CLARISSA HARLOWE
or the
history of a young lady
Nine Volumes
Volume I.
CLARISSA
or, the
history
of a
young LADY:
Comprehending
the most important Concerns of private Life.
and particularly shew,
the Distresses that may attend the Misconduct
both of Parents and child,
in Relation to marriage.
PREFACE
the follow history be give in a series of letter, write
principally in a double yet separate correspondence;
between two young lady of virtue and honor, bear an inviolable
friendship for each other, and write not merely for amusement, but
upon the most interesting subject; in which every private family,
more or less, may find itself concern; and,
between two gentleman of free life; one of they glory in his
talent for stratagem and invention, and communicate to the other,
in confidence, all the secret purpose of an intriguing head and
resolute heart.
but here it will be proper to observe, for the sake of such as may
apprehend hurt to the moral of youth, from the more freely-write
letter, that the gentleman, though profess libertine as to the
female sex, and make it one of their wicked maxim, to keep no
faith with any of the individual of it, who be throw into their
power, be not, however, either infidel or scoffer; nor yet such
as think themselves free from the observance of those other moral
duty which bind man to man.
on the contrary, it will be find, in the progress of the work, that
they very often make such reflection upon each other, and each upon
himself and his own action, as reasonable being must make, who
disbelieve not a future state of reward and punishment, and who one
day propose to reform--one of they actually reform, and by that
mean give an opportunity to censure the freedom which fall from
the gayer pen and light heart of the other.
and yet that other, although in unbosom himself to a select friend,
he discover wickedness enough to entitle he to general detestation,
preserve a decency, as well in his image as in his language, which
be not always to be find in the work of some of the most celebrated
modern writer, whose subject and character have less warrant
the liberty they have take.
in the letter of the two young lady, it be presume, will be find
not only the high exercise of a reasonable and practicable
friendship, between mind endow with the noble principle of
virtue and religion, but occasionally intersperse, such delicacy of
sentiment, particularly with regard to the other sex; such instance
of impartiality, each freely, as a fundamental principle of their
friendship, blame, praise, and set right the other, as be
strongly to be recommend to the observation of the young part
(more specially) of female reader.
the principle of these two young lady be propose as an exemplar to
her sex. nor be it any objection to she be so, that she be not in
all respect a perfect character. it be not only natural, but it be
necessary, that she should have some fault, be it only to show the
reader how laudably she could mistrust and blame herself, and carry to
her own heart, divest of self-partiality, the censure which arise
from her own conviction, and that even to the acquittal of those,
because revere character, whom no one else would acquit, and to
whose much great fault her error be owe, and not to a
weak or reproachable heart. as far as it be consistent with human
frailty, and as far as she could be perfect, consider the people
she have to deal with, and those with whom she be inseparably
connect, she be perfect. to have be impeccable, must have leave
nothing for the Divine Grace and a purified state to do, and carry our
idea of she from woman to angel. as such be she often esteem by
the man whose heart be so corrupt that he could hardly believe
human nature capable of the purity, which, on every trial or
temptation, shine out in she's [sic].
besides the four principal person, several other be introduce,
whose letter be characteristic: and it be presume that there will
be find in some of they, but more especially in those of the chief
character among the man, and the second character among the woman,
such stroke of gayety, fancy, and humour, as will entertain and divert,
and at the same time both warn and instruct.
all the letter be write while the heart of the writer must be
suppose to be wholly engage in their subject (the event at the
time generally dubious): so that they abound not only in critical
situation, but with what may be call instantaneous description and
reflection (proper to be bring home to the breast of the youthful
reader;) as also with affect conversation; many of they write in
the dialogue or dramatic way.
'much more lively and affect,' say one of the principal character,
'must be the style of those who write in the height of a present
distress; the mind torture by the pang of uncertainty (the event
then hide in the womb of fate;) than the dry, narrative, unanimated
style of a person relate difficulty and danger surmount, can be;
the relater perfectly at ease; and if himself unmove by his own
story, not likely greatly to affect the reader.'
what will be find to be more particularly aim at in the follow
work be--to warn the inconsiderate and thoughtless of the one sex,
against the base art and design of specious contriver of the other
--to caution parent against the undue exercise of their natural
authority over their child in the great article of marriage--
to warn child against prefer a man of pleasure to a man of
probity upon that dangerous but too-commonly-receive notion, that a
reform rake make the good husband--but above all, to investigate
the high and most important doctrine not only of morality, but of
christianity, by show they throw into action in the conduct of the
worthy character; while the unworthy, who set those doctrine at
defiance, be condignly, and, as may be say, consequentially
punish.
from what have be say, considerate reader will not enter upon the
perusal of the piece before they as if it be design only to divert
and amuse. it will probably be think tedious to all such as dip
into it, expect a light novel, or transitory romance; and look upon
story in it (interesting as that be generally allow to be) as its
sole end, rather than as a vehicle to the instruction.
different person, as might be expect, have be of different
opinion, in relation to the conduct of the Heroine in particular
situation; and several worthy person have object to the general
catastrophe, and other part of the history. whatever be think
material of these shall be take notice of by way of Postscript, at
the conclusion of the history; for this work be address to the
public as a history of life and manner, those part of it which be
propose to carry with they the force of an example, ought to be as
unobjectionable as be consistent with the design of the whole, and
with human nature.
NAMES of the principal person
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, a young lady of great beauty and merit.
ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ. her admirer.
JAMES HARLOWE, ESQ. father of Clarissa.
MRS. HARLOWE, his lady.
JAMES HARLOWE, their only son.
ARABELLA, their eld daughter.
JOHN HARLOWE, ESQ. eld brother of James Harlowe, sen.
ANTONY HARLOWE, third brother.
ROGER SOLMES, ESQ. an admirer of Clarissa, favour by her friend.
MRS. HERVEY, half-sister of Mrs. Harlowe.
MISS DOLLY hervey, her daughter.
MRS. JUDITH NORTON, a woman of great piety and discretion, who have a
principal share in the education of Clarissa.
COL. WM. MORDEN, a near relation of the Harlowes.
MISS HOWE, the most intimate friend, companion, and correspondent of
Clarissa.
MRS. HOWE, her mother.
CHARLES HICKMAN, ESQ. an admirer of Miss Howe.
LORD M., uncle to Mr. Lovelace.
LADY SARAH SADLEIR, LADY BETTY LAWRANCE, half-sister of Lord M.
MISS CHARLOTTE MONTAGUE, MISS PATTY MONTAGUE, niece of the same
nobleman.
DR. LEWEN, a worthy divine.
MR. ELIAS BRAND, a pedantic young clergyman.
DR. H. a humane physician.
MR. GODDARD, an honest and skilful apothecary.
JOHN BELFORD, ESQ. Mr. Lovelace's principal intimate and confidant.
RICHARD MOWBRAY, THOMAS DOLEMAN, JAMES TOURVILLE, THOMAS BELTON,
ESQRS. libertine friend of Mr. Lovelace.
MRS. MOORE, a widow, keep a lodging-house at Hampstead.
MISS RAWLINS, a notable young gentlewoman there.
MRS. BEVIS, a lively young widow of the same place.
MRS. SINCLAIR, the pretended name of a private brothel-keeper in
London.
CAPTAIN TOMLINSON, the assumed name of a vile pander to the
debauchery of Mr. Lovelace.
SALLY MARTIN, POLLY HORTON, assistant of, and partner with, the
infamous Sinclair.
dorca WYKES, an artful servant at the vile house.
content of volume I
LETTER i. Miss Howe to Miss Clarissa Harlowe.--
desire from she the particular of the rencounter between Mr.
Lovelace and her brother; and of the usage she receive upon it: also
the whole of her story from the time Lovelace be introduce as a
suitor to her sister Arabella. admire her great quality, and
glory in the friendship between they.
LETTER II. III. IV. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
give the request particular. together with the ground of her
brother's and sister's il-will to she; and of the animosity between
her brother and lovelace.--her mother connive at the private
correspondence between she and Lovelace, for the sake of prevent
great evil. Character of Lovelace, from an enemy.--copy of the
preamble to her grandfather's will.
LETTER V. from the same.--
her father, mother, brother, briefly characterize. her brother's
consequence in the family. wish Miss Howe have encourage she
brother's address. endeavor to find excuse for her father's ill
temper, and for her mother's passiveness.
LETTER VI. from the same.--
Mr. Symmes, Mr. Mullins, Mr. Wyerley, in return, propose to she, in
malice to Lovelace; and, on their being reject, Mr. Solmes. leave
give she to visit Miss Howe for a few day. her brother's insolent
behaviour upon it.
LETTER VII. from the same.--
the harsh reception she meet with on her return from Miss Howe.
Solmes's first visit.
LETTER viii. from the same.--
all her family determine in Solmes's favour. her aversion to he.
she reject he, and be forbid go to church, visit, receive
visit, or write to any body out of the house.
LETTER IX. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
her expedient to carry on a private correspondence with Miss Howe.
regret the necessity she be lay under to take such a clandestine
step.
LETTER x. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
Inveighs against the Harlowe family for propose such a man as
solme. characterize they. be jealous of Antony Harlowe's visit to
her mother. rally her friend on her suppose regard to Lovelace.
LETTER XI. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
be nettled and alarmed at her raillery. her reason for not give
way to a passion for Lovelace.
LETTER XII. Miss Howe in reply.--
continue her raillery. Gives Lovelace's character from Mrs.
Fortescue.
LETTER XIII. XIV. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
the view of her family in favour the address of Solmes. her
brother's and sister's triumph upon the difficulty into which they
have plunge she.
LETTER XV. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
she account for Arabella's malice. blame she for have give up
the power over the estate leave she by her grandfather.
LETTER XVI. XVII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
Offends her father by her behaviour to Solmes in his presence. tender
conversation between her mother and her.--Offers to give up all
thought of Lovelace, if she may be free from Solmes's address.
substance of one of Lovelace's letter, of her answer, and of his reply.
make a proposal. her mother go down with it.
LETTER xviii. from the same.--
the proposal reject. her mother affect severity to she. another
interesting conversation between they.
LETTER XIX. from the same.--
her dutiful motif for put her estate into her father's power.
why she think she ought not to have solme. afflict on her
mother's account.
LETTER XX. XXI. from the same.--
another conference with her mother, who leave she in anger.--She go
down to beg her favour. solme come in. she offer to withdraw; but
be forbid. what follow upon it.
LETTER XXII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
substance of a letter from Lovelace. she desire leave to go to
church. be refer to her brother, and insultingly refuse by he.
her letter to he. his answer.
LETTER XXIII. XXIV. XXV. from the same.--
her faithful Hannah disgracefully dismiss. Betty Barnes, her
sister's maid, set over she. a letter from her brother forbid she
to appear in the presence of any of her relation without leave. her
answer. write to her mother. her mother's answer. write to her
father. his answer.
LETTER XXVI. from the same.--
be desirous to know the opinion Lord M.'s family have of she.
substance of a letter from Lovelace, resent the indignity he
receive from her relation. she freely acquaint he that he have
nothing to expect from her contrary to her duty. insist that his
next letter shall be his last.
LETTER XXVII. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
advise she to resume her estate. her satirical description of
solme. rally she on her curiosity to know what opinion Lord M. and
his family have of she. ascribe to the difference in each of their
temper their mutual love. give particular of a conversation
between her mother and she on Clarissa's case. reflect on the
Harlowe family, and particularly on Mrs. Harlowe, for her passiveness.
LETTER XXVIII. Clarissa. in answer.--
chide she for the liberty she take with her relation.
particularly defend her mother. chide she also for her lively air
to her own mother. desire she to treat she freely; but wish not
that she should impute love to she; and why.
LETTER XXIX. from the same.--
her expostulatory letter to her brother and sister. their answer.
LETTER XXX. from the same.--
exceedingly angry with Lovelace, on his come to their church.
reflection on pride, &c.
LETTER XXXI. Mr. Lovelace to John Belford, esq.--
Pride, revenge, love, ambition, or a desire of conquest, his avowedly
predominant passion. his early vow to ruin as many of the fair sex
as he can get into his power. his pretence for it. breathe revenge
against the Harlowe family. glory in his contrivance. be
passionately in love with Clarissa. his high notion of her beauty
and merit. yet be incense against she for prefer her own
relation to he. clear she, however, of intentional pride, scorn,
haughtiness, or want of sensibility. what a triumph over the sex, and
over her whole family, if he can carry off a lady so watchful and so
prudent! be resolve, if he cannot have the sister, to carry off the
brother. Libertine as he be, can have no thought of any other woman
but Clarissa. Warns Belford, Mowbray, Tourville, and Belton, to hold
themselves in readiness to obey his summon, on the likelihood there
be of room for what he call glorious mischief.
LETTER XXXII. XXXIII. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
Copies of her letter to her two uncle; and of their characteristic
answer.--her expostulatory letter to Solmes. his answer.--an insolent
letter from her brother, on her writing to Solmes.
LETTER XXXIV. Lovelace to Belford.--
he direct he to come down to he. for what end. description of the
poor inn he put up at in disguise; and of the innocent daughter
there, whom he call his Rosebud. he resolve to spare she. pride
and policy his motif, and not principle. ingenuous reflection on
his own vicious disposition. he have be a rogue, he say, have he
be a plough-boy. resolve on an act of generosity for his Rosebud,
by way of atonement, as he call it, for some of his bad action; and
for other reason which appear in the sequel.
LETTER XXXV. from the same.--
his artful contrivance and dealing with Joseph Leman. his revenge
and his love uppermost by turn. if the latter succeed not, he vow
that the Harlowes shall feel the former, although for it he become an
exile from his country forever. he will throw himself into Clarissa's
presence in the woodhouse. if he think he have no prospect of her
favour, he would attempt to carry she off: that, he say, would be a
rape worthy of a Jupiter. the art he be resolve to practise when he
see she, in order to engage her future reliance upon his honour.
letter xxxvi. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
Lovelace, in disguise, surprise she in the woodhouse. her terror on
first see he. he greatly engage her confidence (as he have
design) by his respectful behaviour.
LETTER XXXVII. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
after rally she on she not readily own the passion which she
suppose she have for Lovelace, she desire to know how far she think
he eligible for his good quality, how far rejectable for his bad.
LETTER XXXVIII. XXXIX. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
she disclaim tyranny to a man who respect she. her unhappy
situation to be consider, in which the imputed love be hold by her
parent to be an undutiful, and therefore a criminal passion, and
where the suppose object of it be a man of faulty moral. be
interrupt by a visit from Mrs. Norton, who be send up to she to
influence she in Solmes's favour. an affect conversation between
they. what pass upon it, and after it.
LETTER XL. from the same.--
resume the request subject. what sort of man she could have
prefer to Mr. Lovelace. argument she have use to herself in his
favour, and in his disfavour. frankly own that be he now a moral
man, she would prefer he to all the man she ever see. yet be
persuade, that she could freely give up the one man to get rid of the
other, as she have offer to her friend. her delicacy affect by
Miss Howe's raillery; and why. give her opinion of the force which
figure or person may be allow to have upon her sex.
LETTER XLI. from the same.--
a letter from her mother (with pattern of rich silk) in which she
entreat she to comply with all their wish. what ought to be the
principal view of a good wife in adorn her person. her distress.
beg leave to wait upon her mother alone. her father's angry letter,
order she to prepare for her wedding-day. solme request to see
she. she refuse. all in tumult below upon it. her brother and her
sister desire that she may be leave to their management.
LETTER XLII. from the same.--
a very warm dialogue between her sister and she. her sister's envy,
unnatural behaviour, and violence. Clarissa send down proposal in
writing to her friend, and a letter to her brother. his insolent
answer; in which he tell she, that her proposal will be consider in
full assembly next morning; but that, if they shall be comply with,
he will retire to Scotland, and never more return to Harlowe-place.
LETTER XLIII. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
hardly doubt but her proposal will be accept. paint to herself,
as her relation arrive one by one, what their deliberation, and the
result of they will be, when they be all assemble. her proposal
reject. her sister's cruel insult on the occasion produce another
warm dialogue between they. her sister leave she in a fury. she be
greatly disturb at the content of a letter from Lovelace.
LETTER XLIV. from the same.--
her aunt hervey, accompany by her sister, make she a visit.
far insult from her sister. her aunt's fruitless plea in
Solmes's favour.
the history
of
CLARISSA HARLOWE
letter I
MISS ANNA HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
JAN 10.
I be extremely concerned, my dear friend, for the disturbance that 
have happen in your family. I know how it must hurt you to become 
the subject of the public talk: and yet, upon an occasion so generally 
know, it be impossible but that whatever relate to a young lady, 
whose distinguished merit have make she the public care, should 
engage every body's attention. I long to have the particular from 
yourself; and of the usage I be tell you receive upon an accident you 
could not help; and in which, as far as I can learn, the sufferer be 
the aggressor.
Mr. Diggs, the surgeon, whom I send for at the first hearing of the 
rencounter, to inquire, for your sake, how your brother be, tell I, 
that there be no danger from the wound, if there be none from the 
fever; which it seem have be increase by the perturbation of his 
spirit.
Mr. Wyerley drink tea with we yesterday; and though he be far from 
be partial to Mr. Lovelace, as it may well be suppose, yet both he 
and Mr. Symmes blame your family for the treatment they give he when 
he go in person to inquire after your brother's health, and to 
express his concern for what have happen.
they say, that Mr. Lovelace could not avoid draw his sword: and 
that either your brother's unskilfulness or passion leave he from the 
very first pass entirely in his power.
this, I be tell, be what Mr. Lovelace say upon it; retreat as he 
speak: 'have a care, Mr. Harlowe--your violence put you out of your 
defence. you give I too much advantage. for your sister's sake, I 
will pass by every thing:--if--'
but this the more provoke his rashness, to lay himself open to the 
advantage of his adversary--who, after a slight wound give he in the 
arm, take away his sword.
there be people who love not your brother, because of his natural 
imperiousness and fierce and uncontroulable temper: these say, that 
the young gentleman's passion be abate on see his blood gush 
plentifully down his arm; and that he receive the generous office of 
his adversary (who help he off with his coat and waistcoat, and 
bind up his arm, till the surgeon could come,) with such patience, as 
be far from make a visit afterwards from that adversary, to inquire 
after his health, appear either insulting or improper.
be this as it may, every body pity you. so steady, so uniform in 
your conduct: so desirous, as you always say, of slide through life 
to the end of it unnote; and, as I may add, not wish to be 
observe even for your silent benevolence; sufficiently happy in the 
noble consciousness which attend it: rather useful than glare, your 
deserve motto; though now, to your regret, push into blaze, as I 
may say: and yet blame at home for the fault of other--how must 
such a virtue suffer on every hand!--yet it must be allow, that your 
present trial be but proportion to your prudence.
as all your friend without door be apprehensive that some other 
unhappy event may result from so violent a contention, in which it 
seem the family on both side be now engage, I must desire you to 
enable I, on the authority of your own information, to do you 
occasional justice.
my mother, and all of we, like the rest of the world, talk of nobody 
but you on this occasion, and of the consequence which may follow 
from the resentment of a man of Mr. Lovelace's spirit; who, as he 
give out, have be treat with high indignity by your uncle. my 
mother will have it, that you cannot now, with any decency, either see 
he, or correspond with he. she be a good deal prepossess by your 
uncle Antony; who occasionally call upon we, as you know; and, on 
this rencounter, have represent to she the crime which it would be in 
a sister to encourage a man who be to wade into her favour (this be 
his expression) through the blood of her brother.
write to I therefore, my dear, the whole of your story from the time 
that Mr. Lovelace be first introduce into your family; and 
particularly an account of all that pass between he and your 
sister; about which there be different report; some people scruple 
not to insinuate that the young sister have steal a lover from the 
elder: and pray write in so full a manner as may satisfy those who 
know not so much of your affair as I do. if anything unhappy should 
fall out from the violence of such spirit as you have to deal with, 
your account of all thing previous to it will be your good 
justification.
you see what you draw upon yourself by excel all your sex. every 
individual of it who know you, or have hear of you, seem to think 
you answerable to she for your conduct in point so very delicate and 
concern.
every eye, in short, be upon you with the expectation of an example. 
I wish to heaven you be at liberty to pursue your own method: all 
would then, I dare say, be easy, and honourably end. but I dread 
your director and directresse; for your mother, admirably well 
qualified as she be to lead, must submit to be lead. your sister and 
brother will certainly put you out of your course.
but this be a point you will not permit I to expatiate upon: pardon 
I therefore, and I have done.--Yet, why should I say, pardon I? when 
your concern be my concern? when your honour be my honour? when I 
love you, as never woman love another? and when you have allow of 
that concern and of that love; and have for year, which in person so 
young may be call many, rank in the first class of your friend,
your ever grateful and affectionate,
ANNA HOWE?
will you oblige I with a copy of the preamble to the clause in your 
grandfather's will in your favour; and allow I to send it to my aunt 
Harman?--She be very desirous to see it. yet your character have so 
charm she, that, though a stranger to you personally, she assent to 
the preference give you in that will, before she know the testator's 
reason for give you that preference.
LETTER II
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
HARLOWE-PLACE, JAN. 13.
how you oppress I, my dear friend, with your politeness! I cannot 
doubt your sincerity; but you should take care, that you give I not 
reason from your kind partiality to call in question your judgment. 
you do not distinguish that I take many admirable hint from you, and 
have the art to pass they upon you for my own: for in all you do, in 
all you say, nay, in your very look (so animate!) you give lesson 
to one who love you and observe you as I love you and observe you, 
without know that you do--so pray, my dear, be more sparing of your 
praise for the future, lest after this confession we should suspect 
that you secretly intend to praise yourself, while you would be 
think only to commend another.
our family have indeed be strangely discomposed.--discomposed!--it 
have be in tumult, ever since the unhappy transaction; and I have 
bear all the blame; yet should have have too much concern from myself, 
have I be more justly spar by every one else.
for, whether it be owe to a faulty impatience, have be too 
indulgently treat to be inure to blame, or to the regret I have to 
hear those censure on my account, whom it be my duty to vindicate; I 
have sometimes wish, that it have please God to have take I in my 
last fever, when I have every body's love and good opinion; but oftener 
that I have never be distinguish by my grandfather as I be: since 
that distinction have estrange from I my brother's and sister's 
affection; at least, have raise a jealousy with regard to the 
apprehend favour of my two uncle, that now-and-then overshadow 
their love.
my brother be happily recover of his fever, and his wound in a 
hopeful way, although he have not yet venture abroad, I will be as 
particular as you desire in the little history you demand of I. but 
heaven forbid that any thing should ever happen which may require it 
to be produce for the purpose you mention!
I will begin, as you command, with Mr. Lovelace's address to my 
sister; and be as brief as possible. I will recite fact only; and 
leave you to judge of the truth of the report raise, that the young 
sister have rob the elder.
it be in pursuance of a conference between Lord M. and my uncle 
Antony, that Mr. Lovelace [my father and mother not forbid] pay 
his respect to my sister Arabella. my brother be then in Scotland, 
busy himself in view the condition of the considerable estate 
which be leave he there by his generous godmother, together with one 
as considerable in Yorkshire. I be also absent at my Dairy-house, as 
it be call,* busy in the account relate to the estate which my 
grandfather have the goodness to devise to I; and which once a year 
be leave to my inspection, although I have give the whole into my 
father's power.
* her grandfather, in order to invite she to he as often as her other 
friend would spare she, indulge she in erect and fit up a 
diary-house in her own taste. when finish, it be so much admire 
for its elegant simplicity and convenience, that the whole seat 
(before, of old time, from its situation, call the Grove) be 
generally know by the name of the Dairy-house. her grandfather in 
particular be fond of have it so call.
my sister make I a visit there the day after Mr. Lovelace have be 
introduce; and seem highly pleased with the gentleman. his birth, 
his fortune in possession, a clear 2000L. a year, as Lord M. have 
assure my uncle; presumptive heir to that nobleman's large estate: 
his great expectation from Lady Sarah Sadleir and Lady Betty 
Lawrence; who with his uncle interest themselves very warmly (he 
be the last of his line) to see he marry.
'so handsome a man!--o her beloved Clary!' (for then she be ready to 
love I dearly, from the overflowings of her good humour on his 
account!) 'he be but too handsome a man for her!--were she but as 
amiable as somebody, there would be a probability of hold his 
affections!--for he be wild, she hear; very wild, very gay; loved 
intrigue--but he be young; a man of sense: would see his error, could 
she but have patience with his fault, if his fault be not cure by 
marriage!'
thus she run on; and then want I 'to see the charming man,' as she 
call him.--again concerned, 'that she be not handsome enough for 
he;' with, 'a sad thing, that the man should have the advantage of 
the woman in that particular!'--But then, step to the glass, she 
compliment herself, 'that she be very well: that there be many 
woman deem passable who be inferior to herself: that she be 
always think comely; and comeliness, let she tell I, have not so 
much to lose as beauty have, would hold, when that would evaporate or 
fly off:--nay, for that matter,' [and again she turn to the glass] 
'her feature be not irregular; her eye not at all amiss.' and I 
remember they be more than usually brilliant at that time.--
'nothing, in short, to be find fault with, though nothing very 
engage she doubt--be there, Clary.'
excuse I, my dear, I never be thus particular before; no, not to 
you. nor would I now have write thus freely of a sister, but that 
she make a merit to my brother of disown that she ever like he; 
as I shall mention hereafter: and then you will always have I give 
you minute description, nor suffer I to pass by the air and manner 
in which thing be speak that be to be take notice of; rightly 
observe, that air and manner often express more than the 
accompany word.
I congratulate she upon her prospect. she receive my compliment 
with a great deal of self-complacency.
she like the gentleman still more at his next visit; and yet he make 
no particular address to she, although an opportunity be give he 
for it. this be wonder at, as my uncle have introduce he into our 
family declaredly as a visitor to my sister. but as we be ever ready 
to make excuse when in good humour with ourselves for the perhaps not 
unwilful slight of those whose approbation we wish to engage; so my 
sister find out a reason much to Mr. Lovelace's advantage for his not 
improve the opportunity that be give him.--It be bashfulness, 
truly, in he. [bashfulness in Mr. Lovelace, my dear!]--indeed, gay 
and lively as he be, he have not the look of an impudent man. but, I 
fancy, it be many, many year ago since he be bashful.
thus, however, could my sister make it out--'upon her word, she 
believe Mr. Lovelace deserve not the bad character he have as to 
women.--He be really, to her thinking, a modest man. he would have 
speak out, she believe; but once or twice as he seem to intend to 
do so, he be under so agreeable a confusion! such a profound 
respect he seem to shew she! a perfect reverence, she think: she 
love dearly that a man in courtship should shew a reverence to his 
mistress'--so indeed we all do, I believe: and with reason; since, if 
I may judge from what I have see in many family, there be little 
enough of it shew afterwards.--and she tell my aunt Hervey, that she 
would be a little less upon the reserve next time he come: 'she be 
not one of those flirt, not she, who would give pain to a person that 
deserve to be well-treat; and the more pain for the greatness of 
his value for she.'--I wish she have not somebody whom I love in her 
eye.
in his third visit, Bella govern herself by this kind and 
considerate principle: so that, accord to her own account of the 
matter, the man might have speak out.--but he be still bashful: he 
be not able to overcome this unseasonable reverence. so this visit 
go off as the former.
but now she begin to be dissatisfied with he. she compare his 
general character with this his particular behaviour to she; and 
have never be court before, own herself puzzle how to deal 
with so odd a lover. 'what do the man mean, she wonder? have not 
her uncle bring he declaredly as a suitor to her?--It could not be 
bashfulness (now she think of it) since he might have open his 
mind to her uncle, if he want courage to speak directly to her.--Not 
that she care much for the man neither: but it be right, surely, 
that a woman should be put out of doubt early as to a man's intention 
in such a case as this, from his own mouth.--but, truly, she have begin 
to think, that he be more solicitous to cultivate her mamma's good 
opinion, than hers!--every body, she own, admire her mother's 
conversation; but he be mistaken if he think respect to her mother 
only would do with she. and then, for his own sake, surely he should 
put it into her power to be complaisant to he, if he give her reason 
to approve of he. this distant behaviour, she must take upon herself 
to say, be the more extraordinary, as he continue his visit, and 
declare himself extremely desirous to cultivate a friendship with the 
whole family; and as he could have no doubt about her sense, if she 
might take upon she to join she own with the general opinion; he 
have take great notice of, and admire many of her good thing as 
they fall from her lip. reserve be painful, she must need say, 
to open and free spirit, like her: and yet she must tell my aunt,' 
(to whom all this be direct) 'that she should never forget what she 
owe to her sex, and to herself, be Mr. Lovelace as unexceptionable 
in his moral as in his figure, and be he to urge his suit ever so 
warmly.'
I be not of her council. I be still absent. and it be agree upon 
between my aunt Hervey and she, that she be to be quite solemn and 
shy in his next visit, if there be not a peculiarity in his address 
to she.
but my sister it seem have not consider the matter well. this be 
not the way, as it prove, to be take for matter of mere omission, 
with a man of Mr. Lovelace's penetration. nor with any man; since if 
love have not take root deep enough to cause it to shoot out into 
declaration, if an opportunity be fairly give for it, there be little 
room to expect, that the blight wind of anger or resentment will 
bring it forward. then my poor sister be not naturally good-humour. 
this be too well-know a truth for I to endeavor to conceal it, 
especially from you. she must therefore, I doubt, have appear to 
great disadvantage when she aim to be worse temper than ordinary.
how they manage it in their next conversation I know not. one would 
be tempt to think by the issue, that Mr. Lovelace be ungenerous 
enough to seek the occasion give,* and to improve it. yet he think 
fit to put the question too:--But, she say, it be not till, by some 
mean or other (she know not how) he have work she up to such a 
pitch of displeasure with he, that it be impossible for she to 
recover herself at the instant. nevertheless he re-urge his 
question, as expect a definitive answer, without wait for the 
return of her temper, or endeavour to mollify she; so that she be 
under a necessity of persist in her denial: yet give he reason to 
think she do not dislike his address, only the manner of it; his 
court be rather make to her mother than to herself, as if he be 
sure of her consent at any time.
* see Mr. Lovelace's Letter, No. XXXI, in which he briefly account for 
his conduct in this affair.
a good encouraging denial, I must own: as be the rest of her plea; to 
wit, 'a disinclination to change her state. exceedingly happy as she 
be: she never could be happy!' and such-like consent negative, 
as I may call they, and yet not intend a reflection upon my sister: 
for what can any young creature in the like circumstance say, when 
she be not sure but a too-ready consent may subject she to the slight 
of a sex that generally value a blessing either more or less as it be 
obtain with difficulty or ease? Miss Biddulph's answer to a copy of 
verse from a gentleman, reproach our sex as act in disguise, be 
not a bad one, although you may perhaps think it too acknowledge for 
the female character.
	ungen'rous sex!--to scorn we if webe kind;
	and yet upbraid we if we seem severe!
	do you, t' encourage we to tell our mind,
	yourself put off disguise, and be sincere.
	you talk of coquetry!--your own false heart
	compel our sex to act dissemble part.
here I be oblige to lay down my pen. I will soon resume it.
LETTER III
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
JAN. 13, 14.
and thus, as Mr. Lovelace think fit to take it, have he his answer 
from my sister. it be with very great regret, as he pretend, [I 
doubt the man be an hypocrite, my dear] that he acquiesce in it. 'so 
much determinedness; such a noble firmness in my sister, that there 
be no hope of prevail upon she to alter sentiment she have adopt 
on full consideration.' he sigh, as Bella tell we, when he take his 
leave of she: 'profoundly sigh; grasp her hand, and kiss it with 
such an ardour--Withdrew with such an air of solemn respect--she could 
almost find it in her heart, although he have vex she, to pity he.' 
a good intentional preparative to love, this pity; since, at the time, 
she little think that he would not renew his offer.
he wait on my mother after he have take leave of Bella, and report 
his ill success in so respectful a manner, as well with regard to my 
sister, as to the whole family, and with so much concern that he be 
not accept as a relation to it, that it leave upon they all (my 
brother be then, as I have say, in Scotland) impression in his 
favour, and a belief that this matter would certainly be bring on 
again. but Mr. Lovelace go up directly to town, where he staid a 
whole fortnight, and meet there with my uncle Antony, to whom he 
regret his niece's cruel resolution not to change her state; it be 
see that there be a total end of the affair.
my sister be not want to herself on this occasion. she make a 
virtue of necessity; and the man be quite another man with she. 'a 
vain creature! too well know his advantage: yet those not what 
she have conceive they to be!--cool and warm by fit and start; an 
ague-like lover. a steady man, a man of virtue, a man of moral, be 
worth a thousand of such gay flutterer. her sister Clary might think 
it worth she while perhaps to try to engage such a man: she have 
patience: she be mistress of persuasion: and indeed, to do the girl 
justice, have something of a person: but as for she, she would not have 
a man of whose heart she could not be sure for one moment; no, not for 
the world: and most sincerely glad be she that she have reject he.'
but when Mr. Lovelace return into the country, he think fit to 
visit my father and mother; hop, as he tell they, that, however 
unhappy he have be in the rejection of the wish-for alliance, he 
might be allow to keep up an acquaintance and friendship with a 
family which he should always respect. and then unhappily, as I may 
say, be I at home and present.
it be immediately observe, that his attention be fix on I. my 
sister, as soon as he be go, in a spirit of bravery, seem 
desirous to promote his address, should it be tender.
my aunt Hervey be there; and be pleased to say, we should make the 
fine couple in England--if my sister have no objection.--no, indeed! 
with a haughty toss, be my sister's reply--it would be strange if she 
have, after the denial she have give he upon full deliberation.
my mother declare, that her only dislike of his alliance with either 
daughter, be on account of his repute faulty moral.
my uncle Harlowe, that his daughter Clary, as he delight to call I 
from childhood, would reform he if any woman in the world could.
my uncle Antony give his approbation in high term: but refer, as 
my aunt have do, to my sister.
she repeat her contempt of he; and declare, that, be there not 
another man in England, she would not have he. she be ready, on the 
contrary, she could assure they, to resign her pretension under hand 
and seal, if Miss Clary be take with his tinsel, and if every one 
else approve of his address to the girl.
my father indeed, after a long silence, be urge by my uncle Antony 
to speak his mind, say, that he have a letter from his son, on his 
hearing of Mr. Lovelace's visit to his daughter Arabella; which he 
have not shew to any body but my mother; that treaty be at an end 
when he receive it: that in this letter he express great dislike to 
an alliance with Mr. Lovelace on the score of his immorality: that 
he know, indeed, there be an old grudge between they; but that, be 
desirous to prevent all occasion of disunion and animosity in his 
family, he would suspend the declaration of his own mind till his son 
arrive, and till he have hear his further objection: that he be the 
more inclined to make his son this compliment, as Mr. Lovelace's 
general character give but too much ground for his son's dislike of 
he; add, that he have hear (so, he suppose, have every one,) that 
he be a very extravagant man; that he have contract debt in his 
travel: and indeed, he be pleased to say, he have the air of a 
spendthrift.
these particular I have partly from my aunt Hervey, and partly from my 
sister; for I be call out as soon as the subject be enter upon. 
when I return, my uncle Antony ask I, how I should like Mr. 
Lovelace? every body see, he be pleased to say, that I have make a 
conquest.
I immediately answer, that I do not like he at all: he seem to 
have too good an opinion both on his person and part, to have any 
regard to his wife, let he marry whom he would.
my sister particularly be pleased with this answer, and confirm it 
to be just; with a compliment to my judgment.--For it be her.
but the very next day Lord M. come to Harlowe-Place [I be then 
absent]; and in his nephew's name make a proposal in form; declare, 
that it be the ambition of all his family to be relate to our: and 
he hop his kinsman would not have such an answer on the part of the 
young sister, as he have on that of the elder.
in short, Mr. Lovelace's visit be admit as those of a man who 
have not deserve disrespect from our family; but as to his address to 
I, with a reservation, as above, on my father's part, that he would 
determine nothing without his son. my discretion as to the rest be 
confide in: for still I have the same objection as to the man: nor 
would I, when we be well acquaint, hear any thing but general 
talk from he; give he no opportunity of converse with I in 
private.
he bear this with a resignation little expect from his natural 
temper, which be generally report to be quick and hasty; unused it 
seem from childhood to check or controul. a case too common in 
considerable family where there be an only son: and his mother never 
have any other child. but, as I have heretofore tell you, I could 
perceive, notwithstanding this resignation, that he have so good an 
opinion of himself, as not to doubt, that his person and 
accomplishment would insensibly engage I: and could that be once 
do, he tell my aunt hervey, he should hope, from so steady a temper, 
that his hold in my affection would be durable: while my sister 
account for his patience in another manner, which would perhaps have 
have more force if it have come from a person less prejudiced: 'that the 
man be not fond of marry at all: that he might perhaps have half a 
score mistress: and that delay might be as convenient for his 
roving, as for my well-act indifference.' that be her kind 
expression.
whatever be his motive for a patience so generally believe to be out 
of his usual character, and where the object of his address be 
suppose to be of fortune considerable enough to engage his warm 
attention, he certainly escape many mortification by it: for while my 
father suspend his approbation till my brother's arrival, Mr. 
Lovelace receive from every one those civility which be due to 
his birth: and although we hear from time to time report to his 
disadvantage with regard to moral, yet could we not question he upon 
they without give he great advantage in his own opinion than the 
situation he be in with we would justify to prudence; since it be 
much more likely that his address would not be allow of, than that 
it would.
and thus be he admit to converse with our family almost upon his 
own term; for while my friend see nothing in his behaviour but what 
be extremely respectful, and observe in he no violent importunity, 
they seem to have take a great liking to his conversation: while I 
consider he only as a common guest when he come; and think myself 
no more concerned in his visit, not at his entrance and departure, 
than any other of the family.
but this indifference on my side be the mean of procure he one 
very great advantage; since upon it be ground that correspondence 
by letter which succeeded;--and which, have it be to be begin when 
the family animosity break out, would never have be enter into on 
my part. the occasion be this:
my uncle Hervey have a young gentleman intrust to his care, whom he 
have thought of send abroad a year or two hence, to make the Grand 
Tour, as it be call; and find Mr. Lovelace could give a good 
account of every thing necessary for a young traveller to observe upon 
such an occasion, he desire he to write down a description of the 
court and country he have visit, and what be most worthy of 
curiosity in they.
he consent, on condition that I would direct his subject, as he 
call it: and as every one have hear his manner of writing commend; 
and think his narrative might be agreeable amusement in winter 
evening; and that he could have no opportunity particularly to 
address I directly in they, since they be to be read in full 
assembly before they be give to the young gentleman, I make the 
less scruple to write, and to make observation, and put question for 
our further information--still the less perhaps as I love write; and 
those who do, be fond, you know, of occasion to use the pen: and 
then, have ever one's consent, and my uncle Hervey's desire that I 
would write, I think that if I have be the only scrupulous person, 
it would have shew a particularity that a vain man might construe to 
his advantage; and which my sister would not fail to animadvert upon.
you have see some of these letter; and have be pleased with this 
account of person, place, and thing; and we have both agree, that 
he be no common observer upon what he have see.
my sister allow that the man have a tolerable knack of writing and 
describing: and my father, who have be abroad in his youth, say, 
that his remark be curious, and shew he to be a person of 
reading, judgment and taste.
thus be a kind of correspondence begin between he and I, with 
general approbation; while every one wonder at, and be pleased 
with, his patient veneration of I; for so they call it. however, 
it be not doubt but he would soon be more importunate, since his 
visit be more frequent, and he acknowledge to my aunt Hervey a 
passion for I, accompany with an awe that he have never know 
before; to which he attribute what he call his but seem 
acquiescence with my father's pleasure, and the distance I keep he 
at. and yet, my dear, this may be his usual manner of behaviour to 
our sex; for have not my sister at first all his reverence?
mean time, my father, expect his importunity, keep in readiness the 
report he have hear in his disfavour, to charge they upon he then, 
as so many objection to address. and it be highly agreeable to I 
that he do so: it would have be strange if it be not; since the 
person who could reject Mr. Wyerley's address for the sake of his free 
opinion, must have be inexcusable, have she not reject anotherbe 
for his free practice.
but I should own, that in the letter he send I upon the general 
subject, he more than once inclose a particular one, declare his 
passionate regard for I, and complain with fervour enough, of my 
reserve. but of these I take not the least notice: for, as I have not 
write to he at all, but upon a subject so general, I think it be 
but right to let what he write upon one so particular pass off as if I 
have never see it; and the rather, as I be not then at liberty (from 
the approbation his letter meet with) to break off the correspondence, 
unless I have assign the true reason for do so. besides, with all 
his respectful assiduity, it be easy to observe, (if it have not 
be his general character) that his temper be naturally haughty and 
violent; and I have see too much of that untractable spirit in my 
brother to like it in one who hop to be still more nearly related to 
I.
I have a little speciman of this temper of his upon the very occasion I 
have mention: for after he have send I a third particular letter 
with the general one, he ask I the next time he come to Harlowe-
Place, if I have not receive such a one from him?--i tell he I should 
never answer one so send; and that I have wait for such an occasion 
as he have now give I, to tell he so: I desire he therefore not to 
write again on the subject; assure he, that if he do, I would 
return both, and never write another line to he.
you cannot imagine how saucily the man look; as if, in short, he be 
disappointed that he have not make a more sensible impression upon I: 
nor, when he recollect himself (as he do immediately), what a 
visible struggle it cost he to change his haughty air for more 
placid one. but I take no notice of either; for I think it well to 
convince he, by the coolness and indifference with which I repulse 
his forward hope (at the same time intend to avoid the affectation 
of pride or vanity) that he be not considerable enough in my eye to 
make I take over-ready offence at what he say, or at his haughty 
look: in other word, that I have not value enough for he to treat 
he with peculiarity either by smile or frown. indeed he have 
cunning enough to give I, undesignedly, a piece of instruction which 
teach I this caution; for he have say in conversation once, 'that if 
a man could not make a woman in courtship own herself pleased with 
he, it be as much and oftentime more to his purpose to make she 
angry with he.'
I must break off here, but will continue the subject the very first 
opportunity. mean time, I be
your most affectionate friend and servant,
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER IV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
JAN. 15.
such, my dear, be the situation Mr. Lovelace and I be in when my 
brother arrive from Scotland.
the moment Mr. Lovelace's visit be mention to he, he, without 
either hesitation or apology, express his disapprobation of they. he 
find great flaw in his character; and take the liberty to say in so 
many word, that he wonder how it come into the head of his uncle 
to encourage such a man for either of his sister: at the same time 
return his thank to my father for decline his consent till he 
arrive, in such a manner, I think, as a superior would do, when he 
commend an inferior for have well perform his duty in his 
absence.
he justify his avow inveteracy by common fame, and by what he have 
know of he at college; declare, that he have ever hat he; ever 
should hate he; and would never own he for a brother, or I for a 
sister, if I marry he.
that early antipathy I have hear account for in this manner:
Mr. Lovelace be always note for his vivacity and courage; and no 
less, it seem, for the swift and surprising progress he make in all 
part of literature: for diligence in his study in the hour of 
study, he have hardly his equal. this it seem be his general 
character at the university; and it gain he many friend among the 
more learn; while those who do not love he, fear he, by reason 
of the offence his vivacity make he too ready to give, and of the 
courage he shew in support the offence when give; which procure 
he as many follower as he please among the mischievous sort.--no 
very amiable character, youwill say, upon the whole.
but my brother's temper be not more happy. his native haughtiness 
could not bear a superiority so visible; and whom we fear more than 
love, we be not far from hat: and have less command of his 
passion than the other, he be evermore the subject of his perhaps 
indecent ridicule: so that every body, either from love or fear, 
side with his antagonist, he have a most uneasy time of it while both 
continue in the same college.--it be the less wonder therefore that 
a young man who be not note for the gentleness of his temper, should 
resume an antipathy early begin, and so deeply rooted.
he find my sister, who wait but for the occasion, ready to join he 
in his resentment against the man he hat. she utterly disclaim 
all manner of regard for he: 'never like he at all:--His estate be 
certainly much incumbere: it be impossible it should be otherwise; 
so entirely devoted as he be to his pleasure. he keep no house; have 
no equipage: nobody pretend that he want pride: the reason 
therefore be easy to be guess at.' and then do she boast of, and 
my brother praise she for, refuse he: and both join on all 
occasion to depreciate he, and not seldom make the occasion; their 
displeasure against he cause every subject to run into this, if it 
begin not with it.
I be not solicitous to vindicate he when I be not join in their 
reflection. I tell they I do not value he enough to make a 
difference in the family on his account: and as he be suppose to 
have give much cause for their ill opinion of he, I think he ought 
to take the consequence of his own fault.
now and then indeed, when I observe that their vehemence carry they 
beyond all bound of probability in their charge against he, I 
think it but justice to put in a word for he. but this only 
subject I to reproach, as have a prepossession in his favour 
which I would not own.--so that, when I could not change the subject, 
I use to retire either to my music, or to my closet.
their behaviour to he, when they could not help see he, be very 
cold and disobliging; but as yet not directly affrontive. for they 
be in hope of prevail upon my father to forbid his visit. but 
as there be nothing in his behaviour, that might warrant such a 
treatment of a man of his birth and fortune, they succeed not: and 
then they be very earnest with I to forbid they. I ask, what 
authority I have to take such a step in my father's house; and when my 
behaviour to he be so distant, that he seem to be as much the 
guest of any other person of the family, themselves except, as 
mine?--In revenge, they tell I, that it be cunning management 
between we; and that we both understand one another well than we 
pretend to do. and at last they give such a loose to their 
passion, all of a sudden* as I may say, that instead of withdraw, 
as they use to do when he come, they throw themselves in his way 
purposely to affront he.
* the reason of this their more openly show animosity be give in 
Letter XIII.
Mr. Lovelace, you may believe, very ill brook this: but nevertheless 
content himself to complain of it to I: in high term, however, 
tell I, that but for my sake my brother's treatment of he be not 
to be bear.
I be sorry for the merit this give he in his own opinion with I: 
and the more, as some of the affront he receive be too flagrant to 
be excuse: but I tell he, that I be determined not to fall out with 
my brother, if I could help it, whatever fault he have: and since they 
could not see one another with temper, should be glad that he would 
not throw himself in my brother's way; and I be sure my brother would 
not seek he.
he be very much nettled at this answer: but say, he must bear his 
affront if I would have it so. he have be accuse himself of 
violence in his temper; but he hop to shew on this occasion that he 
have a command of his passion which few young man, so highly provoke, 
would be able to shew; and doubt not but it would be attribute to a 
proper motive by a person of my generosity and penetration.
my brother have just before, with the approbation of my uncle, 
employ a person relate to a discharged bailiff or steward of Lord 
M. who have have the management of some part of Mr. Lovelace's affair 
(from which he be also dismiss by he) to inquire into his debt, 
after his companion, into his amour, and the like.
my aunt hervey, in confidence, give I the following particular of 
what the man have say of he.
'that he be a generous landlord: that he spar nothing for solid and 
last improvement upon his estate; and that he look into his own 
affair, and understand they: that he have be very expensive when 
abroad; and contract a large debt (for he make no secret of his 
affair); yet choose to limit himself to an annual sum, and to decline 
equipage, in order to avoid be oblige to his uncle and aunt; from 
whom he might have what money he please; but that he be very jealous 
of their controul; have often quarrel with they; and treat they so 
freely, that they be all afraid of he. however, that his estate 
be never mortgage, as my brother have hear it be; his credit be 
always high; and the man believe, he be by this time near upon, if 
not quite, clear of the world.
'he be a sad gentleman, he say, as to women:--if his tenant have 
pretty daughter, they choose to keep they out of his sight. he 
believe he keep no particular mistress; for he have hear newelty, 
that be the man's word, be every thing with he. but for his 
uncle's and aunt's teazing, the man fancy he would not think of 
marriage: he be never know to be disguise with liquor; but be a 
great plotter, and a great writer: that he live a wild life in town, 
by what he have hear: have six or seven companion as bad as himself; 
whom now and then he bring down with he; and the country be always 
glad when they go up again. he would have it, that although 
passionate, he be good-humour; love as well to take a jest as to 
give one; and would rally himself upon occasion the free of any man 
he ever know.'
this be his character from an enemy; for, as my aunt observe, every 
thing the man say commendably of he come grudgingly, with a must 
need say--to do he justice, &c. while the contrary be deliver 
with a free good-will. and this character, as a bad be expect, 
though this be bad enough, not answer the end of inquire after 
it, my brother and sister be more apprehensive than before, that his 
address would be encourage, since the bad part of it be know, or 
suppose, when he be first introduce to my sister.
but, with regard to myself, I must observe in his disfavour, that, 
notwithstanding the merit he want to make with I for his patience 
upon my brother's ill-treatment of he, I owe he no compliment for 
try to conciliate with he. not that I believe it would have 
signify any thing if he have make ever such court either to he or to 
my sister: yet one might have expect from a man of his politeness, 
and from his pretension, you know, that he would have be willing to 
try. instead of which, he shew such a contempt both of my brother 
and my sister, especially my brother, as be construe into a defiance 
of they. and for I to have hint at an alteration in his behaviour 
to my brother, be an advantage I know he would have be proud of; 
and which therefore I have no mind to give he. but I doubt not that 
have so very little encouragement from any body, his pride would 
soon take fire, and he would of himself discontinue his visit, or go 
to town; where, till he come acquaint with our family, he use 
chiefly to reside: and in this latter case he have no reason to expect, 
that I would receive, much less answer, his letter: the occasion 
which have lead I to receive any of his, be by this time over.
but my brother's antipathy would not permit he to wait for such an 
event; and after several excess, which Mr. Lovelace still return 
with contempt, and a haughtiness too much like that of the aggressor, 
my brother take upon himself to fill up the door-way once when he 
come, as if to oppose his entrance: and upon his asking for I, 
demand, what his business be with his sister?
the other, with a challenging air, as my brother say, tell he, he 
would answer a gentleman any question; but he wish that Mr. James 
Harlowe, who have of late give himself high air, would remember that 
he be not now at college.
just then the good Dr. Lewen, who frequently honour I with a visit 
of conversation, as he be pleased to call it, and have part with I 
in my own parlour, come to the door: and hear the word, 
interpose; both have their hand upon their sword: and tell Mr. 
Lovelace where I be, he burst by my brother, to come to I; leave 
he chafing, he say, like a hunt boar at bay.
this alarm we all. my father be pleased to hint to Mr. Lovelace, 
that he wish he would discontinue his visit for the peace-sake of 
the family: and I, by his command, speak a great deal plainer.
but Mr. Lovelace be a man not easily bring to give up his purpose, 
especially in a point wherein he pretend his heart be so much 
engage: and no absolute prohibition have be give, thing go on 
for a little while as before: for I see plainly, that to have deny 
myself to his visit (which however I decline receive as often as I 
could) be to bring forward some desperate issue between the two; 
since the offence so readily give on one side be brook by the 
other only out of consideration to I.
and thus do my brother's rashness lie I under an obligation where I 
would least have owe it.
the intermediate proposal of Mr. Symmes and Mr. Mullins, both (in 
turn) encourage by my brother, induce he to be more patient for a 
while, as nobody think I over-forward in Mr. Lovelace's favour; for 
he hop that he should engage my father and uncle to approve of the 
one or the other in opposition to the man he hat. but when he find 
that I have interest enough to disengage myself from the address of 
those gentleman, as I have (before he go to Scotland, and before Mr. 
Lovelace visit here) of Mr. Wyerley's, he then keep no measure: and 
first set himself to upbraid I for supposed prepossession, which he 
treat as if it be criminal; and then to insult Mr. Lovelace in 
person, at Mr. Edward Symmes's, the brother of the other Symmes, two 
mile off; and no good Dr. Lewen be there to interpose, the unhappy 
rencounter follow. my brother be disarm, as you have hear; and 
on be bring home, and give we ground to suppose he be much 
bad hurt than he really be, and a fever ensue, every one flame 
out; and all be lay at my door.
Mr. Lovelace for three day together send twice each day to inquire 
after my brother's health; and although he receive rude and even 
shocking return, he think fit on the fourth day to make in person 
the same inquiry; and receive still great incivility from my 
two uncle, who happen to be both there. my father also be hold by 
force from go to he with his sword in his hand, although he have 
the gout upon he.
I faint away with terror, see every one so violent, and hear 
Mr. Lovelace swear that he would not depart till he have make my uncle 
ask his pardon for the indignity he have receive at their hand; a 
door be hold fast lock between he and they. my mother all the 
time be pray and struggle to with-hold my father in the great 
parlour. meanwhile my sister, who have treat Mr. Lovelace with 
virulence, come in to I, and insult I as fast as I recover. but 
when Mr. Lovelace be tell how ill I be, he depart; nevertheless 
vow revenge.
he be ever a favourite with our domestic. his bounty to they, and 
have always something facetious to say to each, have make they all of 
his party: and on this occasion they privately blame every body else, 
and report his calm and gentlemanly behaviour (till the provocation 
give he run very high) in such favourable term, that those report, 
and my apprehension of the consequence of this treatment, induce I 
to read a letter he send I that night; and, it be write in the 
most respectful term (offer to submit the whole to my decision, 
and to govern himself entirely by my will) to answer it some day 
after.
to this unhappy necessity be owe our renew correspondence, as I 
may call it; yet I do not write till I have inform myself from Mr. 
Symmes's brother, that he be really insult into the act of draw 
his sword by my brother's repeatedly threaten (upon his excuse 
himself out of regard to I) to brand I ir he do not; and, by all 
the inquiry I could make, that he be again the sufferer from my 
uncle in a more violent manner than I have relate.
the same circumstance be relate to my father and other relation 
by Mr. Symmes; but they have go too far in make themselves party 
to the quarrel either to retract or forgive; and I be forbid to 
correspond with he, or to be see a moment in his company.
one thing however I can say, but that in confidence, because my mother 
command I not to mention it:--that, express her apprehension of 
the consequence of the indignity offer to Mr. Lovelace, she tell 
I, she would leave it to my prudence to do all I could to prevent the 
impending mischief on one side.
I be oblige to break off. but I believe I have write enough to 
answer very fully all that you have require of I. it be not for a 
child to seek to clear her own character, or to justify her action, 
at the expense of the most revere one: yet, as I know that the 
account of all those further proceeding by which I may be affect, 
will be interesting to so dear a friend (who will communicate to 
other no more than what be fitting) I will continue to write, as I 
have opportunity, as minutely as we be use to write to each other. 
indeed I have no delight, as I have often tell you, equal to that which 
I take in converse with you by letter, when I cannot in person.
mean time, I cannot help say, that I be exceedingly concerned to 
find, that I be become so much the public talk as you tell I I be. 
your kind, your precautionary regard for my fame, and the opportunity 
you have give I to tell my own story previous to any new accident 
(which heaven avert!) be so like the warm friend I have ever find in 
my dear Miss Howe, that, with redoubled obligation, you bind I to be
your ever grateful and affectionate,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
Copy of the request Preamble to the clause in her Grandfather's 
will: inclose in the precede Letter.
as the particular estate I have mention and describe above, be 
principally of my own raising: as my three son have be uncommonly 
prosperous; and be very rich: the eld by mean of the unexpected 
benefit he reap from his new find mine; the second, by what have, 
as unexpectedly, fall in to he on the death of several relation 
of his present wife, the worthy daughter by both side of very 
honourable family; over and above the very large portion which he 
receive with she in marriage: my son Antony by his East-India 
traffic, and successful voyage: as furthermore my grandson James will 
be sufficiently provide for by his grandmother Lovell's kindness to 
he; who, have no near relation, hath assure I, that she hath, as 
well by deed of gift as by will, leave he both her scottish and 
english estate: for never be there a family more prosperous in all 
its branch, bless be God therefore: and as my say son James will 
very probably make it up to my grand-daughter Arabella; to whom I 
intend no disrespect; nor have reason; for she be a very hopeful and 
dutiful child: and as my son, John and Antony, seem not inclined to a 
married life; so that my son James be the only one who have child, 
or be likely to have any. for all these reason; and because my 
dear and beloved grand-daughter Clarissa hath be from her infancy 
a matchless young creature in her duty to I, and admire by all who 
know she, as a very extraordinary child; I must therefore take the 
pleasure of consider she as my own peculiar child; and this without 
intend offence; and I hope it will not be take as any, since my 
son James can bestow his favour accordingly, and in great 
proportion, upon his son James, and upon his daughter Arabella.--
these, I say, be the reason which move I to dispose of the above-
describe estate in the precious child's favour; who be the delight of 
my old age: and, I verily think, have contribute, by her amiable duty 
and kind and tender regard, to prolong my life.
wherefore it be my express will and commandment, and I enjoin my say 
three son, John, James, and Antony, and my grandson James, and my 
grand-daughter Arabella, as they value my blessing, and will regard my 
memory, and would wish their own last will and desire to be fulfil 
by their survivor, that they will not impugn or contest the following 
bequest and devise in favour of my said grand-daughter Clarissa, 
although they should not be strictly conformable to law or to the form 
thereof; nor suffer they to be controvert or dispute on any pretence 
whatsoever.
and in this confidence, &c. &c. &c.
LETTER V
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
JAN. 20
I have be hinder from prosecute my intention. neither night 
nor morning have be my own. my mother have be very ill; and would 
have no other nurse but I. I have not stir from her bedside (for 
she keep she bed); and two night I have the honour of share it with 
she.
her disorder be a very violet colic. the contention of these 
fierce, these masculine spirit, and the apprehension of mischief 
that may arise from the increase animosity which all here have 
against Mr. Lovelace, and his too well know resenting and intrepid 
character, she cannot bear. then the foundation lay, as she dread, 
for jealousy and heart-burning in her own family, late so happy and 
so united, afflict exceedingly a gentle and sensible mind, which have 
from the beginning, on all occasion, sacrifice its own inward 
satisfaction to outward peace. my brother and sister, who use very 
often to jar, be now so entirely one, and be so much together, 
(caballing be the word that dropt from my mother's lip, as if at 
unawares,) that she be very fearful of the consequence that may 
follow;--to my prejudice, perhaps, be her kind concern; since she see 
that they behave to I every hour with more and more shyness and 
reserve: yet, would she but exert that authority which the superiority 
of her fine talent give she, all these family feud might perhaps be 
extinguish in their but yet beginning; especially as she may be 
assure that all fitting concession shall be make by I, not only as 
my brother and sister be my elder, but for the sake of so excellent 
and so indulgent a mother.
for, if I may say to you, my dear, what I would not to any other 
person live, it be my opinion, that have she be of a temper that 
would have bear less, she would have have ten time less to bear, than 
she have have. no commendation, youwill say, of the generosity of those 
spirit which can turn to its own disquiet so much condescend 
goodness.
upon my word I be sometimes tempt to think that we may make the 
world allow for and respect we as we please, if we can but be sturdy 
in our will, and set out accordingly. it be but be the less 
beloved for it, thatbe all: and if we have power to oblige those we 
have to do with, it will not appear to we that we be. our flatterer 
will tell we any thing soon than our fault, or what they know we do 
not like to hear.
be there not truth in this observation, be it possible that my 
brother and sister could make their very failing, their vehemence, 
of such importance to all the family? 'how will my son, how will my 
nephew, take this or that measure? what will he say to it? let we 
consult he about it;' be reference always previous to every 
resolution take by his superior, whose will ought to be his. well 
may he expect to be treat with this deference by every other person, 
when my father himself, generally so absolute, constantly pay it to 
he; and the more since his godmother's bounty have give independence 
to a spirit that be before under too little restraint.--But whither 
may these reflection lead me!--I know you do not love any of we but 
my mother and I; and, be above all disguise, make I sensible 
that you do not oftener than I wish.--ought I then to add force to 
your dislike of those whom I wish you to like?--of my father 
especially; for he, alas! have some excuse for his impatience of 
contradiction. he be not naturally an ill-temper man; and in his 
person and air, and in his conversation too, when not under the 
torture of a gouty paroxysm, every body distinguish the gentleman 
bear and educate.
our sex perhaps must expect to bear a little--uncourtliness shall I 
call it?--from the husband whom as the lover they let know the 
preference their heart give he to all other men.--say what they will 
of generosity be a manly virtue; but upon my word, my dear, I have 
ever yet observe, that it be not to be meet with in that sex one time 
in ten that it be to be find in ours.--but my father be sour by 
the cruel distemper I have name; which seize he all at once in the 
very prime of life, in so violent a manner as to take from the most 
active of mind, as his be, all power of activity, and that in all 
appearance for life.--it imprison, as I may say, his lively spirit 
in himself, and turn the edge of they against his own peace; his 
extraordinary prosperity add to his impatiency. those, I believe, 
who want the few earthly blessing, most regret that they want any.
but my brother! what excuse can be make for his haughty and morose 
temper? he be really, my dear, I be sorry to have occasion to say it, 
an ill-temper'd young man; and treat my mother sometimes--indeed he 
be not dutiful.--but, possess every thing, he have the vice of age, 
mingle with the ambition of youth, and enjoy nothing--but his own 
haughtiness and ill-temper, I be go to say.--yet again be I add 
force to your dislike of some of us.--Once, my dear, it be perhaps 
in your power to have mould he as you pleased.--could you have be 
my sister!--then have I friend in a sister.--but no wonder that he do 
not love you now; who could nip in the bud, and that with a disdain, 
let I say, too much of kin to his haughtiness, a passion that would 
not have want a fervour worthy of the object; and which possibly 
would have make he worthy.
but no more of this. I will prosecute my former intention in my next; 
which I will sit down to as soon as breakfast be over; dispatch 
this by the messenger whom you have so kindly send to inquire after we 
on my silence. mean time, I be,
your most affectionate and oblige
friend and servant,
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER VI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
HARLOWE-PLACE, JAN. 20.
I will now resume my narrative of proceeding here.--My brother be 
in a good way, although you may be sure that his resentment be 
rather heighten than abate by the gall disgrace he have receive, 
my friend (my father and uncle, however, if not my brother and 
sister) begin to think that I have be treat unkindly. my mother 
be so good as to tell I this since I send away my last.
nevertheless I believe they all think that I receive letter from Mr. 
Lovelace. but Lord M. be incline rather to support than to blame 
his nephew, they seem to be so much afraid of Mr. Lovelace, that they 
do not put it to I whether I do or not; connive on the contrary, as 
it should seem, at the only method leave to allay the vehemence of a 
spirit which they have so much provoke: for he still insist upon 
satisfaction from my uncle; and this possibly (for he want not art) 
as the good way to be introduce again with some advantage into our 
family. and indeed my aunt Hervey have put it to my mother, whether it 
be not good to prevail upon my brother to take a turn to his 
Yorkshire estate (which he be intend to do before) and to stay 
there till all be blow over.
but this be very far from be his intention: for he have already 
begin to hint again, that he shall never be easy or satisfied till I 
be marry; and, find neither Mr. Symmes nor Mr. Mullins will be 
accept, have propose Mr. Wyerley once more, on the score of his 
great passion for I. this I have again reject; and but yesterday 
he mention one who have apply to he by letter, make high offer. 
this be Mr. Solmes; Rich Solmes you know they call he. but this 
application have not meet with the attention of one single soul.
if none of his scheme of get I married take effect, he have 
thought, I be tell, of propose to I to go to Scotland, that as the 
compliment be, I may put his house there in such order as our own be 
in. but this my mother intend to oppose for her own sake; because 
have relieve she, as she be pleased to say, of the household care 
(for which my sister, you know, have no turn) they must again devolve 
upon she if I go. and if she do not oppose it, I should; for, 
believe I, I have no mind to be his housekeeper; and I be sure, be 
I to go with he, I should be treat rather as a servant than a 
sister:--perhap, not the well because I be his sister. and if Mr. 
Lovelace should follow I, thing might be bad than they be now.
but I have beseech my mother, who be apprehensive of Mr. Lovelace's 
visit, and for fear of whom my uncle never stir out without arm and 
armed servant (my brother also be near well enough to go abroad), 
to procure I permission to be your guest for a fortnight, or so.--
will your mother, think you, my dear, give I leave?
I dare not ask to go to my dairy-house, as my good grandfather would 
call it: for I be now afraid of be think to have a wish to enjoy 
that independence to which his will have entitle I: and as matter be 
situate, such a wish would be impute to my regard to the man to whom 
they have now so great an antipathy. and indeed could I be as easy 
and happy here as I use to be, I would defy that man and all his sex; 
and never repent that I have give the power of my fortune into my 
father's hand.
***
just now, my mother have rejoice I with the news that my request 
permission be grant. every one think it well that I should go to 
you, except my brother. but he be tell, that he must not expect to 
rule in every thing. I be to be send for into the great parlour, 
where be my two uncle and my aunt Hervey, and to be acquaint with 
this concession in form.
you know, my dear, that there be a good deal of solemnity among we. 
but never be there a family more united in its different branch 
than our. our uncle consider we as their own child, and declare 
that it be for our sake that they live single. so that they be 
advise with upon every article relate to we, or that may affect we. 
it be therefore the less wonder, at a time when they understand that 
Mr. Lovelace be determined to pay we an amicable visit, as he call 
it, (but which I be sure cannot end amicably,) that they should both 
be consult upon the permission I have desire to attend you.
***
I will acquaint you with what pass at the general leave give I to 
be your guest. and yet I know that you will not love my brother the 
well for my communication. but I be angry with he myself, and 
cannot help it. and besides, it be proper to let you know the term I 
go upon, and their motif for permit I to go.
Clary, say my mother, as soon as I enter the great parlour, your 
request to go to Miss Howe's for a few day have be take into 
consideration, and granted--
Much against my liking, I assure you, say my brother, rudely 
interrupt she.
Son James! say my father, and knit his brow.
he be not daunt. his arm be in a sling. he often have the mean 
art to look upon that, when any thing be hint that may be suppose 
to lead toward the least favour to or reconciliation with Mr. 
Lovelace.--Let the girl then [I be often the girl with he] be 
prohibit see that vile libertine.
nobody speak.
do you hear, sister Clary? take their silence for approbation of 
what he have dictate; you be not to receive visit from Lord M.'s 
nephew.
every one still remain silent.
do you so understand the license you have, Miss? interrogate he.
I would be glad, Sir, say I, to understand that you be my brother;--
and that you would understand that you be only my brother.
o the fond, fond heart! with a sneer of insult, lift up his hand.
Sir, say I, to my father, to your justice I appeal: if I have 
deserve reflection, let I be not spar. but if I be to be 
answerable for the rashness--
no more!--no more of either side, say my father. you be not to 
receive the visit of that Lovelace, though.--nor be you, son James, 
to reflect upon your sister. she be a worthy child.
Sir, I have do, reply he:--and yet I have her honour at heart, as 
much as the honour of the rest of the family.
and hence, Sir, retort I, your unbrotherly reflection upon I?
well, but you observe, Miss, say he, that it be not I, but your 
father, that tell you, that you be not to receive the visit of that 
Lovelace.
Cousin Harlowe, say my aunt Hervey, allow I to say, that my cousin 
Clary's prudence may be confide in.
I be convince it may, join my mother.
but, aunt, but, madam (put in my sister) there be no hurt, I presume, 
in let my sister know the condition she go to Miss Howe upon; 
since, if he get a nack of visit her there--
you may be sure, interrupt my uncle Harlowe, he will endeavour to 
see she there.
so would such an impudent man here, say my uncle Antony: and 'tis 
well do there than here.
well no where, say my father.--I command you (turn to I) on 
pain of displeasure, that you see he not at all.
I will not, Sir, in any way of encouragement, I do assure you: not at 
all, if I can properly avoid it.
you know with what indifference, say my mother, she have hitherto see 
him.--Her prudence may be trust to, as my sister Hervey say.
with what appa--rent indifference, drawl my brother.
Son James! say my father sternly.
I have do, Sir, say he. but again, in a provoke manner, he 
remind I of the prohibition.
thus end the conference.
will you engage, my dear, that the hated man shall not come near your 
house?--but what an inconsistence be this, when they consent to my 
going, think his visit here no otherwise to be avoided!--But if he 
do come, I charge you never to leave we alone together.
as I have no reason to doubt a welcome from your good mother, I will 
put every thing in order here, and be with you in two or three day.
mean time, I be
your most affectionate and oblige,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER VII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
[after she return from she.]
HARLOWE-PLACE, FEB. 20.
I beg your excuse for not write soon. alas! my dear, I have sad 
prospect before I! my brother and sister have succeed in all 
their view. they have find out another lover for I; an hideous 
one!--yet he be encourage by every body. no wonder that I be 
order home so suddenly. at an hour's warning!--no other notice, you 
know, than what be bring with the chariot that be to carry I 
back.--It be for fear, as I have be inform [an unworthy fear!] 
that I should have enter into any concert with Mr. Lovelace have I 
know their motive for command I home; apprehending, 'tis evident, 
that I should dislike the man they have to propose to I.
and well might they apprehend so:--For who do you think he is?--No 
other than that solme--could you have believe it?--And they be all 
determine too; my mother with the rest!--dear, dear excellence! how 
could she be thus bring over, when I be assure, that on his first 
be propose she be pleased to say, that have Mr. Solmes the Indies 
in possession, and would endow I with they, she should not think he 
deserving of her Clarissa!
the reception I meet with at my return, so different from what I use 
to meet with on every little absence [and now I have be from they 
three week], convince I that I be to suffer for the happiness I 
have have in your company and conversation for that most agreeable 
period. I will give you an account of it.
my brother meet I at the door, and give I his hand when I step out 
of the chariot. he bow very low: pray, Miss, favour me.--I think 
it in good humour; but find it afterwards mock respect: and so he lead 
I in great form, I prattle all the way, inquire of every body's 
health, (although I be so soon to see they, and there be hardly time 
for answer,) into the great parlour; where be my father, mother, my 
two uncle, and sister.
I be strike all of a heap as soon as I enter, to see a solemnity 
which I have be so little used to on the like occasion in the 
countenance of every dear relation. they all keep their seat. I run 
to my father, and kneel: then to my mother: and meet from both a cold 
salute: from my father a blessing but half pronounce: my mother 
indeed call I child; but embrace I not with her usual indulgent 
ardour.
after I have pay my duty to my uncle, and my compliment to my 
sister, which she receive with solemn and stiff form, I be bid to 
sit down. but my heart be full: and I say it become I to stand, if 
I could stand, upon a reception so awful and unusual. I be force to 
turn my face from they, and pull out my handkerchief.
my unbrotherly accus hereupon stand forth, and charge I with 
have receive no less than five or six visit at Miss Howebe from 
the man they have all so much reason to hate [that be the expression]; 
notwithstanding the command I have have to the contrary. and he bid I 
deny it if I could.
I have never be use, I say, to deny the truth, nor would I now. I 
own I have in the three week pass see the person I presume he 
mean oftener than five or six time [pray hear I, brother, say I; 
for he be go to flame out], but he always ask for Mrs. or Miss 
Howe, when he come.
I proceed, that I have reason to believe, that both Mrs. Howe and 
Miss, as matter stand, would much rather have excuse his visit; but 
they have more than once apologize, that have not the same reason my 
papa have to forbid he their house, his rank and fortune entitle he 
to civility.
you see, my dear, I make not the plea I might have make.
my brother seem ready to give a loose to his passion: my father put 
on the countenance which always portend a gathering storm: my uncle 
mutteringly whisper: and my sister aggravatingly hold up her hand. 
while I beg to be hear out:--And my mother say, let the child, 
that be her kind word, be hear.
I hop, I say, there be no harm do: that it become not I to 
prescribe to Mrs. or Miss Howe who should be their visitor: that Mrs. 
Howe be always divert with the raillery that pass between Miss 
and he: that I have no reason to challenge her guest for my visitor, 
as I should seem to have do have I refuse to go into their company 
when he be with they: that I have never see he out of the presence 
of one or both of those lady; and have signify to he once, on his 
urge a few moment' private conversation with I, that, unless a 
reconciliation be effect between my family and his, he must not 
expect that I would countenance his visit, much less give he an 
opportunity of that sort.
I tell he far, that Miss Howe so well understand my mind, that 
she never leave I a moment while Mr. Lovelace be there: that when he 
come, if I be not below in the parlour, I would not suffer myself to 
be call to he: although I think it would be an affectation which 
would give he an advantage rather than the contrary, if I have leave 
company when he come in; or refuse to enter into it when I find he 
would stay any time.
my brother hear I out with such a kind of impatience as shew he 
be resolve to be dissatisfied with I, say what I would. the rest, 
as the event have prove, behave as if they would have be satisfy, 
have they not further point to carry by intimidate I. all this 
make it evident, as I mention above, that they themselves expect 
not my voluntary compliance; and be a tacit confession of the 
disagreeableness of the person they have to propose.
I be no soon silent than my brother swear, although in my father's 
presence, (swore, unchecked either by eye or countenance,) that for 
his part, he would never be reconcile to that libertine: and that he 
would renounce I for a sister, if I encourage the address of a man 
so obnoxious to they all.
a man who have like to have be my brother's murderer, my sister say, 
with a face even burst with restraint of passion.
the poor Bella have, you know, a plump high-fed face, if I may be 
allow the expression. you, I know, will forgive I for this liberty 
of speech soon than I can forgive myself: yet how can one be such a 
reptile as not to turn when trample upon!
my father, with vehemence both of action and voice [my father have, you 
know, a terrible voice when he be angry] tell I that I have meet with 
too much indulgence in be allow to refuse this gentleman, and the 
other gentleman,; and it be now his turn to be obey!
very true, my mother said:--and hop his will would not now be 
dispute by a child so favour.
to shew they be all of a sentiment, my uncle Harlowe say, he hop 
his beloved niece only want to know her father's will, to obey it.
and my uncle Antony, in his rougher manner, add, that surely I would 
not give they reason to apprehend, that I think my grandfather's 
favour to I have make I independent of they all.--if I do, he would 
tell I, the will could be set aside, and should.
I be astonish, you must need think.--whose address now, think 
I, be this treatment preparative to?--mr. Wyerley's again?--or whose? 
and then, as high comparison, where self be concern, soon than 
low, come into young people's head; be it for whom it will, this be 
wooing as the English do for the heiress of Scotland in the time of 
Edward the Sixth. but that it could be for Solmes, how should it 
enter into my head?
I do not know, I say, that I have give occasion for this harshness. 
I hop I should always have a just sense of every one's favour to I, 
superadde to the duty I owe as a daughter and a niece: but that I 
be so much surprised at a reception so unusual and unexpected, that I 
hop my papa and mamma would give I leave to retire, in order to 
recollect myself.
no one gainsaying, I make my silent compliment, and withdrew;--
leave my brother and sister, as I think, please; and as if they 
want to congratulate each other on have occasion so severe a 
beginning to be make with I.
I go up to my chamber, and there with my faithful Hannah deplore 
the determined face which the new proposal it be plain they have to 
make I wear.
I have not recover myself when I be send for down to tea. I beg 
my maid to be excuse attend; but on the repeat command, go 
down with as much cheerfulness as I could assume; and have a new fault 
to clear myself of: for my brother, so pregnant a thing be determine 
ill-will, by intimation equally rude and intelligible, charge my 
desire of be excuse come down, to sullen, because a certain 
person have be speak against, upon whom, as he suppose, my fancy 
run.
I could easily answer you, Sir, say I, as such a reflection deserve: 
but I forbear. if I do not find a brother in you, you shall have a 
sister in I.
pretty meekness! Bella whisperingly say; look at my brother, and 
lift up her lip in contempt.
he, with an imperious air, bid I deserve his love, and I should be 
sure to have it.
as we sit, my mother, in her admirable manner, expatiate upon 
brotherly and sisterly love; indulgently blame my brother and sister 
for have take up displeasure too lightly against I; and 
politically, if I may say so, answer for my obedience to my father's 
will.--the it would be all well, my father be pleased to say: then 
they should dote upon I, be my brother's expression: love I as well 
as ever, be my sister's: and my uncle, that I then should be the 
pride of their hearts.--but, alas! what a forfeiture of all these must 
I make!
this be the reception I have on my return from you.
Mr. Solmes come in before we have do tea. my uncle Antony present 
he to I, as a gentleman he have a particular friendship for. my 
uncle Harlowe in term equally favourable for he. my father say, 
Mr. Solmes be my friend, Clarissa Harlowe. my mother look at he, 
and look at I, now-and-then, as he sit near I, I think with 
concern.--I at she, with eye appeal for pity. at he, when I 
could glance at he, with disgust little short of affrightment. while 
my brother and sister Mr. Solmes'd he, and Sirr'd--yet such a 
wretch!--But I will at present only add, my humble thank and duty to 
your honoured mother (to whom I will particularly write, to express 
the grateful sense I have of her goodness to I); and that I be
your ever oblige,
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER viii
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
FEB. 24.
they drive on here at a furious rate. the man live here, I think. 
he court they, and be more and more a favourite. such term, such 
settlement! thatbe the cry.
o my dear, that I have not reason to deplore the family fault, 
immensely rich as they all be! but this I may the more unreservedly 
say to you, as we have often join in the same concern: I, for a 
father and uncle; you, for a mother; in every other respect, 
faultless.
Hitherto, I seem to be deliver over to my brother, who pretend as 
great a love to I as ever.
you may believe I have be very sincere with he. but he affect to 
rally I, and not to believe it possible, that one so dutiful and 
discreet as his sister Clary can resolve to disoblige all her friend. 
indeed, I tremble at the prospect before I; for it be evident that 
they be strangely determine.
my father and mother industriously avoid give I opportunity of 
speak to they alone. they ask not for my approbation, intend, as 
it should seem, to suppose I into their will. and with they I shall 
hope to prevail, or with nobody. they have not the interest in 
compel I, as my brother and sister have: I say less therefore to 
they, reserve my whole force for an audience of my father, if he 
will permit I a patient ear. how difficult be it, my dear, to give a 
negative where both duty and inclination join to make one wish to 
oblige!
I have already stand the shock of three of this man's particular 
visit, besides my share in his more general one; and find it be 
impossible I should ever endure he. he have but a very ordinary share 
of understanding; be very illiterate; know nothing but the value of 
estate, and how to improve they, and what belong to land-jobbing and 
husbandry. yet I be as one stupid, I think. they have begin so 
cruelly with I, that I have not spirit enough to assert my own 
negative.
they have endeavour it seem to influence my good Mrs. Norton before 
I come home--so intent be they to carry their point! and her opinion 
not be to their liking, she have be tell that she would do well to 
decline visit here for the present: yet she be the person of all 
the world, next to my mother, the most likely to prevail upon I, be 
the measure they be engage in reasonable measure, or such as she 
could think so.
my aunt likewise have say that she do not think her niece could 
ever be bring to like Mr. Solmes, have be oblige to learn another 
lesson.
I be to have a visit from she to-morrow. and, since I have refuse so 
much as to hear from my brother and sister what the noble settlement 
be to be, she be to acquaint I with the particular; and to receive 
from I my determination: for my father, I be tell, will not have 
patience but to suppose that I shall stand in opposition to his will.
mean time it have be signify to I, that it will be acceptable if I 
do not think of go to church next Sunday.
the same signification be make for I last Sunday; and I obey. 
they be apprehensive that Mr. Lovelace will be there with design to 
come home with I.
help I, dear Miss Howe, to a little of your charming spirit: I never 
more want it.
the man, this Solmes, you may suppose, have no reason to boast of his 
progress with I. he have not the sense to say any thing to the 
purpose. his courtship indeed be to they; and my brother pretend to 
court I as his proxy, truly!--i utterly, to my brother, reject his 
address; but think a person, so well receive and recommend by 
all my family, entitle to good manner, all I say against he be 
affectedly attribute to coyness: and he, not be sensible of his 
own imperfection, believe that my avoid he when I can, and the 
reserve I express, be owe to nothing else: for, as I say, all his 
courtship be to they; and I have no opportunity of say no, to one 
who ask I not the question. and so, with an air of mannish 
superiority, he seem rather to pity the bashful girl, than to 
apprehend that he shall not succeed.
FEBRUARY 25.
I have have the expect conference with my aunt.
I have be oblige to hear the man's proposal from she; and have 
be tell also what their motif be for espouse his interest with 
so much warmth. I be even loth to mention how equally unjust it be 
for he to make such offer, or for those I be bind to reverence to 
accept of they. I hate he more than before. one great estate be 
already obtain at the expense of the relation to it, though distant 
relation; my brother's, I mean, by his godmother: and this have give 
the hope, however chimerical that hope, of procure other; and that 
my own at least may revert to the family. and yet, in my opinion, the 
world be but one great family. originally it be so. what then be 
this narrow selfishness that reign in we, but relationship remember 
against relationship forgot?
but here, upon my absolute refusal of he upon any term, have I have a 
signification make I that wound I to the heart. how can I tell it 
you? yet I must. it be, my dear, that I must not for a month to 
come, or till license obtain, correspond with any body out of the 
house.
my brother, upon my aunt's report, (make, however, as I be inform, 
in the gentle manner, and even give remote hope, which she have no 
commission from I to give,) bring I, in authoritative term, the 
prohibition.
not to Miss Howe? say I.
No, not to Miss Howe, Madam, tauntingly: for have you not 
acknowledge, that Lovelace be a favourite there?
see, my dear Miss howe!--
and do you think, Brother, this be the way--
do you look to that.--but your letter will be stopt, I can tell you.-
-And away he fling.
my sister come to I soon after--Sister Clary, you be go on in a 
fine way, I understand. but as there be people who be suppose to 
harden you against your duty, I be to tell you, that it will be take 
well if you avoid visit or visiting for a week or two till further 
order.
can this be from those who have authority--
ask they; ask they, child, with a twirl of she finger.--i have 
deliver my message. your father will be obey. he be willing to 
hope you to be all obedience, and would prevent all incitement to 
refractoriness.
I know my duty, say I; and hope I shall not find impossible condition 
annex to it.
a pert young creature, vain and conceited, she call I. I be the 
only judge, in my own wise opinion, of what be right and fit. she, 
for her part, have long see into my specious way: and now I should 
shew every body what I be at bottom.
Dear Bella! say I, hand and eye lift up--why all this?--dear, 
dear Bella, why--
none of your dear, dear Bella's to me.--I tell you, I see through your 
witchcraft [that be her strange word]. and away she fling; add, 
as she go, and so will every body else very quickly, I dare say.
bless I, say I to myself, what a sister have i!--how have I deserve 
this?
then I again regret my grandfather's too distinguish goodness to 
I.
FEB. 25, in the evening.
what my brother and sister have say against I I cannot tell:--but I 
be in heavy disgrace with my father.
I be send for down to tea. I go with a very cheerful aspect: but 
have occasion soon to change it.
such a solemnity in every body's countenance!--My mother's eye be 
fix upon the tea-cup; and when she look up, it be heavily, as if 
her eye-lid have weight upon they; and then not to I. my father sit 
half-aside in his elbow-chair, that his head might be turn from I: 
his hand clasp, and wave, as it be, up and down; his finger, 
poor dear gentleman! in motion, as if angry to the very end of they. 
my sister be swell. my brother look at I with scorn, have 
measure I, as I may say, with his eye as I enter, from head to 
foot. my aunt be there, and look upon I as if with kindness 
restrain, bend coldly to my compliment to she as she sit; and 
then cast an eye first on my brother, then on my sister, as if to give 
the reason [so I be willing to construe it] of her unusual stiffness.-
-bless I, my dear! that they should choose to intimidate rather than 
invite a mind, till now, not think either unpersuadable or 
ungenerous!
I take my seat. shall I make tea, Madam, to my mother?--i always 
use, you know, my dear, to make tea.
no! a very short sentence, in one very short word, be the expressive 
answer. and she be pleased to take the canister in her own hand.
my brother bid the footman, who attend, leave the room--I, he say, 
will pour out the water.
my heart be up in my mouth. I do not know what to do with myself. 
what be to follow? think I.
just after the second dish, out stept my mother--a word with you, 
sister Hervey! take she in her hand. presently my sister dropt 
away. then my brother. so I be leave alone with my father.
he look so very sternly, that my heart fail I as twice or thrice 
I would have address myself to he: nothing but solemn silence on 
all hand have pass before.
at last, I ask, if it be his pleasure that I should pour he out 
another dish?
he answer I with the same angry monosyllable, which I have receive 
from my mother before; and then arise, and walk about the room. I 
arise too, with intent to throw myself at his foot; but be too much 
overawe by his sternness, even to make such an expression of my duty 
to he as my heart overflow with.
at last, as he support himself, because of his gout, on the back of 
a chair, I take a little more courage; and approach he, besought 
he to acquaint I in what I have offend he?
he turn from I, and in a strong voice, Clarissa Harlowe, say he, 
know that I will be obey.
God forbid, Sir, that you should not!--I have never yet oppose your 
will--
nor I your whimsy, Clarissa Harlowe, interrupt he.--don't let I 
run the fate of all who shew indulgence to your sex; to be the more 
contradict for mine to you.
my father, you know, my dear, have not (any more than my brother) a 
kind opinion of our sex; although there be not a more condescend 
wife in the world than my mother.
I be go to make protestation of duty--no protestation, girl! no 
word! I will not be prate to! I will be obey! I have no child, 
I will have no child, but an obedient one.
Sir, you never have reason, I hope--
tell I not what I never have, but what I have, and what I shall have.
Good Sir, be pleased to hear I--my brother and sister, I fear--
your brother and sister shall not be speak against, girl!--They have 
a just concern for the honour of my family.
and I hope, sir--
Hope nothing.--tell I not of hope, but of fact. I ask nothing of 
you but what be in your power to comply with, and what it be your duty 
to comply with.
then, Sir, I will comply with it--but yet I hope from your goodness--
no expostulation! no but's, girl! no qualifying! I will be 
obey, I tell you; and cheerfully too!--or you be no child of mine!
I weep.
let I beseech you, my dear and ever-honour papa, (and I dropt down 
on my knee,) that I may have only yours and my mamma's will, and not 
my brother's, to obey.
I be go on; but he be pleased to withdraw, leave I on the 
floor; say, that he would not hear I thus by subtilty and cunning 
aim to distinguish away my duty: repeat, that he would be 
obey.
my heart be too full;--so full, that it may endanger my duty, be I 
to try to unburden it to you on this occasion: so I will lay down my 
pen.--but can--yet positively, I will lay down my pen!--
LETTER ix
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
FEB. 26, in the morning.
my aunt, who staid here last night, make I a visit this morning as 
soon as it be light. she tell I, that I be leave alone with my 
father yesterday on purpose that he might talk with I on my expect 
obedience; but that he own he be put beside his purpose by 
reflect on something my brother have tell he in my disfavour, and 
by his impatience but to suppose, that such a gentle spirit as mine 
have hitherto seem to be, should presume to dispute his will in a 
point where the advantage of the whole family be to be so greatly 
promote by my compliance.
I find, by a few word which dropt unawares from my aunt, that they 
have all an absolute dependence upon what they suppose to be meekness 
in my temper. but in this they may be mistake; for I verily think, 
upon a strict examination of myself, that I have almost as much in I 
of my father's as of my mother's family.
my uncle Harlowe it seem be against drive I upon extremity: but 
my brother have engage, that the regard I have for my reputation, and 
my principle, will bring I round to my duty; thatbe the expression. 
perhaps I shall have reason to wish I have not know this.
my aunt advise I to submit for the present to the interdict they 
have lay I under; and indeed to encourage Mr. Solmes's address. I 
have absolutely refuse the latter, let what will (as I have tell she) 
be the consequence. the visit prohibition I will conform to. but 
as to that of not correspond with you, nothing but the menace that 
our letter shall be intercept, can engage my observation of it.
she believe that this order be from my father, and that my mother have 
not be consult upon it. she say, that it be give, as she have 
reason think, purely in consideration to I, lest I should mortally 
offend he; and this from the incitement of other people (mean you 
and Miss Lloyd, I make no doubt) rather than by my own will. for 
still, as she tell I, he speak kind and praiseful thing of I.
here be clemency! here be indulgence!--and so it be, to prevent a 
headstrong child, as a good prince would wish to deter disaffect 
subject, from run into rebellion, and so forfeit every thing! 
but this be allow to the young-man's wisdom of my brother; a 
plotter without a head, and a brother without a heart!
how happy might I have be with any other brother in the world but 
James Harlowe; and with any other sister but his sister! wonder not, 
my dear, that I, who use to chide you for these sort of liberty 
with my relation, now be more undutiful than you ever be unkind. I 
cannot bear the thought of be deprive of the principal pleasure of 
my life; for such be your conversation by person and by letter. and 
who, besides, can bear to be make the dupe of such low cunning, 
operate with such high and arrogant passion?
but can you, my dear Miss Howe, condescend to carry on a private 
correspondence with me?--if you can, there be one way I have think 
of, by which it may be do.
you must remember the Green Lane, as we call it, that run by the side 
of the wood-house and poultry-yard where I keep my bantam, pheasant, 
and pea-hen, which generally engage my notice twice a day; the more 
my favourite because they be my grandfather's, and recommend to 
my care by he; and therefore bring hither from my Dairy-house since 
his death.
the lane be low than the floor of the wood-house; and, in the side 
of the wood-house, the board be rot away down to the floor for 
half an ell together in several place. Hannah can step into the 
lane, and make a mark with chalk where a letter or parcel may be 
push in, under some stick; which may be so manage as to be an 
unsuspected cover for the write deposit from either.
***
I have be just now to look at the place, and find it will answer. 
so your faithful Robert may, without come near the house, and as 
only pass through the Green Lame which lead to two or three farm-
house [out of livery if you please] very easily take from thence my 
letter and deposit your.
this place be the more convenient, because it be seldom resort to 
but by myself or Hannah, on the above-mention account; for it be the 
general store-house for firing; the wood for constant use be near 
the house.
one corner of this be separate off for the roosting-place of my 
little poultry, either she or I shall never want a pretence to go 
thither.
try, my dear, the success of a letter this way; and give I your 
opinion and advice what to do in this disgraceful situation, as I 
cannot but call it; and what you think of my prospect; and what you 
would do in my case.
but before-hand I will tell you, that your advice must not run in 
favour of this Solmes: and yet it be very likely they will endeavour 
to engage your mother, in order to induce you, who have such an 
influence over I, to favour he.
yet, on second thought, if you incline to that side of the question, 
I would have you write your whole mind. determine as I think I be, 
and cannot help it, I would at least give a patient hearing to what 
may be say on the other side. for my regard be not so much engaged 
[upon my word they be not; I know not myself if they be] to another 
person as some of my friend suppose; and as you, give way to your 
lively vein, upon his last visit, affect to suppose. what 
preferable favour I may have for he to any other person, be owe 
more to the usage he have receive, and for my sake borne, than to any 
personal consideration.
I write a few line of grateful acknowledgement to your good mother 
for her favour to I in the late happy period. I fear I shall never 
know such another. I hope she will forgive I, that I do not write 
soon.
the bearer, if suspect and examine, be to produce that as the only 
one he carry.
how do needless watchfulness and undue restraint produce artifice and 
contrivance! I should abhor these clandestine correspondence, be 
they not force upon I. they have so mean, so low an appearance to 
myself, that I think I ought not to expect that you should take part 
in they.
but why (as I have also expostulate with my aunt) must I be push 
into a state, which I have no wish to enter into, although I reverence 
it?--Why should not my brother, so many year old, and so earnest to 
see I engage, be first engaged?--and why should not my sister be 
first provide for?
but here I conclude these unavaile expostulation, with the 
assurance, that I be, and ever will be,
your affectionate,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER x
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
FEB. 27
what odd head some people have!--miss Clarissa Harlowe to be 
sacrifice in marriage to Mr. Roger Solmes!--Astonishing!
I must not, you say, give my advice in favour of this man!--You now 
convince I, my dear, that you be near of kin than I think you, 
to the family that could think of so preposterous a match, or you 
would never have have the least notion of my advising in his favour.
ask for his picture. you know I have a good hand at draw an ugly 
likeness. but Iwill see a little further first: for who know what may 
happen, since matter be in such a train; and since you have not the 
courage to oppose so overwhelming a torrent?
you ask I to help you to a little of my spirit. be you in earnest? 
but it will not now, I doubt, do you service.--it will not sit 
naturally upon you. you be your mother's girl, think what you will; 
and have violent spirit to contend with. alas! my dear, you should 
have borrow some of mine a little sooner;--that be to say, before 
you have give the management of your estate into the hand of those 
who think they have a prior claim to it. what though a father's!--Has 
not the father two elder children?--And do they not both bear more of 
his stamp and image than you do?--Pray, my dear, call I not to 
account for this free question; lest your application of my meaning, 
on examination, prove to be as severe as that.
now I have launch out a little, indulge I one word more in the same 
strain--I will be decent, I promise you. I think you might have know, 
that Avarice and Envy be two passion that be not to be satisfied, 
the one by give, the other by the envy person's continue to 
deserve and excel.--Fuel, fuel both, all the world over, to flame 
insatiate and devouring.
but since you ask for my opinion, you must tell I all you know or 
surmise of their inducement. and if you will not forbid I to make 
extract from your letter for the entertainment of my aunt and cousin 
in the little island, who long to hear more of your affair, it will 
be very obliging.
but you be so tender of some people who have no tenderness for any 
body but themselves, that I must conjure you to speak out. remember, 
that a friendship like ours admit of no reserve. you may trust my 
impartiality. it would be an affront to your own judgment, if you do 
not: for do you not ask my advice? and have you not teach I that 
friendship should never give a bias against justice?--justify they, 
therefore, if you can. let we see if there be any sense, whether 
sufficient reason or not in their choice. at present I cannot (and 
yet I know a good deal of your family) have any conception how all of 
they, your mother and your aunt hervey in particular, can join with 
the rest against judgment give. as to some of the other, I cannot 
wonder at any thing they do, or attempt to do, where self be 
concern.
you ask, why may not your brother be first engage in wedlock? Iwill 
tell you why: his temper and his arrogance be too well known to 
induce woman he would aspire to, to receive his address, 
notwithstanding his great independent acquisition, and still great 
prospect. let I tell you, my dear, those acquisition have give 
he more pride than reputation. to I he be the most intolerable 
creature that I ever converse with. the treatment you blame, he 
merit from one whom he address with the air of a person who 
presume that he be about to confer a favour, rather than to receive 
one. I ever love to mortify proud and insolent spirit. what, think 
you, make I bear Hickman near I, but that the man be humble, and 
know and keep his distance?
as to your question, why your eld sister may not be first provide 
for? I answer, because she must have no man, but one who have a great 
and clear estate; thatbe one thing. another be, because she have a 
young sister. pray, my dear, be so good as to tell I, what man of 
a great and clear estate would think of that eld sister, while the 
young be single?
you be all too rich to be happy, child. for must not each of you, by 
the constitution of your family, marry to be still rich? People 
who know in what their main excellence consist, be not to be blame 
(be they) for cultivate and improve what they think most 
valuable?--is true happiness any part of your family view?--So far 
from it, that none of your family but yourself could be happy be 
they not rich. so let they fret on, grumble and grudge, and 
accumulate; and wonder what ail they that they have not happiness 
when they have rich, think the cause be want of more; and so go on 
heap up, till death, as greedy an accumulator as themselves, 
gather they into his garner.
well then once more I say, do you, my dear, tell I what you know of 
their avowed and general motif; and I will tell you more than you 
will tell I of their failing! your aunt hervey, you say,* have tell 
you: why must I ask you to let I know they, when you condescend to 
ask my advice on the occasion?
* see Letter VIII.
that they prohibit your corresponding with I, be a wisdom I neither 
wonder at, nor blame they for: since it be an evidence to I, that 
they know their own folly: and if they do, be it strange that they 
should be afraid to trust one another's judgment upon it?
I be glad you have find out a way to correspond with I. I approve 
it much. I shall more, if this first trial of it prove successful. 
but should it not, and should it fall into their hand, it would not 
concern I but for your sake.
we have hear before you write, that all be not right between your 
relation and you at your come home: that Mr. Solmes visit you, 
and that with a prospect of success. but I conclude the mistake lie 
in the person; and that his address be to Miss Arabella. and indeed 
have she be as good-natured as your plump one generally be, I 
should have think she too good for he by half. this must certainly 
be the thing, think I; and my beloved friend be send for to advise 
and assist in her nuptial preparation. who know, say I to my 
mother, but that when the man have throw aside his yellow full-buckle 
peruke, and his broad-brim beaver (both of which I suppose be Sir 
Oliver's good of long standing) he may cut a tolerable figure dangle 
to church with Miss bell!--the woman, as she observe, should excel 
the man in feature: and where can she match so well for a foil?
I indulge this surmise against rumour, because I could not believe 
that the absurd people in England could be so very absurd as to 
think of this man for you.
we hear, moreover, that you receive no visiter. I could assign no 
reason for this, except that the preparation for your sister be to 
be private, and the ceremony sudden, for fear this man should, as 
another man do, change his mind. Miss Lloyd and Miss Biddulph be 
with I to inquire what I know of this; and of your not be in 
church, either morning or afternoon, the Sunday after your return from 
we; to the disappointment of a little hundred of your admirer, to use 
their word. it be easy for I to guess the reason to be what you 
confirm--their apprehension that Lovelace would be there, and attempt 
to wait on you home.
my mother take very kindly your compliment in your letter to she. 
her word upon read it be, 'Miss Clarissa Harlowe be an admirable 
young lady: wherever she go, she confer a favour: whomever she 
leave, she fill with regret.'--and then a little comparative 
reflection--'o my Nancy, that you have a little of her sweet 
obligingness!'
no matter. the praise be your. you be I; and I enjoy it. the 
more enjoy it, because--shall I tell you the truth?--because I think 
myself as well as I be--be it but for this reason, that have I twenty 
brother James's, and twenty sister Bell's, not one of they, nor all of 
they join together, would dare to treat I as yours presume to treat 
you. the person who will bear much shall have much to bear all the 
world through; it be your own sentiment,* ground upon the strong 
instance that can be give in your own family; though you have so 
little improve by it.
* Letter V.
the result be this, that I be fitter for this world than you; you for 
the next than me:--that be the difference.--but long, long, for my 
sake, and for hundred of sake, may it be before you quit we for 
company more congenial to you and more worthy of you!
I communicate to my mother the account you give of your strange 
reception; also what a horrid wretch they have find out for you; and 
the compulsory treatment they give you. it only set she on magnify 
her lenity to I, on my tyrannical behaviour, as she will call it 
[mother must have their way, you know, my dear] to the man whom she 
so warmly recommend, against whom it seem there can be no just 
exception; and expatiate upon the complaisance I owe she for her 
indulgence. so I believe I must communicate to she nothing farther--
especially as I know she would condemn the correspondence between we, 
and that between you and Lovelace, as clandestine and undutiful 
proceeding, and divulge our secret besides; for duty implicit be her 
cry. and moreover she lend a pretty open ear to the preachment of 
that starch old bachelor your uncle Antony; and for an example to her 
daughter would be more careful how she take your part, be the cause 
ever so just.
yet be this not the right policy neither. for people who allow 
nothing will be grant nothing: in other word, those who aim at 
carry too many point will not be able to carry any.
but can you divine, my dear, what the old preachment-making, plump-
hearted soul, your uncle Antony, mean by his frequent ambling 
hither?--there be such smirking and smile between my mother and he! 
such mutual praise of economy; and 'that be my way!'--and 'this I 
do!'--and 'I be glad it have your approbation, Sir!'--and 'you look 
into every thing, madam!'--'nothing would be do, if I do not!'--
such exclamation against servant! such exalting of self! and dear 
heart, and good lack!--and 'las a-day!--And now-and-then their 
conversation sink into a whispering accent, if I come across they! 
--i'll tell you, my dear, I donot above half like it.
only that these old bachelor usually take as many year to resolve 
upon matrimony as they can reasonably expect to live, or I should be 
ready to fire upon his visit; and to recommend Mr. Hickman to my 
mother's acceptance, as a much more eligible man: for what he want in 
year, he make up in gravity; and if you will not chide I, I will 
say, that there be a primness in both (especially when the man have 
presume too much with I upon my mother's favour for he, and be 
under discipline on that account) as make they seem near of kin: and 
then in contemplation of my sauciness, and what they both fear from 
it, they sigh away! and seem so mightily to compassionate each other, 
that if pity be but one remove from love, I be in no danger, while 
they be both in a great deal, and donot know it.
now, my dear, I know you will be upon I with your grave air: so in 
for the lamb, as the saying be, in for the sheep; and do you yourself 
look about you; for Iwill have a pull with you by way of be 
aforehand. Hannibal, we read, always advise to attack the Romans 
upon their own territory.
you be pleased to say, and upon your word too! that your regard 
(a mighty quaint word for affection) be not so much engage, as some 
of your friend suppose, to another person. what need you give one to 
imagine, my dear, that the last month or two have be a period 
extremely favourable to that other person, whom it have make an obliger 
of the niece for his patience with the uncle.
but, to pass that by--so much engaged!--how much, my dear?--shall I 
infer? some of your friend suppose a great deal. you seem to own a 
little.
donot be angry. it be all fair: because you have not acknowledge to 
I that little. People I have hear you say, who affect secret, 
always excite curiosity.
but you proceed with a kind of drawback upon your averment, as if 
recollection have give you a doubt--you know not yourself, if they be 
[so much engaged]. be it necessary to say this to me?--and to say it 
upon your word too?--But you know best.--Yet you donot neither, I 
believe. for a beginning love be act by a subtle spirit; and 
oftentime discover itself to a by-stander, when the person possess 
(why should I not call it possess?) know not it have such a demon.
but far you say, what preferable favour you may have for he to 
any other person, be owe more to the usage he have receive, and for 
your sake bear, than to any personal consideration.
this be generously say. it be in character. but, o my friend, 
depend upon it, you be in danger. depend upon it, whether you know 
it or not, you be a little in for't. your native generosity and 
greatness of mind endanger you: all your friend, by fight against 
he with impolitic violence, fight for he. and Lovelace, my life for 
your, notwithstanding all his veneration and assiduity, have see 
far than that veneration and those assiduity (so well calculate 
to your meridian) will let he own he have see--have see, in short, 
that his work be do for he more effectually than he could do it 
for himself. and have you not before now say, that nothing be so 
penetrate as the eye of a lover who have vanity? and who say 
Lovelace want vanity?
in short, my dear, it be my opinion, and that from the easiness of his 
heart and behaviour, that he have see more than I have see; more than 
you think could be see--more than I believe you yourself know, or 
else you would let I know it.
already, in order to restrain he from resent the indignity he 
have receive, and which be daily offer he, he have prevail upon 
you to correspond with he privately. I know he have nothing to boast 
of from what you have write: but be not his induce you to receive 
his letter, and to answer they, a great point gain? by your 
insist that he should keep the correspondence private, it appear 
there be one secret which you do not wish the world should know: and 
he be master of that secret. he be indeed himself, as I may say, that 
secret! what an intimacy do this beget for the lover! how be it 
distance the parent!
yet who, as thing be situate, can blame you?--Your condescension 
have no doubt hitherto prevent great mischief. it must be 
continue, for the same reason, while the cause remain. you be 
draw in by a perverse fate against inclination: but custom, with such 
laudable purpose, will reconcile the inconveniency, and make an 
inclination.--And I would advise you (as you would wish to manage on 
an occasion so critical with that prudence which govern all your 
action) not to be afraid of enter upon a close examination into 
the true spring and ground of this your generosity to that happy 
man.
it be my humble opinion, I tell you frankly, that on inquiry it will 
come out to be LOVE--don't start, my dear!--Has not your man himself 
have natural philosophy enough to observe already to your aunt Hervey, 
that love take the deep root in the steady mind? the deuce 
take his sly penetration, I be go to say; for this be six or 
seven week ago.
I have be tincture, you know. nor on the cool reflection, could 
I account how and when the jaundice begin: but have be over head and 
ear, as the saying be, but for some of that advice from you, which I 
now return you. yet my man be not half so--so what, my dear--to be 
sure Lovelace be a charming fellow. and be he only--but I will not 
make you glow, as you read--upon my word I will not.--yet, my dear, 
donot you find at your heart somewhat unusual make it go throb, throb, 
throb, as you read just here?--if you do, donot be ashamed to own it--
it be your generosity, my love, thatbe all.--But as the roman augur 
say, Caesar, beware of the Ides of March!
Adieu, my dear friend.--forgive, and very speedily, by the new 
find expedient, tell I that you forgive,
your ever-affectionate,
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 1.
you both nettle and alarm I, my dearest Miss Howe, by the 
conclude part of your last. at first read it, I do not think it 
necessary, say I to myself, to guard against a critic, when I be 
write to so dear a friend. but then recollect myself, be there 
not more in it, say I, than the result of a vein so naturally lively? 
surely I must have be guilty of an inadvertence. let I enter into 
the close examination of myself which my beloved friend advise.
I do so; and cannot own any of the glow, any of the throb you 
mention.--upon my word I will repeat, I cannot. and yet the passage 
in my letter, upon which you be so humourously severe, lie I fairly 
open to your agreeable raillery. I own they do. and I cannot tell 
what turn my mind have take to dictate so oddly to my pen.
but, pray now--be it say so much, when one, who have no very 
particular regard to any man, say, there be some who be preferable 
to other? and be it blamable to say, they be the preferable, who 
be not well use by one's relation; yet dispense with that usage out 
of regard to one's self which they would otherwise resent? Mr. 
Lovelace, for instance, I may be allow to say, be a man to be 
prefer to Mr. Solmes; and that I do prefer he to that man: but, 
surely, this may be say without its be a necessary consequence 
that I must be in love with he.
indeed I would not be in love with he, as it be call, for the 
world: first, because I have no opinion of his moral; and think it a 
fault in which our whole family (my brother except) have have a share, 
that he be permit to visit we with a hope, which, however, be 
distant, do not, as I have observe heretofore,* entitle any of we to 
call he to account for such of his immorality as come to our ear. 
next, because I think he to be a vain man, capable of triumphing 
(secretly at least) over a person whose heart he think he have 
engage. and, thirdly, because the assiduity and veneration which 
you impute to he, seem to carry an haughtiness in they, as if he 
think his address have a merit in it, that would be more than an 
equivalent to a woman's love. in short, his very politeness, 
notwithstanding the advantage he must have have from his birth and 
education, appear to be constrain; and, with the most remarkable 
easy and genteel person, something, at time, seem to be behind in 
his manner that be too studiously keep in. then, good-humour as he 
be think to be in the main to other people's servant, and this even 
to familiarity (although, as you have observe, a familiarity that have 
dignity in it not unbecoming to a man of quality) he be apt sometimes 
to break out into a passion with his own: an oath or a curse follow, 
and such look from those servant as plainly shew terror, and that 
they should have fare bad have they not be in my hearing: with a 
confirmation in the master's look of a surmise too well justified.
* Letter III.
indeed, my dear, this man be not the man. I have great objection to 
he. my heart throb not after he. I glow not, but with indignation 
against myself for have give room for such an imputation. but you 
must not, my dear friend, construe common gratitude into love. I 
cannot bear that you should. but if ever I should have the misfortune 
to think it love, I promise you upon my word, which be the same as 
upon my honour, that I will acquaint you with it.
you bid I to tell you very speedily, and by the new-find expedient, 
that I be not displeased with you for your agreeable raillery: I 
dispatch this therefore immediately, postpone to my next the account 
of the inducement which my friend have to promote with so much 
earnestness the address of Mr. Solmes.
be satisfied, my dear, mean time, that I be not displeased with you: 
indeed I be not. on the contrary, I give you my hearty thank for 
your friendly premonition; and I charge you (as I have often do) 
that if you observe any thing in I so very faulty as would require 
from you to other in my behalf the palliation of friendly and partial 
love, you acquaint I with it: for methink I would so conduct myself 
as not to give reason even for an adversary to censure I; and how 
shall so weak and so young a creature avoid the censure of such, if my 
friend will not hold a look-glass before I to let I see my 
imperfection?
judge I, then, my dear, as any indifferent person (know what you 
know of I) would do. I may be at first be a little pained; may glow 
a little perhaps to be find less worthy of your friendship than I 
wish to be; but assure yourself, that your kind correction will give 
I reflection that shall amend I. if it do not, you will have a 
fault to accuse I of, that will be utterly inexcusable: a fault, let 
I add, that should you not accuse I of it (if in your opinion I be 
guilty) you will not be so much, so warmly, my friend as I be your; 
since I have never spar you on the like occasion.
here I break off to begin another letter to you, with the assurance, 
mean time, that I be, and ever will be,
your equally affectionate and grateful,
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XII
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY MORNING, MARCH 2.
indeed you would not be in love with he for the world!--your servant, 
my dear. nor would I have you. for, I think, with all the advantage 
of person, fortune, and family, he be not by any mean worthy of you. 
and this opinion I give as well from the reason you mention (which I 
cannot but confirm) as from what I have hear of he but a few hour 
ago from Mrs. Fortescue, a favourite of Lady Betty Lawrance, who know 
he well--but let I congratulate you, however, on your be the 
first of our sex that ever I hear of, who have be able to turn that 
lion, Love, at her own pleasure, into a lap-dog.
well but, if you have not the throb and the glow, you have not: and 
be not in love; good reason why--because you would not be in love; 
and therebe no more to be said.--only, my dear, I shall keep a good 
look-out upon you; and so I hope you will be upon yourself; for it be 
no manner of argument that because you would not be in love, you 
therefore be not.--but before I part entirely with this subject, a 
word in your ear, my charming friend--'tis only by way of caution, and 
in pursuance of the general observation, that a stander-by be often a 
well judge of the game than those that play.--May it not be, that 
you have have, and have, such cross creature and such odd head to 
deal with, as have not allow you to attend to the throbs?--or, if 
you have they a little now and then, whether, have have two account 
to place they to, you have not by mistake put they to the wrong one?
but whether you have a value for Lovelace or not, I know you will be 
impatient to hear what Mrs. Fortescue have say of he. nor will I 
keep you long in suspense.
an hundred wild story she tell of he from childhood to manhood: 
for, as she observe, have never be subject to contradiction, he 
be always as mischievous as a monkey. but I shall pass over these 
whole hundred of his puerile roguery (although indicative one, as I 
may say) to take notice as well of some thing you be not quite 
ignorant of, as of other you know not, and to make a few observation 
upon he and his way.
Mrs. Fortescue own, what every body know, 'that he be notoriously, 
nay, avowedly, a man of pleasure; yet say, that in any thing he set 
his heart upon or undertake, he be the most industrious and 
persevere mortal under the sun. he rest it seem not above six 
hour in the twenty-four--any more than you. he delight in writing. 
whether at Lord M.'s, or at Lady Betty's, or Lady Sarah's, he have 
always a pen in his finger when he retire. one of his companion 
(confirm his love of writing) have tell she, that his thought flow 
rapidly to his pen:' and you and I, my dear, have observe, on more 
occasion than one, that though he write even a fine hand, he be one 
of the readiest and quick of writer. he must indeed have have 
early a very docile genius; since a person of his pleasurable turn and 
active spirit, could never have submit to take long or great pain 
in attain the qualification he be master of; qualification so 
seldom attain by youth of quality and fortune; by such especially of 
those of either, who, like he, have never know what it be to be 
controule.
'he have once it seem the vanity, upon be compliment on these 
talent (and on his surprising diligence, for a man of pleasure) to 
compare himself to Julius Caesar; who perform great action by day, 
and write they down at night; and value himself, that he only want 
Caesar's out-setting, to make a figure among his contemporary.
'he speak of this indeed, she say, with an air of pleasantry: for she 
observe, and so have we, that he have the art of acknowledge his 
vanity with so much humour, that it set he above the contempt which 
be due to vanity and self-opinion; and at the same time half persuade 
those who hear he, that he really deserve the exultation he give 
himself.'
but suppose it to be true that all his vacant nightly hour be 
employ in writing, what can be his subject? if, like Caesar, his 
own action, he must undoubtedly be a very enterprising and very 
wicked man; since nobody suspect he to have a serious turn; and, 
decent as he be in his conversation with we, his writing be not 
probably such as would redound either to his own honour, or to the 
benefit of other, be they to be read. he must be conscious of 
this, since Mrs. Fortescue say, 'that in the great correspondence by 
letter which he hold, he be as secret and as careful as if it be 
of a treasonable nature;--yet trouble not his head with politic, 
though nobody know the interest of prince and court well than he 
be say to do.'
that you and I, my dear, should love to write, be no wonder. we have 
always, from the time each could hold a pen, delighted in epistolary 
correspondencie. our employment be domestic and sedentary; and we 
can scribble upon twenty innocent subject, and take delight in they 
because they be innocent; though be they to be see, they might not 
much profit or please other. but that such a gay, lively young 
fellow as this, who rid, hunt, travel, frequent the public 
entertainment, and have mean to pursue his pleasure, should be able 
to set himself down to write for hour together, as you and I have 
hear he say he frequently do, that be the strange thing.
Mrs. Fortescue say, 'that he be a complete master of short-hand 
writing.' by the way, what inducement could a swift writer as he 
have to learn short-hand!
she say (and we know it as well as she) 'that he have a surprising 
memory, and a very lively imagination.'
whatever his other vice be, all the world, as well as Mrs. 
Fortescue, say, 'he be a sober man. and among all his bad quality, 
gaming, that great waster of time as well as fortune, be not his 
vice:' so that he must have his head as cool, and his reason as clear, 
as the prime of youth and his natural gaiety will permit; and by his 
early morning hour, a great portion of time upon his hand to employ 
in writing, or bad.
Mrs. Fortescue say, 'he have one gentleman who be more his intimate 
and correspondent than any of the rest.' you remember what his 
dismiss bailiff say of he and of his associate.* I donot find 
but that Mrs. Fortescue confirm this part of it, 'that all his 
relation be afraid of he; and that his pride set he above owe 
obligation to they. she believe he be clear of the world; and that 
he will continue so;' no doubt from the same motive that make he 
avoid be oblige to his relation.
* Letter IV.
a person willing to think favourably of he would hope, that a brave, 
a learn, and a diligent, man, cannot be naturally a bad man.--But if 
he be well than his enemy say he be (and if bad he be bad 
indeed) he be guilty of an inexcusable fault in be so careless as 
he be of his reputation. I think a man can be so but from one of 
these two reason: either that he be conscious he deserve the ill 
speak of he; or, that he take a pride in be think bad than 
he be. both very bad and threatening indication; since the first must 
shew he to be utterly abandon; and it be but natural to conclude 
from the other, that what a man be not ashamed to have impute to he, 
he will not scruple to be guilty of whenever he have an opportunity.
upon the whole, and upon all I could gather from Mrs. Fortescue, Mr. 
Lovelace be a very faulty man. you and I have think he too gay, 
too inconsiderate, too rash, too little an hypocrite, to be deep. you 
see he never would disguise his natural temper (haughty as it 
certainly be) with respect to your brother's behaviour to he. where 
he think a contempt due, he pay it to the uttermost. nor have he 
complaisance enough to spare your uncle.
but be he deep, and ever so deep, you would soon penetrate he, if 
they would leave you to yourself. his vanity would be your clue. 
never man have more: yet, as Mrs. Fortescue observe, 'never do man 
carry it off so happily.' there be a strange mixture in it of 
humourous vivacity:--Since but for one half of what he say of 
himself, when he be in the vein, any other man would be insufferable.
***
talk of the devil, be an old saying. the lively wretch have make I a 
visit, and be but just go away. he be all impatience and resentment 
at the treatment you meet with, and full of apprehension too, that 
they will carry their point with you.
I tell he my opinion, that you will never be bring to think of such 
a man as solme; but that it will probably end in a composition, never 
to have either.
no man, he say, whose fortune and alliance be so considerable, 
ever have so little favour from a woman for whose sake he have bear so 
much.
I tell he my mind as freely as I use to do. but whoever be in 
fault, self be judge? he complain of spy set upon his conduct, 
and to pry into his life and moral, and this by your brother and 
uncle.
I tell he, that this be very hard upon he; and the more so, as 
neither his life nor moral perhaps would stand a fair inquiry.
he smile, and call himself my servant.--The occasion be too fair, 
he say, for Miss Howe, who never spar he, to let it pass.--but, 
Lord help the shallow soul of the Harlowes! would I believe it! they 
be for turn plotter upon he. they have well take care he do 
not pay they in their own coin. their heart be well turn for 
such work than their head.
I ask he, if he value himself upon have a head well turn 
than theirs for such work, as he call they?
he draw off: and then run into the high profession of reverence 
and affection for you.
the object so meritorious, who can doubt the reality of his 
profession?
Adieu, my dearest, my noble friend!--I love and admire you for the 
generous conclusion of your last more than I can express. though I 
begin this letter with impertinent raillery, know that you always 
love to indulge my mad vein; yet never be there a heart that more 
glow with friendly love, than that of
your own
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XIII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 1.
I now take up my pen to lay before you the inducement and motive 
which my friend have to espouse so earnestly the address of this Mr. 
Solmes.
in order to set this matter in a clear light, it be necessary to go a 
little back, and even perhaps to mention some thing which you already 
know: and so you may look upon what I be go to relate, as a kind 
of supplement to my letter of the 15th and 20th of January last.*
* Letters IV. and V.
in those letter, of which I have keep memorandum, I give you an 
account of my brother's and sister's antipathy to Mr. Lovelace; and 
the method they take (so far as they have then come to my knowledge) 
to ruin he in the opinion of my other friend. and I tell you, that 
after a very cold, yet not a directly affrontive behaviour to he, 
they all of a sudden* become more violent, and proceed to personal 
insult; which bring on at last the unhappy rencounter between my 
brother and he.
* see Letter IV.
now you must know, that from the last conversation that pass between 
my aunt and I, it come out, that this sudden vehemence on my 
brother's and sister's part, be owe to strong reason than to 
the college-begin antipathy on his side, or to slight love on her; 
to wit, to an apprehension that my uncle intend to follow my 
grandfather's example in my favour; at least in a high degree than 
they wish they should. an apprehension found it seem on a 
conversation between my two uncle and my brother and sister: which my 
aunt communicate to I in confidence, as an argument to prevail upon 
I to accept of Mr. Solmes's noble settlement: urge, that such a 
seasonable compliance, would frustrate my brother's and sister's 
view, and establish I for ever in the love of my father and uncle.
I will give you the substance of this communicate conversation, after 
I have make a brief introductory observation or two, which however I 
hardly need to make to you who be so well acquainted with we all, do 
not the series or thread of the story require it.
I have more than once mention to you the darling view some of we 
have long have of raise a family, as it be call. a reflection, as 
I have often think, upon our own, which be no considerable or 
upstart one, on either side, on my mother's especially.--a view too 
frequently it seem entertain by family which, have great 
substance, cannot be satisfied without rank and title.
my uncle have once extend this view to each of we three child; 
urge, that as they themselves intend not to marry, we each of we 
might be so portion, and so advantageously match, as that our 
posterity, if not ourselves, might make a first figure in our 
country.--while my brother, as the only son, think the two girl 
might be very well provide for by ten or fifteen thousand pound 
a-piece: and that all the real estate in the family, to wit, my 
grandfather's, father's, and two uncle', and the remainder of their 
respective personal estate, together with what he have an expectation 
of from his godmother, would make such a noble fortune, and give he 
such an interest, as might entitle he to hope for a peerage. nothing 
less would satisfy his ambition.
with this view he give himself air very early; 'that his grandfather 
and uncle be his steward: that no man ever have well: that 
daughter be but incumbrance and drawback upon a family:' and this 
low and familiar expression be often in his mouth, and utter always 
with the self-complaisance which an imagined happy thought can be 
suppose to give the speaker; to wit, 'that a man who have son bring 
up chicken for his own table,' [though once I make his comparison 
stagger with he, by ask he, if the son, to make it hold, be to 
have their neck wrung off?] 'whereas daughter be chicken bring 
up for table of other man.' this, accompany with the equally 
polite reflection, 'that, to induce people to take they off their 
hand, the family-stock must be impair into the bargain,' use to 
put my sister out of all patience: and, although she now seem to 
think a young sister only can be an incumbrance, she be then often 
propose to I to make a party in our own favour against my brother's 
rapacious view, as she use to call they: while I be for consider 
the liberty he take of this sort, as the effect of a temporary 
pleasantry, which, in a young man, not naturally good-humour, I be 
glad to see; or as a foible that deserve raillery, but no other 
notice.
but when my grandfather's will (of the purport of which in my 
particular favour, until it be open, I be as ignorant as they) have 
lop off one branch of my brother's expectation, he be extremely 
dissatisfied with I. nobody indeed be please: for although every 
one love I, yet be the young child, father, uncle, brother, 
sister, all think themselves postpone, as to matter of right and 
power [who love not power?]: and my father himself could not bear 
that I should be make sole, as I may call it, and independent; for 
such the will, as to that estate and the power it give, 
(unaccountably, as they all say,) make I.
to obviate, therefore, every one's jealousy, I give up to my father's 
management, as you know, not only the estate, but the money bequeath 
I (which be a moiety of what my grandfather have by he at his death; 
the other moiety be bequeath to my sister); content myself to 
take as from his bounty what he be pleased to allow I, without 
desire the least addition to my annual stipend. and then I hop I 
have lay all envy asleep: but still my brother and sister (jealous, as 
now be evident, of my two uncle' favour of I, and of the pleasure I 
have give my father and they by this act of duty) be every 
now-and-then occasionally do I covert ill office: of which, 
however, I take the less notice, when I be tell of they, as I think 
I have remove the cause of their envy; and I impute every thing of 
that sort to the petulance they be both pretty much note for.
my brother's acquisition then take place. this make we all very 
happy; and he go down to take possession of it: and his absence (on 
so good an account too) make we still happy. then follow Lord 
M.'s proposal for my sister: and this be an additional felicity for 
the time. I have tell you how exceedingly good-humour it make my 
sister.
you know how that go off: you know what come on in its place.
my brother then return; and we be all wrong again: and Bella, as I 
observe in my letter abovementione, have an opportunity to give 
herself the credit of have refuse Mr. Lovelace, on the score of his 
repute faulty moral. this unite my brother and sister in one 
cause. they set themselves on all occasion to depreciate Mr. 
Lovelace, and his family too (a family which deserve nothing but 
respect): and this give rise to the conversation I be lead to, 
between my uncle and they: of which I now come to give the 
particular; after I have observe, that it happen before the 
rencounter, and soon after the inquiry make into Mr. Lovelace's 
affair have come out well than my brother and sister hop it 
would.*
* see Letter IV.
they be bitterly inveigh against he, in their usual way, 
strengthen their invective with some new story in his disfavour, 
when my uncle Antony, have give they a patient hearing, declare, 
'that he think the gentleman behave like a gentleman; his niece 
Clary with prudence; and that a more honourable alliance for the 
family, as he have often tell they, could not be wish for: since Mr. 
Lovelace have a very good paternal estate; and that, by the evidence of 
an enemy, all clear. nor do it appear, that he be so bad a man as 
he have be represent to be: wild indeed; but it be a gay time of 
life: he be a man of sense: and he be sure that his niece would not 
have he, if she have not good reason to think he reform, or that 
there be a likelihood that she could reform he by her example.'
my uncle then give one instance, my aunt tell I, as a proof of a 
generosity in Mr. Lovelace's spirit, which convince he that he be 
not a bad man in nature; and that he be of a temper, he be pleased 
to say, like my own; which be, that when he (my uncle) have 
represent to he, that he might, if he please, make three or four 
hundred pound a year of his paternal estate, more than he do; he 
answer, 'that his tenant pay their rent well: that it be a maxim 
with his family, from which he would by no means depart, never to 
rack-rent old tenant, or their descendant; and that it be a 
pleasure to he, to see all his tenant look fat, sleek, and 
content.'
I indeed have once occasionally hear he say something like this; and 
think he never look so well as at that time;--except once; and 
that be in an instance give by he on the following incident.
an unhappy tenant of my uncle Antony come petition to my uncle for 
forbearance, in Mr. Lovelace's presence. when he have fruitlessly 
withdraw, Mr. Lovelace plead his cause so well, that the man be 
call in again, and have his suit grant. and Mr. Lovelace privately 
follow he out, and give he two guineas, for present relief; the 
man have declare, that, at the time, he have not five shilling in 
the world.
on this occasion, he tell my uncle (but without any air of 
ostentation), that he have once observe an old tenant and his wife in 
a very mean habit at church; and question they about it the next 
day, as he know they have no hard bargain in their farm, the man say, 
he have do some very foolish thing with a good intention, which have 
put he behind-hand, and he could not have pay his rent, and appear 
well. he ask he how long it would take he to retrieve the 
foolish step he acknowledge he have make. he say, perhaps two or 
three year. well then, say he, I will abate you five pound a year 
for seven year, provide you will lay it upon your wife and self, that 
you may make a Sunday-appearance like MY tenant. mean time, 
take this (put his hand in his pocket, and give he five 
guineas), to put yourself in present plight; and let I see you next 
Sunday at church, hand in hand, like an honest and loving couple; and 
I bespeak you to dine with I afterwards.
although this please I when I hear it, as give an instance of 
generosity and prudence at the same time, not lessen (as my uncle 
take notice) the yearly value of the farm, yet, my dear, I have no 
throb, no glow upon it!--upon my word, I have not. nevertheless I 
own to you, that I could not help say to myself on the occasion, 
'be it ever to be my lot to have this man, he would not hinder I 
from pursue the method I so much delight to take'--with 'a pity, 
that such a man be not uniformly good!'
forgive I this digression.
my uncle go on (as my aunt tell I), 'that, besides his paternal 
estate, he be the immediate heir to very splendid fortune: that, 
when he be in treaty for his niece Arabella, Lord M. tell he (my 
uncle) what great thing he and his two half-sister intend to do 
for he, in order to qualify he for the title, which would be extinct 
at his Lordship's death, and which they hop to procure for he, or a 
still high, that of those lady' father, which have be for some 
time extinct on failure of heir male: that it be with this view that 
his relation be all so earnest for his marrying: that as he see not 
where Mr. Lovelace could better himself; so, truly, he think there 
be wealth enough in their own family to build up three considerable 
one: that, therefore, he must need say, he be the more desirous of 
this alliance, as there be a great probability, not only from Mr. 
Lovelace's descent, but from his fortune, that his niece Clarissa 
might one day be a peeress of Great Britain:--and, upon that prospect 
[here be the mortifying stroke], he should, for his own part, think 
it not wrong to make such disposition as should contribute to the 
well support of the dignity.'
my uncle Harlowe, it seem, far from disapprove of what his brother 
have say, declare, 'that there be but one objection to an alliance 
with Mr. Lovelace; to wit, his faulty moral: especially as so much 
could be do for Miss Bella, and for my brother too, by my father; 
and as my brother be actually possess of a considerable estate by 
virtue of the deed of gift and will of his godmother Lovell.'
have I know this before, I should the less have wonder at many 
thing I have be unable to account for in my brother's and sister's 
behaviour to I; and be more on my guard than I imagine there be a 
necessity to be.
you may easily guess how much this conversation affect my brother at 
the time. he could not, you know, but be very uneasy to hear two of 
his steward talk at this rate to his face.
he have from early day, by his violent temper, make himself both 
fear and court by the whole family. my father himself, as I have 
lately mention, very often (long before my brother's acquisition have 
make he still more assume) give way to he, as to an only son who 
be to build up the name, and augment the honour of it. little 
inducement, therefore, have my brother to correct a temper which give 
he so much consideration with every body.
'see, Sister Bella,' say he, in an indecent passion before my uncle, 
on this occasion I have mentioned--'see how it is!--you and I ought to 
look about us!--this little syren be in a fair way to out-uncle, as 
she have already out-grandfather'd, us both!'
from this time (as I now find it plain upon recollection) do my 
brother and sister behave to I, as to one who stand in their way; and 
to each other as have but one interest: and be resolve, 
therefore, to bend all their force to hinder an alliance from take 
effect, which they believe be likely to oblige they to contract 
their view.
and how be this to be do, after such a declaration from both my 
uncle?
my brother find out the way. my sister (as I have say) go hand in 
hand with he. between they, the family union be break, and every 
one be make uneasy. Mr. Lovelace be receive more and more coldly 
by all: but not be to be put out of his course by slight only, 
personal affront succeed; defiance next; then the rencounter: that, 
as you have hear, do the business. and now, if I do not oblige they, my grandfather's estate be to be litigate with I; and I, who never design 
to take advantage of the independency bequeath I, be to be as dependent 
upon my father's will, as a daughter ought to be who know not what be 
good for herself. this be the language of the family now.
but if I will suffer myself to be prevail upon, how happy (as they 
lie it out) shall we all be!--such present be I to have, such jewel, 
and I cannot tell what, from every one in the family! then Mr. 
Solmes's fortune be so great, and his proposal so very 
advantageous, (no relation whom he value,) that there will be 
abundant room to raise mine upon they, be the high-intend favour 
of my own relation to be quite out of the question. moreover, it be 
now, with this view, find out, that I have qualification which of 
themselves will be a full equivalent to Mr. Solmes for the settlement 
he be to make; and still leave he under an obligation to I for my 
compliance. he himself think so, I be tell--so very poor a creature 
be he, even in his own eye, as well as in theirs.
these desirable view answer, how rich, how splendid shall we all 
three be! and I--what obligation shall I lay upon they all!--and 
that only by do an act of duty so suitable to my character, and 
manner of thinking; if, indeed, I be the generous as well as dutiful 
creature I have hitherto make they believe I be.
this be the bright side that be turn to my father and uncle, to 
captivate they: but I be afraid that my brother's and sister's design 
be to ruin I with they at any rate. be it otherwise, would they 
not on my return from you have rather seek to court than frighten I 
into measure which their heart be so much bent to carry? a method 
they have follow ever since.
mean time, order be give to all the servant to shew the high 
respect to Mr. Solmes; the generous Mr. Solmes be now his character 
with some of our family! but be not these order a tacit confession, 
that they think his own merit will not procure he respect? he be 
accordingly, in every visit he make, not only highly caress by the 
principal of our family, but obsequiously attend and cringe to by 
the menials.--And the noble settlement be echo from every mouth.
Noble be the word use to enforce the offer of a man who be mean 
enough avowedly to hate, and wicke enough to propose to rob of their 
just expectation, his own family, (every one of which at the same 
time stand in too much need of his favour,) in order to settle all he 
be worth upon I; and if I die without child, and he have none by 
any other marriage, upon a family which already abound. such be his 
proposal.
but be there no other motive to induce I to despise the upstart 
man, be not this unjust one to his family enough?--the upstart man, I 
repeat; for he be not bear to the immense rich he be possess of: 
rich leave by one niggard to another, in injury to the next heir, 
because that other be a niggard. and should I not be as culpable, do 
you think, in my acceptance of such unjust settlement, as he be in 
the offer of they, if I could persuade myself to be a sharer in they, 
or suffer a reversionary expectation of possess they to influence 
my choice?
indeed, it concern I not a little, that my friend could be bring 
to encourage such offer on such motif as I think a person of 
conscience should not presume to begin the world with.
but this it seem be the only method that can be take to disappoint 
Mr. Lovelace; and at the same time to answer all my relation have 
wish for each of we. and surely I will not stand against such an 
accession to the family as may happen from marry Mr. Solmes: since 
now a possibility be discover, (which such a grasp mind as my 
brother's can easily turn into a probability,) that my grandfather's 
estate will revert to it, with a much more considerable one of the 
man's own. instance of estate fall in, in case far more 
unlikely than this, be insist upon; and my sister say, in the 
word of an old saw, it be good to be relate to an estate.
while Solmes, smile no doubt to himself at a hope so remote, by 
offer only, obtain all their interest; and doubt not to join to 
his own the estate I be envy for; which, for the conveniency of its 
situation between two of his, will it seem be of twice the value to 
he that it would be of to any other person; and be therefore, I doubt 
not, a strong motive with he than the wife.
these, my dear, seem to I the principal inducement of my relation 
to espouse so vehemently as they do this man's suit. and here, once 
more, must I deplore the family fault, which give those inducement 
such a force as it will be difficult to resist.
and thus far, let matter with regard to Mr. Solmes and I come out as 
they will, my brother have succeed in his view; that be to say, he 
have, in the first place, get my FATHER to make the cause his own, and 
to insist upon my compliance as an act of duty.
my MOTHER have never think fit to oppose my father's will, when once 
he have declare himself determine.
my UNCLES, stiff, unbroken, highly-prosperous bachelor, give I leave 
to say, (though very worthy person in the main,) have as high notion 
of a child's duty, as of a wife's obedience; in the last of which, my 
mother's meekness have confirm they, and give they great reason to 
expect the first.
my aunt hervey (not extremely happy in her own nuptial, and perhaps 
under some little obligation) be get over, and chuse [sic] not to 
open her lip in my favour against the will of a father and uncle so 
determine.
this passiveness in my mother and in my aunt, in a point so contrary 
to their own first judgment, be too strong a proof that my father be 
absolutely resolve.
their treatment of my worthy MRS. NORTON be a sad confirmation of it: 
a woman deserve of all consideration for her wisdom, and every body 
thinking so; but who, not be wealthy enough to have due weight in a 
point against which she have give her opinion, and which they seem 
bent upon carry, be restrain from visit here, and even from 
correspond with I, as I be this very day inform.
Hatred to Lovelace, family aggrandizement, and this great motive 
paternal authority!--what a force united must they be suppose to have, 
when singly each consideration be sufficient to carry all before it!
this be the formidable appearance which the address of this 
disagreeable man wear at present.
my brother and my SISTER triumph.--They have get I down, as Hannah 
overhear they exult. and so they have (yet I never know that I be 
insolently up); for now my brother will either lay I under an obligation 
to comply to my own unhappiness, and so make I an instrument of his 
revenge upon Lovelace; or, if I refuse, will throw I into disgrace 
with my whole family.
who will wonder at the intrigue and plot carry on by undermine 
courtier against one another, when a private family, but three of 
which can possibly have clash interest, and one of they (as she 
presume to think) above such low motif, cannot be free from they?
what at present most concern I, be, the peace of my mother's mind! 
how can the husband of such a wife (a good man too!--but oh! this 
prerogative of manhood!) be so positive, so unpersuadable, to one who 
have bring into the family mean, which they know so well the value 
of, that methink they should value she the more for their sake?
they do indeed value she: but, I be sorry to say, she have purchase 
that value by her compliance; yet have merit for which she ought to be 
venerate; prudence which ought of itself to be conform to in every 
thing.
but whither rove my pen? how dare a perverse girl take these 
liberty with relation so very respectable, and whom she highly 
respect? what an unhappy situation be that which oblige she, in her 
own defence as it be, to expose their failing?
but you, who know how much I love and reverence my mother, will judge 
what a difficulty I be under, to be oblige to oppose a scheme which 
she have engage in. yet I must oppose it (to comply be impossible); 
and must without delay declare my opposition, or my difficulty will 
increase; since, as I be just now inform, a lawyer have be this 
very day consult [would you have believe it?] in relation to 
settlement.
be ours a roman catholic family, how much happy for I, that they 
think a nunnery would answer all their views!--how happy, have not a 
certain person slight somebody! all then would have be probably 
conclude between they before my brother have arrive to thwart the 
match: then have I a sister; which now I have not; and two brothers;--
both aspiring; possibly both title: while I should only have value 
that in either which be above title, that which be truly noble in 
both!
but by what a long-reach selfishness be my brother govern! by 
what remote, exceedingly remote view! view, which it be in the 
power of the slight accident, of a fever, for instance, (the seed 
of which be always vegetate, as I may say, and ready to burst 
forth, in his own impetuous temper,) or of the provoke weapon of an 
adversary, to blow up and destroy!
I will break off here. let I write ever so freely of my friend, I 
be sure of your kind construction: and I confide in your discretion, 
that you will avoid read to or transcribe for other such 
passage as may have the appearance of treat too freely the 
parental, or even the fraternal character, or induce other to censure 
for a suppose failure in duty to the one, or decency to the other,
your truly affectionate,
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XIV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY EVENING, MARCH 2.
on Hannah's deposit my long letter, (begin yesterday, but by reason 
of several interruption not finish till within this hour,) she 
find and bring I yours of this day. I thank you, my dear, for 
this kind expedition. these few line will perhaps be time enough 
deposit, to be take away by your servant with the other letter: yet 
they be only to thank you, and to tell you my increase 
apprehension.
I must take or seek the occasion to apply to my mother for her 
mediation; for I be in danger of have a day fix, and antipathy 
take for bashfulness.--should not sister be sister to each other? 
should not they make a common cause of it, as I may say, a cause of 
sex, on such occasion as the present? yet mine, in support of my 
brother's selfishness, and, no doubt, in concert with he, have be 
urge in full assembly it seem, (and that with an earnestness 
peculiar to herself when she set upon any thing,) that an absolute 
day be give I; and if I comply not, to be tell, that it shall be to 
the forfeiture of all my fortune, and of all their love.
she need not be so officious: my brother's interest, without her, be 
strong enough; for he have find mean to confederate all the family 
against I. upon some fresh provocation, or new intelligence 
concern Mr. Lovelace, (I know not what it be,) they have bind 
themselves, or be to bind themselves, by a sign paper, to one 
another [the Lord bless I, my dear, what shall I do!] to carry their 
point in favour of Mr. Solmes, in support of my father's authority, as 
it be call, and against Mr. Lovelace, as a libertine, and an enemy 
to the family: and if so, I be sure, I may say against me.--How 
impolitic in they all, to join two people in one interest, whom they 
wish for ever to keep asunder!
what the discharged steward report of he be surely bad enough: what 
Mrs. Fortescue say, not only confirm that bad, but give room to 
think he still bad. and yet the something far which my friend 
have come at, be of so heinous a nature (as Betty Barnes tell Hannah) 
that it prove he almost to be the bad of men.--But, hang the man, 
I have almost say--what be he to I? what would he be--be not this 
Mr. Sol----O my dear, how I hate the man in the light he be propose 
to I!
all of they, at the same time, be afraid of Mr. Lovelace; yet not 
afraid to provoke him!--How be I entangled!--to be oblige to go on 
correspond with he for their sake--Heaven forbid, that their 
persist-in violence should so drive I, as to make it necessary for 
my own!
but surely they will yield--indeed I cannot.
I believe the gentle spirit when provoke (causelessly and cruelly 
provoke) be the most determined. the reason may be, that not take 
up resolution lightly--their very deliberation make they the more 
immovable.--and then when a point be clear and self-evident, how can 
one with patience think of enter into an argument or contention 
upon it?--
an interruption oblige I to conclude myself, in some hurry, as well 
as fright, what I must ever be,
your more than my own,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER XV
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
FRIDAY, MARCH 3.
I have both your letter at once. it be very unhappy, my dear, since 
your friend will have you marry, that a person of your merit should 
be address by a succession of worthless creature, who have nothing 
but their presumption for their excuse.
that these presumer appear not in this very unworthy light to some of 
your friend, be, because their defect be not so striking to they as 
to others.--And why? shall I venture to tell you?--Because they be 
nearer their own standard--Modesty, after all, perhaps have a concern 
in it; for how should they think that a niece or sister of theirs [I 
will not go high, for fear of incur your displeasure] should be 
an angel?
but where indeed be the man to be find (who have the least share of 
due diffidence) that dare to look up to Miss Clarissa Harlowe with 
hope, or with any thing but wish? thus the bold and forward, not 
be sensible of their defect, aspire; while the modesty of the 
really worthy fill they with too much reverence to permit they to 
explain themselves. hence your symme's, your Byron's, your 
Mullins's, your Wyerley's (the good of the herd), and your solme's, 
in turn, invade you--Wretches that, look upon the rest of your 
family, need not despair of succeed in an alliance with it--but to 
you, what an inexcusable presumption!
yet I be afraid all opposition will be in vain. you must, you will, I 
doubt, be sacrifice to this odious man. I know your family. there 
will be no resisting such bait as he have throw out. o, my dear, my 
beloved friend! and be such charming quality, be such exalt 
merit, to be sink in such a marriage!--You must not, your uncle tell 
your mother, dispute their authority. AUTHORITY! what a full word be 
that in the mouth of a narrow-minded person, who happen to be bear 
thirty year before one!--of your uncle I speak; for as to the 
paternal authority, that ought to be sacred.--But should not parent 
have reason for what they do?
wonder not, however, at your Bell's unsisterly behaviour in this 
affair: I have a particular to add to the inducement your insolent 
brother be govern by, which will account for all her drive. you 
have already own, that her outward eye be from the first strike 
with the figure and address of the man whom she pretend to despise, 
and who, 'tis certain, thoroughly despise she: but you have not tell 
I, that still she love he of all man. Bell have a meanness in her 
very pride; that meanness rise with her pride, and go hand in hand 
with it; and no one be so proud as Bell. she have own her love, her 
uneasy day, and sleepless night, and her revenge graft upon her 
love, to her favourite Betty Barnes--to lay herself in the power of a 
servant's tongue! poor creature!--but like little soul will find one 
another out, and mingle, as well as like great one. this, however, 
she tell the wench in strict confidence: and thus, by way of the 
female round-about, as Lovelace have the sauciness on such another 
occasion, in ridicule of our sex, to call it, Betty (pleased to be 
think worthy of a secret, and to have an opportunity of inveigh 
against Lovelace's perfidy, as she would have it to be) tell it to one 
of her confidant: that confidant, with like injunction of secrecy, 
to Miss Lloyd's Harriot--Harriot to Miss Lloyd--Miss Lloyd to I--I to 
you--with leave to make what you please of it.
and now you will not wonder to find Miss Bell an implacable rival, 
rather than an affectionate sister; and will be able to account for 
the word witchcraft, syren, and such like, throw out against you; 
and for she drive on for a fix day for sacrifice you to Solmes: 
in short, for her rudeness and violence of every kind.
what a sweet revenge will she take, as well upon Lovelace as upon you, 
if she can procure her rival sister to be married to the man that 
sister hat; and so prevent she have the man whom she herself love 
(whether she have hope of he or not), and whom she suspect her 
sister love!
poison and poniard have often be set to work by mind inflame by 
disappointed love, and actuate by revenge.--will you wonder, then, 
that the tie of relationship in such a case have no force, and that a 
sister forget to be a sister?
now I know this to be her secret motive, (the more grating to she, as 
her pride be concerned to make she disavow it), and can consider it 
join with her former envy, and as strengthen by a brother, who have 
such an ascendant over the whole family; and whose interest (slave to 
it as he always be) engage he to ruin you with every one: both 
possess of the ear of all your family, and have it as much in 
their power as in their will to misrepresent all you say, all you do; 
such subject also as to the rencounter, and Lovelace's want of moral, 
to expatiate upon: your whole family likewise avowedly attach to the 
odious man by mean of the captivate proposal he have make them;--
when I consider all these thing, I be full of apprehension for you.
--o my dear, how will you be able to maintain your ground;--i be sure, 
(alas! I be too sure) that they will subdue such a fine spirit as 
your, unused to opposition; and (tell it not in Gath) you must be 
Mrs. Solmes!
mean time, it be now easy, as you will observe, to guess from what 
quarter the report I mention to you in one of my former, come, that 
the young sister have rob the elder of her lover:* for Betty 
whisper it, at the time she whisper the rest, that neither 
Lovelace nor you have do honourably by her young mistress.--how 
cruel, my dear, in you, to rob the poor Bella of the only lover she 
only had!--At the instant too that she be pride herself, that now 
at last she should have it in her power not only to gratify her own 
susceptibility, but to give an example to the flirt of her sex** 
(my worship's self in her eye) how to govern their man with a silken 
rein, and without a curb-bridle!
* Letter I.
** Letter II.
upon the whole, I have now no doubt of their persevering in favour of 
the despicable solme; and of their dependence upon the gentleness of 
your temper, and the regard you have for their favour, and for your 
own reputation. and now I be more than ever convinced of the 
propriety of the advice I formerly give you, to keep in your own hand 
the estate bequeath to you by your grandfather.--had you do so, it 
would have procure you at least an outward respect from your brother 
and sister, which would have make they conceal the envy and ill-will 
that now be burst upon you from heart so narrow.
I must harp a little more upon this string--do not you observe, how 
much your brother's influence have overtop your, since he have get 
into fortune so considerable, and since you have give some of they 
an appetite to continue in themselves the possession of your estate, 
unless you comply with their term?
I know your dutiful, your laudable motif; and one would have 
think, that you might have trust to a father who so dearly love 
you. but have you be actually in possession of that estate, and 
live up to it, and upon it, (your youth protect from blight 
tongue by the company of your prudent Norton, as you have propose,) 
do you think that your brother, grudge it to you at the time as he 
do, and look upon it as his right as an only son, would have be 
practise about it, and aim at it? I tell you some time ago, that 
I think your trial but proportion to your prudence:* but you will 
be more than woman, if you can extricate yourself with honour, have 
such violent spirit and sordid mind in some, and such tyrannical and 
despotic will in other, to deal with. indeed, all may be do, and 
the world be teach far to admire you for your blind duty and 
will-less resignation, if you can persuade yourself to be Mrs. Solmes.
* Letter I.
I be pleased with the instance you give I of Mr. Lovelace's 
benevolence to his own tenant, and with his little gift to your 
uncle's. Mrs. Fortescue allow he to be the good of landlord: I 
might have tell you that, have I think it necessary to put you into 
some little conceit of he. he have quality, in short, that may make 
he a tolerable creature on the other side of fifty: but God help the 
poor woman to whose lot he shall fall till then! woman, I should say, 
perhaps; since he may break half-a-dozen heart before that time.--But 
to the point I be upon--shall we not have reason to commend the 
tenant's grateful honesty, if we be tell, that with joy the poor man 
call out your uncle, and on the spot pay he in part of his debt 
those two guineas?--but what shall we say of that landlord, who, 
though he know the poor man to be quite destitute, could take it; and, 
say nothing while Mr. Lovelace staid, as soon as he be go, tell 
of it in praise of the poor fellow's honesty?--were this so, and be 
not that landlord relate to my dear friend, how should I despise 
such a wretch?--but, perhaps, the story be aggravate. covetous 
people have every one's ill word: and so indeed they ought; because 
they be only solicitous to keep that which they prefer to every one's 
good one.--covetous indeed would they be, who deserve neither, yet 
expect both!
I long for your next letter. continue to be as particular as 
possible. I can think of no other subject but what relate to you and 
to your affair: for I be, and ever will be, most affectionately,
your own,
ANNA HOWE. 
LETTER XVI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
[she precede not AT that TIME RECEIVED.]
FRIDAY, MARCH 3.
o my dear friend, I have have a sad conflict! trial upon trial; 
conference upon conference!--but what law, what ceremony, can give a 
man a right to a heart which abhor he more than it do any live 
creature?
I hope my mother will be able to prevail for me.--But I will recount 
it all, though I sit up the whole night to do it; for I have a vast 
deal to write, and will be as minute as you wish I to be.
I conclude my last in a fright. it be occasion by a conversation 
that pass between my mother and my aunt, part of which Hannah 
overheard. I need not give you the particular; since what I have to 
relate to you from different conversation that have pass between my 
mother and I, in the space of a very few hour, will include they 
all. I will begin then.
I go down this morning when breakfast be ready with a very uneasy 
heart, from what Hannah have inform I of yesterday afternoon; 
wish for an opportunity, however, to appeal to my mother, in hope 
to engage her interest in my behalf, and purpose to try to find one 
when she retire to her own apartment after breakfast: but, unluckily, 
there be the odious solme, sit asquat between my mother and 
sister, with so much assurance in his looks!--But you know, my dear, 
that those we love not, cannot do any thing to please we.
have the wretch keep his seat, it might have be well enough: but the 
bend and broad-shoulder creature must need rise, and stalk towards 
a chair, which be just by that which be set for I.
I remove it to a distance, as if to make way to my own: and down I 
sit, abruptly I believe; what I have hear all in my head.
but this be not enough to daunt he. the man be a very confident, he 
be a very bold, star man!--Indeed, my dear, the man be very 
confident.
he take the removed chair, and draw it so near mine, squat in it 
with his ugly weight, that he press upon my hoop.--I be so offended 
(all I have hear, as I say, in my head) that I remove to another 
chair. I own I have too little command of myself. it give my brother 
and sister too much advantage. I day say they take it. but I do it 
involuntarily, I think. I could not help it.--I know not what I do.
I see that my father be excessively displeased. when angry, no man's 
countenance ever shews it so much as my father's. Clarissa Harlowe! 
say he with a big voice--and there he stop. Sir! say I, 
tremble and courtesying (for I have not then sit down again); and put 
my chair nearer the wretch, and sit down--my face, as I could feel, 
all in a glow.
make tea, child, say my kind mamma; sit by I, love, and make tea.
I remove with pleasure to the seat the man have quit; and be 
thus indulgently put into employment, soon recover myself; and in 
the course of the breakfasting officiously ask two or three 
question of Mr. Solmes, which I would not have do, but to make up 
with my father.--proud spirit may be bring to! whisperingly speak 
my sister to I, over her shoulder, with an air of triumph and scorn: 
but I do not mind she.
my mother be all kindness and condescension. I ask she once, if 
she be pleased with the tea? she say, softly, (and again call I 
dear,) she be pleased with all I do. I be very proud of this 
encourage goodness: and all blow over, as I hop, between my father 
and I; for he also speak kindly to I two or three time.
small accident these, my dear, to trouble you with; only as they lead 
to great, as you shall hear.
before the usual breakfast-time be over, my father withdraw with my 
mother, tell she he want to speak with she. then my sister and 
next my aunt (who be with we) dropt away.
my brother give himself some air of insult, which I understand well 
enough; but which Mr. Solmes could make nothing of: and at last he 
arise from his seat--Sister, say he, I have a curiosity to shew you. 
I will fetch it. and away he go shut the door close after he.
I see what all this be for. I arise; the man hem up for a 
speech, rise, and begin to set his splay-foot [indeed, my dear, 
the man in all his way be hateful to I] in an approach posture.--
I will save my brother the trouble of bring to I his curiosity, 
say I. I courtesie--your servant, sir--the man cry, Madam, Madam, 
twice, and look like a fool.--but away I go--to find my brother, 
to save my word.--but my brother, indifferent as the weather be, be 
go to walk in the garden with my sister. a plain case, that he have 
leave his curiosity with I, and design to shew I no other.
I have but just get into my own apartment, and begin to think of 
send Hannah to beg an audience of my mother (the more encourage by 
her condescend goodness at breakfast) when Shorey, her woman, 
bring I her command to attend I in her closet.
my father, Hannah tell I, be just go out of it with a positive 
angry countenance. then I as much dread the audience as I have 
wish for it before.
I go down however; but, apprehend the subject she intend to 
talk to I upon, approach her trembling, and my heart in visible 
palpitation.
she see my concern. hold out her kind arm, as she sit, come kiss 
I, my dear, say she, with a smile like a sun-beam breaking through 
the cloud that overshadow she naturally benign aspect--why flutter 
my jewel so?
this preparative sweetness, with she goodness just before, confirm 
my apprehension. my mother see the bitter pill want gilding.
o my Mamma! be all I could say; and I clasp my arm round her neck, 
and my face sink into her bosom.
my child! my child! restrain, say she, your power of move! I dare 
not else trust myself with you.--And my tear trickle down her bosom, 
as hers bedew my neck.
o the word of kindness, all to be express in vain, that flow from 
her lip!
lift up your sweet face, my good child, my own Clarissa Harlowe!--O my 
daughter, well beloved of my heart, lift up a face so ever amiable to 
me!--why these sobs?--is an apprehend duty so affect a thing, 
that before I can speak--but I be glad, my love, you can guess at what 
I have to say to you. I be spar the pain of break to you what 
be a task upon I reluctantly enough undertake to break to you. 
then rise, she draw a chair near her own, and make I sit down by 
she, overwhelmed as I be with tear of apprehension of what she have 
to say, and of gratitude for her truly maternal goodness to I--sobs 
still my only language.
and draw her chair still near to mine, she put her arm round my 
neck, and my glow cheek wet with my tear, close to her own: let I 
talk to you, my child. since silence be your choice, hearken to I, 
and be silent.
you know, my dear, what I every day forego, and undergo, for the sake 
of peace. your papa be a very good man, and mean well; but he will 
not be controule; nor yet persuade. you have sometimes seem to 
pity I, that I be oblige to give up every point. poor man! his 
reputation the less for it; mine the greater: yet would I not have 
this credit, if I could help it, at so dear a rate to he and to 
myself. you be a dutiful, a prudent, and a wise child, she be 
pleased to say, in hope, no doubt, to make I so: you would not add, I 
be sure, to my trouble: you would not wilfully break that peace which 
cost your mother so much to preserve. obedience be well than 
sacrifice. o my Clary Harlowe, rejoice my heart, by tell I that I 
have apprehend too much!--I see your concern! I see your 
perplexity! I see your conflict! [loose her arm, and rise, not 
willing I should see how much she herself be affect]. I will leave 
you a moment.--answer I not--[for I be essay to speak, and have, 
as soon as she take she dear cheek from mine, dropt down on my knee, 
my hand clasp, and lift up in a supplicate manner]--I be not 
prepared for your irresistible expostulation, she be pleased to say. 
I will leave you to recollection: and I charge you, on my blessing, 
that all this my truly maternal tenderness be not throw away upon you.
and then she withdraw into the next apartment; wipe her eye as she 
go from I; as mine overflow; my heart take in the whole compass 
of her meaning.
she soon return, have recover more steadiness.
still on my knee, I have throw my face across the chair she have sit 
in.
look up to I, my Clary Harlowe--no sullenness, I hope!
no, indeed, my ever-to-be-revere Mamma.--And I arise. I bent my 
knee.
she raise I. no kneeling to I, but with knee of duty and 
compliance. your heart, not your knee, must bend. it be absolutely 
determine. prepare yourself therefore to receive your father, when 
he visit you by-and-by, as he would wish to receive you. but on this 
one quarter of an hour depend the peace of my future life, the 
satisfaction of all the family, and your own security from a man of 
violence: and I charge you besides, on my blessing, that you think of 
be Mrs. Solmes.
there go the dagger to my heart, and down I sunk: and when I 
recover, find myself in the arm of my Hannah, my sister's Betty 
holding open my reluctantly -opene palm, my lace cut, my linen 
scented with hartshorn; and my mother go. have I be less kindly 
treat, the hat name still forbear to be mention, or mention 
with a little more preparation and reserve, I have stand the horrid 
sound with less visible emotion--but to be bid, on the blessing of a 
mother so dearly beloved, so truly reverenced, to think of be MRS. 
SOLMES--what a denunciation be that!
Shorey come in with a message (deliver in her solemn way): your 
mamma, Miss, be concerned for your disorder: she expect you down 
again in an hour; and bid I say, that she then hop every thing from 
your duty.
I make no reply; for what could I say? and lean upon my Hannah's 
arm, withdraw to my own apartment. there you will guess how the 
great part of the hour be employ.
within that time, my mother come up to I.
I love, she be pleased to say, to come into this apartment.--No 
emotion, child! no flutters!--am I not your mother?--do not 
discompose I by discompose yourself! do not occasion I 
uneasiness, when I would give you nothing but pleasure. come, my 
dear, we will go into your closet.
she take my hand, lead the way, and make I sit down by she: and after 
she have inquire how I do, she begin in a strain as if she suppose I 
have make use of the intervene space to overcome all my objection. 
she be pleased to tell I, that my father and she, in order to spare 
my natural modesty, have take the whole affair upon themselves--
hear I out; and then speak.--He be not indeed every thing I wish he 
to be: but he be a man of probity, and have no vices--
no vice, Madam!--
hear I out, child.--You have not behave much amiss to he: we have 
see with pleasure that you have not--
O Madam, must I not now speak!
I shall have do presently.--a young creature of your virtuous and 
pious turn, she be pleased to say, cannot surely love a profligate: 
you love your brother too well, to wish to marry one who have like to 
have kill he, and who threaten your uncle, and defy we all. 
you have have your own way six or seven time: we want to secure you 
against a man so vile. tell I (I have a right to know) whether you 
prefer this man to all others?--yet God forbid that I should know you 
do; for such a declaration would make we all miserable. yet tell I, 
be your affection engage to this man?
I know not what the inference would be, if I say they be not.
you hesitate--you answer I not--you cannot answer me.--rising--never 
more will I look upon you with an eye of favour--
O Madam, Madam! kill I not with your displeasure--I would not, I 
need not, hesitate one moment, do I not dread the inference, if I 
answer you as you wish.--yet be that inference what it will, your 
threaten displeasure will make I speak. and I declare to you, that 
I know not my own heart, if it not be absolutely free. and pray, let 
I ask my dear Mamma, in what have my conduct be faulty, that, 
like a giddy creature, I must be force to marry, to save I from--
from what? let I beseech you, Madam, to be the guardian of my 
reputation! let not your Clarissa be precipitate into a state she 
wish not to enter into with any man! and this upon a supposition 
that otherwise she shall marry herself, and disgrace her whole family.
well then, Clary [pass over the force of my plea] if your heart be 
free--
o my beloved Mamma, let the usual generosity of your dear heart 
operate in my favour. urge not upon I the inference that make I 
hesitate.
I willnot be interrupt, Clary--you have see in my behaviour to you, 
on this occasion, a truly maternal tenderness; you have observe that 
I have undertake the task with some reluctance, because the man be 
not every thing; and because I know you carry your notion of 
perfection in a man too high--
Dearest Madam, this one time excuse me!--is there then any danger that 
I should be guilty of an imprudent thing for the man's sake you hint 
at?
again interrupted!--am I to be question, and argue with? you know 
this willnot do somewhere else. you know it willnot. what reason then, 
ungenerous girl, can you have for argue with I thus, but because 
you think from my indulgence to you, you may?
what can I say? what can I do? what must that cause be that will not 
bear be argue upon?
again! Clary Harlowe!
Dearest Madam, forgive I: it be always my pride and my pleasure to 
obey you. but look upon that man--see but the disagreeableness of his 
person--
now, Clary, do I see whose person you have in your eye!--now be Mr. 
Solmes, I see, but comparatively disagreeable; disagreeable only as 
another man have a much more specious person
but, Madam, be not his manner equally so?--is not his person the 
true representative of his mind?--that other man be not, shall not be, 
any thing to I, release I but from this one man, whom my heart, 
unbidden, resist.
condition thus with your father. will he bear, do you think, to be 
thus dialogue with? have I not conjure you, as you value my peace--
what be it that I do not give up?--this very task, because I 
apprehend you would not be easily persuade, be a task indeed upon 
I. and will you give up nothing? have you not refuse as many as 
have be offer to you? if you would not have we guess for whom, 
comply; for comply you must, or be look upon as in a state of 
defiance with your whole family.
and say this, she arise and go from I. but at the chamber-door 
stopt; and turn back: I will not say below in what a disposition I 
leave you. consider of every thing. the matter be resolve upon. as 
you value your father's blessing and mine, and the satisfaction of all 
the family, resolve to comply. I will leave you for a few moment. I 
will come up to you again. see that I find you as I wish to find you; 
and since your heart be free, let your duty govern it.
in about half an hour, my mother return. she find I in tear. 
she take my hand: it be my part evermore, say she, to be of the 
acknowledge side. I believe I have needlessly expose myself to 
your opposition, by the method I have take with you. I first begin 
as if I expect a denial, and by my indulgence bring it upon 
myself.
do not, my dear Mamma! do not say so!
be the occasion for this debate, proceed she, to have rise from 
myself; be it in my power to dispense with your compliance; you too 
well know what you can do with I.
would any body, my dear Miss Howe, wish to marry, who see a wife of 
such a temper, and bless with such an understanding as my mother be 
note for, not only deprive of all power, but oblige to be even 
active in bring to bear a point of high importance, which she think 
ought not to be insist upon?
when I come to you a second time, proceed she, know that your 
opposition would avail you nothing, I refuse to hear your reason: 
and in this I be wrong too, because a young creature who love to 
reason, and use to love to be convince by reason, ought to have all 
her objection hear: I now therefore, this third time, see you; and 
be come resolve to hear all you have to say: and let I, my dear, by 
my patience engage your gratitude; your generosity, I will call it, 
because it be to you I speak, who use to have a mind wholly 
generous.--let I, if your heart be really free, let I see what it 
will induce you to do to oblige I: and so as you permit your usual 
discretion to govern you, I will hear all you have to say; but with 
this intimation, that say what you will, it will be of no avail 
elsewhere.
what a dreadful saying be that! but could I engage your pity, Madam, 
it would be somewhat. 
you have as much of my pity as of my love. but what be person, Clary, 
with one of your prudence, and your heart disengage?
should the eye be disgust, when the heart be to be engaged?--o 
Madam, who can think of marry when the heart be shock at the 
first appearance, and where the disgust must be confirm by every 
conversation afterwards?
this, Clary, be owe to your prepossession. let I not have cause to 
regret that noble firmness of mind in so young a creature which I 
think your glory, and which be my boast in your character. in this 
instance it would be obstinacy, and want of duty.--have you not make 
objection to several--
that be to their mind, to their principle, madam.--but this man--
be an honest man, Clary Harlowe. he have a good mind. he be a 
virtuous man.
he an honest man? his a good mind, Madam? he a virtuous man?--
nobody deny these quality.
can he be an honest man who offer term that will rob all his own 
relation of their just expectations?--can his mind be good--
you, Clary Harlowe, for whose sake he offer so much, be the last 
person who should make this observation.
give I leave to say, Madam, that a person prefer happiness to 
fortune, as I do; that want not even what I have, and can give up the 
use of that, as an instance of duty--
no more, no more of your merits!--you know you will be a gainer by 
that cheerful instance of your duty; not a loser. you know you have 
but cast your bread upon the water--so no more of that!--for it be 
not understand as a merit by every body, I assure you; though I think 
it a high one; and so do your father and uncle at the time--
at the time, madam!--how unworthily do my brother and sister, who be 
afraid that the favour I be so lately in--
I hear nothing against your brother and sister--what family feud have 
I in prospect, at a time when I hop to have most comfort from you 
all!
God bless my brother and sister in all their worthy view! you shall 
have no family feud if I can prevent they. you yourself, Madam, 
shall tell I what I shall bear from they, and I will bear it: but let 
my action, not their misrepresentation (as I be sure by the 
disgraceful prohibition I have meet with have be the case) speak for 
I.
just then, up come my father, with a sternness in his look that make 
I tremble.--He take two or three turn about my chamber, though 
pain by his gout; and then say to my mother, who be silent as soon 
as she see him--
my dear, you be long absent.--dinner be near ready. what you have to 
say, lie in a very little compass. surely, you have nothing to do but 
to declare your will, and my will--but perhaps you may be talk of 
the preparation--let we have you soon down--your daughter in your 
hand, if worthy of the name.
and down he go, cast his eye upon I with a look so stern, that I 
be unable to say one word to he, or even for a few minute to my 
mother.
be not this very intimidating, my dear?
my mother, see my concern, seem to pity I. she call I her 
good child, and kiss I; and tell I that my father should not know 
I have make such opposition. he have kindly furnish we with an excuse 
for be so long together, say she.--Come, my dear--dinner will be 
upon table presently--shall we go down?--And take my hand.
this make I start: what, Madam, go down to let it be suppose we be 
talk of preparations!--o my beloved Mamma, command I not down upon 
such a supposition.
you see, child, that to stay long together, will be own that you 
be debate about an absolute duty; and that will not be bear. do 
not your father himself some day ago tell you, he would be obey? I 
will a third time leave you. I must say something by way of excuse 
for you: and that you desire not to go down to dinner--that your 
modesty on the occasion--
O Madam! say not my modesty on such an occasion: for that will be to 
give hope--
and design you not to give hope?--perverse girl!--rising and flinging 
from I; take more time for consideration!--since it be necessary, 
take more time--and when I see you next, let I know what blame I have 
to cast upon myself, or to bear from your father, for my indulgence to 
you.
she make, however, a little stop at the chamber-door; and seem to 
expect that I would have besought she to make the gentle 
construction for I; for, hesitating, she be pleased to say, I 
suppose you would not have I make a report--
O Madam, interrupt I, whose favour can I hope for if I lose my 
mamma's?
to have desire a favourable report, you know, my dear, would have 
be qualify upon a point that I be too much determined upon, to 
give room for any of my friend to think I have the least hesitation 
about it. and so my mother go down stair.
I will deposit thus far; and, as I know you will not think I too 
minute in the relation of particular so very interesting to one you 
honour with your love, proceed in the same way. as matter stand, I 
donot care to have paper, so freely write, about I.
pray let Robert call every day, if you can spare he, whether I have 
any thing ready or not.
I should be glad you would not send he empty hand. what a 
generosity will it be in you, to write as frequently from friendship, 
as I be force to do from misfortune! the letter be take away 
will be an assurance that you have they. as I shall write and deposit 
as I have opportunity, the formality of super and sub-scription will 
be excuse. for I need not say how much I be
your sincere and ever affectionate,
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XVII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
my mother, on her return, which be as soon as she have din, be 
pleased to inform I, that she tell my father, on his question she 
about my cheerul compliance (for, it seem, the cheerful be all that 
be doubt) that she be willing, on so material a point, to give a 
child whom she have so much reason to love (as she condescend to 
acknowledge be her word) liberty to say all that be in her heart 
to say, that her compliance might be the free: let he know, that 
when he come up, she be attend to my plea; for that she find I 
have rather not marry at all.
she tell I, that to this my father angrily say, let she take care--
let she take care--that she give I not ground to suspect she of a 
preference somewhere else. but, if it be to ease her heart, and not 
to dispute my will, you may hear she out.
so, Clary, say my mother, I be return in a temper accordingly: and 
I hope you will not again, by your peremptoriness, shew I how I ought 
to treat you.
indeed, Madam, you do I justice to say, I have no inclination to 
marry at all. I have not, I hope, make myself so very unuseful in my 
papa's family, as--
no more of your merit, Clary! you have be a good child. you have 
ease I of all the family care: but do not now give more than ever 
you relieve I from. you have be amply repay in the reputation 
your skill and management have give you: but now there be soon to be 
a period to all those assistance from you. if you marry, there will 
be a natural, and, if to please we, a desirable period; because your 
own family will employ all your talent in that way: if you do not, 
there will be a period likewise, but not a natural one--you understand 
I, child.
I weep.
I have make inquiry already after a housekeeper. I would have have 
your good Norton; but I suppose you will yourself wish to have the 
worthy woman with you. if you desire it, that shall be agree upon 
for you.
but, why, dear Madam, why be I, the young, to be precipitate 
into a state, that I be very far from wish to enter into with any 
body?
you be go to question I, I suppose, why your sister be not 
think of for Mr. Solmes?
I hope, Madam, it will not displease you if I be.
I might refer you for an answer to your father.--mr. solme have 
reason for prefer you--
and I have reason, Madam, for dislike he. and why I am--
this quickness upon I, interrupt my mother, be not to be bear! I 
be go, and your father come, if I can do no good with you.
o Madam, I would rather die, than--
she put her hand to my mouth--no peremptoriness, Clary Harlowe: once 
you declare yourself inflexible, I have do.
I weep for vexation. this be all, all, my brother's doing--his 
grasp views--
no reflection upon your brother: he have entirely the honour of the 
family at heart.
I would no more dishonour my family, Madam, than my brother would.
I believe it: but I hope you will allow your father, and I, and your 
uncle, to judge what will do it honour, what dishonour.
I then offer to live single; never to marry at all; or never but 
with their full approbation.
if you mean to shew your duty, and your obedience, Clary, you must 
shew it in our way, not in your own.
I hope, Madam, that I have not so behave hitherto, as to render such 
a trial of my obedience necessary.
yes, Clary, I cannot but say that you have hitherto behave extremely 
well: but you have have no trial till now: and I hope, that now you 
be call to one, you will not fail in it. parent, proceed she, 
when child be young, be pleased with every thing they do. you 
have be a good child upon the whole: but we have hitherto rather 
comply with you, than you with we. now that you be grow up to 
marriageable year, be the test; especially as your grandfather have 
make you independent, as we may say, in preference to those who have 
prior expectation upon that estate.
Madam, my grandfather know, and expressly mention in his will his 
desire, that my father will more than make it up to my sister. I do 
nothing but what I think my duty to procure his favour. it be 
rather a mark of his affection, than any advantage to I: for, do I 
either seek or wish to be independent? be I to be queen of the 
universe, that dignity should not absolve I from my duty to you and 
to my father. I would kneel for your blessing, be it in the 
presence of million--so that--
I be loth to interrupt you, Clary; though you could more than once 
break in upon I. you be young and unbroken: but, with all this 
ostentation of your duty, I desire you to shew a little more deference 
to I when I be speak.
I beg your pardon, dear Madam, and your patience with I on such an 
occasion as this. if I do not speak with earnestness upon it, I 
should be suppose to have only maidenly objection against a man I 
never can endure.
Clary Harlowe!--
Dearest, dear Madam, permit I to speak what I have to say, this 
once--it be hard, it be very hard, to be forbid to enter into the 
cause of all these misunderstanding, because I must not speak 
disrespectfully of one who suppose I in the way of his ambition, and 
treat I like a slave--
Whither, whither, Clary--
my dearest Mamma!--My duty will not permit I so far to suppose my 
father arbitrary, as to make a plea of that arbitrariness to you--
how now, Clary!--O girl!
your patience, my dear mamma:--you be pleased to say, you would 
hear I with patience.--person in a man be nothing, because I be 
suppose to be prudent: so my eye be to be disgust, and my reason 
not convinced--
Girl, girl!
thus be my imputed good quality to be make my punishment; and I be 
to wed to a monster--
[astonishing!--can this, Clarissa, be from you?
the man, Madam, person and mind, be a monster in my eye.]--and that I 
may be induce to bear this treatment, I be to be compliment with 
be indifferent to all man: yet, at other time, and to serve other 
purpose, be think prepossess in favour of a man against whose 
moral character lie just objections.--confine, as if, like the 
giddiest of creature, I would run away with this man, and disgrace my 
whole family! o my dear Mamma! who can be patient under such 
treatment?
now, Clary, I suppose you will allow I to speak. I think I have have 
patience indeed with you.--Could I have think--but I will put all 
upon a short issue. your mother, Clarissa, shall shew you an example 
of that patience you so boldly claim from she, without have any 
yourself.
o my dear, how my mother's condescension distress I at the time!--
infinitely more distressed I, than rigour could have do. but she 
know, she be to be sure aware, that she be put upon a harsh, upon an 
unreasonable service, let I say, or she would not, she could not, 
have have so much patience with I.
let I tell you then, proceed she, that all lie in a small compass, 
as your father said.--You have be hitherto, as you be pretty ready 
to plead, a dutiful child. you have indeed have no cause to be 
otherwise. no child be ever more favoured. whether you will 
discredit all your past behaviour; whether, at a time and upon an 
occasion, that the high instance of duty be expect from you (an 
instance that be to crown all); and when you declare that your heart 
be free--you will give that instance; or whether, have a view to the 
independence you may claim, (for so, Clary, whatever be your motive, 
it will be judge,) and which any man you favour, can assert for you 
against we all; or rather for himself in spite of we--whether, I say, 
you will break with we all; and stand in defiance of a jealous father, 
needlessly jealous, I will venture to say, of the prerogative of his 
sex, as to I, and still ten time more jealous of the authority of a 
father;--this be now the point with we. you know your father have make 
it a point; and do he ever give up one he think he have a right to 
carry?
too true, think I to myself! and now my brother have engage my 
father, his fine scheme will walk alone, without need his leading-
string; and it be become my father's will that I oppose; not my 
brother's grasping view.
I be silent. to say the truth, I be just then sullenly silent. my 
heart be too big. I think it be hard to be thus give up by my 
mother; and that she should make a will so uncontroulable as my 
brother's, her will.--my mother, my dear, though I must not say so, 
be not oblige to marry against her liking. my mother love my 
father.
my silence avail I still less.
I see, my dear, say she, that you be convince. now, my good child
--now, my Clary, do I love you! it shall not be know, that you have 
argue with I at all. all shall be impute to that modesty which have 
ever so much distinguish you. you shall have the full merit of your 
resignation.
I weep.
she tenderly wipe the tear from my eye, and kiss my cheek--your 
father expect you down with a cheerful countenance--but I will excuse 
your going. all your scruple, you see, have meet with an indulgence 
truly maternal from I. I rejoice in the hope that you be convince. 
this indeed seem to be a proof of the truth of your agreeable 
declaration, that your heart be free.
do not this seem to border upon cruelty, my dear, in so indulgent a 
mother?--It would be wicked [would it not] to suppose my mother 
capable of art?--but she be put upon it, and oblige to take method 
to which her heart be naturally above stoop; and all intend for 
my good, because she see that no arguing will be admit any where 
else!
I will go down, proceed she, and excuse your attendance at afternoon 
tea, as I do to dinner: for I know you will have some little 
reluctance to subdue. I will allow you those; and also some little 
natural shyness--and so you shall not come down, if you chuse not to 
come down. only, my dear, do not disgrace my report when you come to 
supper. and be sure behave as you use to do to your brother and 
sister; for your behaviour to they will be one test of your cheerful 
obedience to we. I advise as a friend, you see, rather than command 
as a mother--so adieu, my love. and again she kiss I; and be 
go.
o my dear Mamma, say I, forgive me!--But surely you cannot believe, I 
can ever think of have that man!
she be very angry, and seem to be greatly disappointed. she 
threaten to turn I over to my father and uncles:--she however bid 
I (generously bid I) consider, what a handle I give to my brother 
and sister, if I think they have view to serve by make my uncle 
dissatisfied with I.
I, say she, in a milder accent, have early say all that I think 
could be say against the present proposal, on a supposition, that 
you, who have refuse several other (whom I own to be preferable as to 
person) would not approve of it; and could I have succeed, you, 
Clary, have never hear of it. but if I could not, how can you expect 
to prevail? my great end in the task I have undertake, be the 
preservation of the family peace so likely to be overturn; to 
reinstate you in the affection of your father and uncle: and to 
preserve you from a man of violence.--Your father, you must need 
think will flame out upon your refusal to comply: your uncle be so 
thoroughly convinced of the consistency of the measure with their 
favourite view of aggrandize the family, that they be as much 
determined as your father: your aunt Hervey and your uncle Hervey be 
of the same party. and it be hard, if a father and mother, and 
uncle, and aunt, all conjoin, cannot be allow to direct your 
choice--surely, my dear girl, proceed she [for I be silent all this 
time], it cannot be that you be the more averse, because the family 
view will be promote by the match--this, I assure you, be what every 
body must think, if you comply not. nor, while the man, so obnoxious 
to we all, remain unmarried, and buzz about you, will the strong 
wish to live single, be in the least regard. and well you know, 
that be Mr. Lovelace an angel, and your father have make it a point 
that you should not have he, it would be in vain to dispute his will. 
as to the prohibition lay upon you (much as I will own against my 
liking), that be owe to the belief that you correspond by Miss 
Howe's mean with that man; nor do I doubt that you do so.
I answer to every article, in such a manner, as I be sure would have 
satisfy she, could she have be permit to judge for herself; and 
I then inveigh with bitterness against the disgraceful prohibition 
lay upon I. 
they would serve to shew I, she be pleased to say, how much in 
earnest my father be. they might be take off, whenever I think 
fit, and no harm do, nor disgrace receive. but if I be to be 
contumacious, I might thank myself for all that would follow.
I sigh. I weep. I be silent.
shall I, Clary, say she, shall I tell your father that these 
prohibition be as unnecessary as I hop they would be? that you 
know your duty, and will not offer to controvert his will? what say 
you, my love?
o Madam, what can I say to question so indulgently put? I do indeed 
know my duty: no creature in the world be more willing to practise it: 
but, pardon I, dear Madam, if I say, that I must bear these 
prohibition, if I be to pay so dear to have they take off.
determined and perverse, my dear mamma call I: and after walk 
twice or thrice in anger about the room, she turn to I: your heart 
free, Clarissa! how can you tell I your heart be free? such 
extraordinary prepossession to a particular person must be owe to 
extraordinary prepossession in another's favour! tell I, Clary, and 
tell I truly--do you not continue to correspond with Mr. Lovelace?
Dearest Madam, reply I, you know my motif: to prevent mischief, I 
answer his letter. the reason for our apprehension of this sort 
be not over.
I own to you, Clary, (although now I would not have it know,) that I 
once think a little qualifying among such violent spirit be not 
amiss. I do not know but all thing would come round again by the 
mediation of Lord M. and his two sister: but as they all three think 
proper to resent for their nephew; and as their nephew think fit to 
defy we all; and as term be offer, on the other hand, that could 
not be ask, which will very probably prevent your grandfather's 
estate go out of the family, and may be a means to bring still 
great into it; I see not, that the continuance of your 
correspondence with he either can or ought to be permit. I 
therefore now forbid it to you, as you value my favour.
be pleased, Madam, only to advise I how to break it off with safety 
to my brother and uncle; and it be all I wish for. would to heaven, 
the man so hat have not the pretence to make of have be too 
violently treat, when he mean peace and reconciliation! it would 
always have be in my own power to have break with he. his reputed 
immorality would have give I a just pretence at any time to do so. 
but, Madam, as my uncle and my brother will keep no measure; as he 
have hear what the view be; and his regard for I from resent their 
violent treatment of he and his family; what can I do? would you 
have I, Madam, make he desperate?
the law will protect we, child! offend magistracy will assert 
itself--
but, Madam, may not some dreadful mischief first happen?--The law 
assert not itself, till it be offend.
you have make offer, Clary, if you might be oblige in the point in 
question--be you really in earnest, be you to be comply with, to 
break off all correspondence with Mr. Lovelace?--Let I know this.
indeed I be; and I will. you, Madam, shall see all the letter that 
have pass between we. you shall see I have give he no 
encouragement independent of my duty. and when you have see they, 
you will be well able to direct I how, on the condition I have 
offer, to break entirely with he.
I take you at your word, Clarissa--give I his letter; and the copy 
of your. 
I be sure, Madam, you will keep the knowledge that I write, and what I 
write--
no condition with your mother--surely my prudence may be trust to.
I beg her pardon; and besought she to take the key of the private 
drawer in my escritoire, where they lay, that she herself might see 
that I have no reserve to my mother.
she do; and take all his letter, and the copy of mine.--
unconditione with, she be pleased to say, they shall be yours again, 
unseen by any body else.
I thank she; and she withdraw to read they; say, she would return 
they, when she have.
***
you, my dear, have see all the letter that pass between Mr. 
Lovelace and I, till my last return from you. you have acknowledge, 
that he have nothing to boast of from they. three other I have 
receive since, by the private conveyance I tell you of: the last I 
have not yet answer.
in these three, as in those you have see, after have besought my 
favour, and, in the most earnest manner, profess the ardour of his 
passion for I; and set forth the indignity do he; the defiance 
my brother throw out against he in all company; the menace, and 
hostile appearance of my uncle wherever they go; and the method they 
take to defame he; he declare, 'that neither his own honour, nor the 
honour of his family, (involve as that be in the undistinguishing 
reflection cast upon he for an unhappy affair which he would have 
shun, but could not) permit he to bear these confirm 
indignity: that as my inclination, if not favourable to he, cannot 
be, nor be, to such a man as the newly-introduce Solmes, he be 
interested the more to resent my brother's behaviour; who to every 
body avow his rancour and malice; and glory in the probability he 
have, through the address of this Solmes, of mortify I, and 
avenge himself on he: that it be impossible he should not think 
himself concerned to frustrate a measure so directly level at he, 
have he not a still high motive for hop to frustrate it: that I 
must forgive he, if he enter into conference with Solmes upon it. he 
earnestly insist (upon what he have so often propose) that I will 
give he leave, in company with Lord M. to wait upon my uncle, and 
even upon my father--and he promise patience, if new provocation, 
absolutely beneath a man to bear, be not give:' which by the way I be 
far from be able to engage for.
in my answer, I absolutely declare, as I tell he I have often do, 
'that he be to expect no favour from I against the approbation of my 
friend: that I be sure their consent for his visit any of they 
will never be obtain: that I will not be either so undutiful, or so 
indiscreet, as to suffer my interest to be separate from the 
interest of my family, for any man upon earth: that I do not think 
myself oblige to he for the forbearance I desire one flame spirit 
to have with other: that in this desire I require nothing of he, but 
what prudence, justice, and the law of his country require: that if 
he have any expectation of favour from I, on that account, he 
deceive himself: that I have no inclination, as I have often tell 
he, to change my condition: that I cannot allow myself to correspond 
with he any long in this clandestine manner: it be mean, low, 
undutiful, I tell he; and have a giddy appearance, which cannot be 
excuse: that therefore he be not to expect that I will continue it.
to this in his last, among other thing, he reply, 'that if I be 
actually determined to break off all correspondence with he, he must 
conclude, that it be with a view to become the wife of a man, whom no 
woman of honour and fortune can think tolerable. and in that case, I 
must excuse he for say, that he shall neither be able to bear the 
thought of lose for ever a person in whom all his present and all 
his future hope be centre; nor support himself with patience under 
the insolent triumph of my brother upon it. but that nevertheless he 
will not threaten either his own life, or that of any other man. he 
must take his resolution as such a dreaded event shall impel he at 
the time. if he shall know that it will have my consent, he must 
endeavour to resign to his destiny: but if it be bring about by 
compulsion, he shall not be able to answer for the consequence.'
I will send you these letter for your perusal in a few day. I would 
enclose they; but that it be possible something may happen, which may 
make my mother require to re-peruse they. when you see they, you will 
observe how he endeavour to hold I to this correspondence.
***
in about an hour my mother return. take your letter, Clary: I have 
nothing, she be pleased to say, to tax your discretion with, as to 
the wording of yours to he: you have even keep up a proper dignity, 
as well as observe all the rule of decorum; and you have resent, 
as you ought to resent, his menacing invective. in a word, I see 
not, that he can form the least expectation, from what you have 
write, that you will encourage the passion he avow for you. but 
do he not avow his passion? have you the least doubt about what 
must be the issue of this correspondence, if continue? and do you 
yourself think, when you know the avow hatred of one side, and he 
declare defiance of the other, that this can be, that it ought to be 
a match?
by no mean it can, Madam; you will be pleased to observe, that I 
have say as much to he. but now, Madam, that the whole 
correspondence be before you, I beg your command what to do in a 
situation so very disagreeable.
one thing I will tell you, Clary--but I charge you, as you would not 
have I question the generosity of your spirit, to take no advantage 
of it, either mentally or verbally; that I be so much pleased with the 
offer of your key to I, make in so cheerful and unreserve a manner, 
and in the prudence you have shew in your letter, that be it 
practicable to bring every one, or your father only, into my opinion, 
I should readily leave all the rest to your discretion, reserve only 
to myself the direction or approbation of your future letter; and to 
see, that you break off the correspondence as soon as possible. but 
as it be not, and as I know your father would have no patience with 
you, should it be acknowledge that you correspond with Mr. Lovelace, 
or that you have correspond with he since the time he prohibit 
you to do so; I forbid you to continue such a liberty--yet, as the 
case be difficult, let I ask you, what you yourself can propose? 
your heart, you say, be free. your own, that you cannot think, as 
matter circumstance, that a match with a man so obnoxious as he now 
be to we all, be proper to be think of: what do you propose to do?--
what, Clary, be your own thought of the matter?
without hesitation thus I answer--what I humbly propose be this:--
'that I will write to Mr. Lovelace (for I have not answer his last) 
that he have nothing to do between my father and I: that I neither ask 
his advice nor need it: but that since he think he have some pretence 
for interfere, because of my brother's avowal of the interest of Mr. 
Solmes in displeasure to he, I will assure he (without give he 
any reason to impute the assurance to be in the least favourable to 
himself) that I will never be that man's.' and if, proceed I, I may 
never be permit to give he this assurance; and Mr. Solmes, in 
consequence of it, be discourage from prosecute his address; let 
Mr. Lovelace be satisfied or dissatisfied, I will go no far; nor 
write another line to he; nor ever see he more, if I can avoid it: 
and I shall have a good excuse for it, without bring in any of my 
family.
ah! my love!--But what shall we do about the term Mr. Solmes offer? 
those be the inducement with every body. he have even give hope to 
your brother that he will make exchange of estate; or, at least, 
that he will purchase the northern one; for you know it must be 
entirely consistent with the family-view, that we increase our 
interest in this country. your brother, in short, have give a plan 
that captivate we all. and a family so rich in all its branch, and 
that have its view to honour, must be pleased to see a very great 
probability of take rank one day among the principal in the kingdom.
and for the sake of these view, for the sake of this plan of my 
brother's, be I, Madam, to be give in marriage to a man I can never 
endure!--o my dear Mamma, save I, save I, if you can, from this 
heavy evil.--I have rather be bury alive, indeed I have, than have 
that man!
she chide I for my vehemence; but be so good as to tell I, that she 
would sound my uncle Harlowe, who be then below; and if he encourage 
she (or would engage to second she) she would venture to talk to my 
father herself; and I should hear far in the morning.
she go down to tea, and kindly undertake to excuse my attendance at 
supper.
but be it not a sad thing, I repeat, to be oblige to stand in 
opposition to the will of such a mother? why, as I often say to 
myself, be such a man as this solme fix upon? the only man in the 
world, surely, that could offer so much, and deserve so little!
little indeed do he deserve!--why, my dear, the man have the most 
indifferent of character. every mouth be open against he for his 
sordid way--a foolish man, to be so base-minded!--When the difference 
between the obtaining of a fame for generosity, and incur the 
censure of be a miser, will not, prudently manage, cost fifty 
pound a year.
what a name have you get, at a less expense? and what an opportunity 
have he of obtain credit at a very small one, succeed such a 
wretched creature as Sir Oliver, in fortune so vast?--yet have he so 
behave, that the common phrase be apply to he, that Sir Oliver 
will never be dead while Mr. Solmes live.
the world, as I have often think, ill-natured as it be say to be, 
be generally more just in character (speak by what it feel) than 
be usually apprehend: and those who complain most of its 
censoriousness, perhaps should look inwardly for the occasion oftener 
than they do.
my heart be a little at ease, on the hope that my mother will be able 
to procure favour for I, and a deliverance from this man; and so I 
have leisure to moralize. but if I have not, I should not forbear to 
intermingle occasionally these sort of remark, because you command 
I never to omit they when they occur to my mind: and not to be able 
to make they, even in a more affecting situation, when one sit down 
to write, would shew one's self more engaged to self, and to one's own 
concern, than attentive to the wish of a friend. if it be say, 
that it be natural so to be, what make that nature, on occasion 
where a friend may be oblige, or remind of a piece of instruction, 
which (write down) one's self may be the well for, but a fault; 
which it would set a person above nature to subdue?
LETTER xviii
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SAT. MAR. 4.
would you not have think something might have be obtain in my 
favour, from an offer so reasonable, from an expedient so proper, as I 
imagine, to put a tolerable end, as from myself, to a correspondence I 
hardly know how otherwise, with safety to some of my family, to get 
rid of?--But my brother's plan, (which my mother speak of, and of 
which I have in vain endeavour to procure a copy, with a design to 
take it to piece, and expose it, as I question not there be room to 
do,) join with my father's impatience of contradiction, be 
irresistible.
I have not be in bed all night; nor be I in the least drowsy. 
Expectation, and hope, and doubt, (an uneasy state!) keep I 
sufficiently wakeful. I stept down at my usual time, that it might 
not be know I have not be in bed; and give direction in the family 
way.
about eight o'clock, Shorey come to I from my mother with order to 
attend she in her chamber.
my mother have be weep, I see by her eye: but her aspect seem 
to be less tender, and less affectionate, than the day before; and 
this, as soon as I enter into her presence, strike I with an awe, 
which give a great damp to my spirit.
sit down, Clary Harlowe; I shall talk to you by-and-by: and continue 
look into a drawer among lace and linen, in a way neither busy 
nor unbusy.
I believe it be a quarter of an hour before she speak to I (my heart 
throb with the suspense all the time); and then she ask I 
coldly, what direction I have give for the day?
I shew she the bill of fare for this day, and to-morrow, if, I say, 
it please she to approve of it.
she make a small alteration in it; but with an air so cold and so 
solemn, as add to my emotion.
Mr. Harlowe talk of din out to-day, I think, at my brother 
Antony's--
Mr. harlowe!--not my father!--have I not then a father!--thought i.
sit down when I bid you.
I sit down.
you look very sullen, Clary.
I hope not, Madam.
if child would always be child--parent--and there she stopt.
she then go to she toilette, and look into the glass, and give 
half a sigh--the other half, as if she would not have sigh if she 
could have help it, she gently hem'd away.
I donot love to see the girl look so sullen.
indeed, Madam, I be not sullen.--And I arise, and, turn from she, 
draw out my handkerchief; for the tear run down my cheek.
I think, by the glass before I, I see the mother in she soften 
eye cast towards I. but her word confirm not the hop-for 
tenderness.
one of the most provoking thing in this world be, to have people cry 
for what they can help!
I wish to heaven I could, madam!--and I sob again.
tear of penitence and sob of perverseness be mighty well suited!--
you may go up to your chamber. I shall talk with you by-and-by.
I courtesie with reverence.
mock I not with outward gesture of respect. the heart, Clary, be 
what I want.
indeed, Madam, you have it. it be not so much mine as my Mamma's!
Fine talking!--as somebody say, if word be to pass for duty, 
Clarissa Harlowe would be the dutiful child breathing.
God bless that somebody!--Be it whom it will, God bless that 
somebody!--And I courtesie, and, pursuant to her last command, be 
go.
she seem strike; but be to be angry with I.
so turn from I, she speak with quickness, Whither now, Clary 
Harlowe?
you command I, Madam, to go to my chamber.
I see you be very ready to go out of my presence.--is your compliance 
the effect of sullenness, or obedience?--you be very ready to leave 
I.
I could hold no long; but throw myself at her foot: o my dearest 
Mamma! let I know all I be to suffer! let I know what I be to be!
--I will bear it, if I can bear it: but your displeasure I cannot 
bear!
leave I, leave I, Clary harlowe!--no kneeling!--limbs so supple! 
will so stubborn!--rise, I tell you.
I cannot rise! I will disobey my Mamma, when she bid I leave she 
without be reconcile to I! no sullen, my Mamma: no 
perverseness: but, bad than either: this be direct disobedience!--
yet tear not yourself from I! [wrap my arm about she as I 
kneel; she struggle to get from I; my face lift up to her, 
with eye run over, that speak not my heart if they be not all 
humility and reverence] you must not, must not, tear yourself from I! 
[for still the dear lady struggle, and look this way and that, all 
in a sweet disorder, as if she know not what to do].--I will neither 
rise, nor leave you, nor let you go, till you say you be not angry 
with I.
o thou ever-move child of my heart! [fold she dear arm about my 
neck, as mine embrace her knee] why be this task--but leave me!--
you have discompose I beyond expression! leave I, my dear!--i 
willnot be angry with you--if I can help it--if youwill be good.
I arise tremble, and, hardly know what I do, or how I stand or 
walk, withdraw to my chamber. my Hannah follow I as soon as she 
hear I quit my mother's presence, and with salt and spring-water 
just keep I from faint; and that be as much as she could do. it 
be near two hour before I could so far recover myself as to take up 
my pen, to write to you how unhappily my hope have end.
my mother go down to breakfast. I be not fit to appear: but if I 
have be well, I suppose I should not have be send for; since the 
permission for my attend she down, be give by my father (when in 
my chamber) only on condition that she find I worthy of the name of 
daughter. that, I doubt, I shall never be in his opinion, if he be 
not bring to change his mind as to this Mr. Solmes.
LETTER XIX
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
[in answer TO LETTER XV.]
SAT. MARCH 4, 12 O'CLOCK.
Hannah have just now bring I from the usual place your favour of 
yesterday. the content of it have make I very thoughtful; and you 
will have an answer in my grave style.--I to have that Mr. Solmes!--
no indeed!--i will soon--but I will write first to those passage in 
your letter which be less concerning, that I may touch upon this part 
with more patience.
as to what you mention of my sister's value for Mr. Lovelace, I be not 
very much surprised at it. she take such officious pain, and it be 
so much her subject, to have it think that she never do, and never 
could like he, that she give but too much room to suspect that she 
do. she never tell the story of their parting, and of her refusal 
of he, but her colour rise, she look with disdain upon I, and 
mingle anger with the air she give herself:--anger as well as air, 
demonstrating, that she refuse a man whom she think worth 
accept: where else be the reason either for anger or boast?--poor 
Bella! she be to be pity--she cannot either like or dislike with 
temper! would to heaven she have be mistress of all her wishes!--
would to heaven she have!
as to what you say of my giving up to my father's controul the estate 
devise I, my motif at the time, as you acknowledge, be not 
blamable. your advice to I on the subject be ground, as I 
remember, on your good opinion of I; believe that I should not make 
a bad use of the power will I. neither you nor I, my dear, 
although you now assume the air of a diviner, [pardon I] could have 
believe that would have happen which have happen, as to my 
father's part particularly. you be indeed jealous of my brother's 
view against I; or rather of his predominant love of himself; but I 
do not think so hardly of my brother and sister as you always do. 
you never love they; and ill-will have eye ever open to the faulty 
side; as good-will or love be blind even to real imperfection. I 
will briefly recollect my motif.
I find jealousy and uneasiness rise in every breast, where all 
before be unity and love. the honoured testator be reflect upon: 
a second childhood be attribute to he; and I be censure, as 
have take advantage of it. all young creature, think I, more or 
less, covet independency; but those who wish most for it, be seldom 
the fit to be trust either with the government of themselves, or 
with power over other. this be certainly a very high and unusual 
devise to so young a creature. we should not aim at all we have power 
to do. to take all that good-nature, or indulgence, or good opinion 
confer, shew a want of moderation, and a graspingness that be 
unworthy of that indulgence; and be bad indication of the use that 
may be make of the power bequeath. it be true, think I, that I 
have form agreeable scheme of make other as happy as myself, by 
the proper discharge of the stewardship intrust to I. [be not all 
estate stewardship, my dear?] but let I examine myself: be not 
vanity, or secret love of praise, a principal motive with I at the 
bottom?--ought I not to suspect my own heart? if I set up for myself, 
puff up with every one's good opinion, may I not be leave to myself?
--every one's eye be upon the conduct, upon the visit, upon the 
visiter, of a young creature of our sex, make independent: and be 
not such subject, more than any other, to the attempt of 
enterpriser and fortune-seekers?--And then, leave to myself, should I 
take a wrong step, though with ever so good an intention, how many 
should I have to triumph over I, how few to pity me!--The more of the 
one, and the few of the other, for have aim at excelling. 
these be some of my reflection at the time: and I have no doubt, 
but that in the same situation I should do the very same thing; and 
that upon the mature deliberation. who can command or foresee 
event? to act up to our good judgment at the time, be all we can 
do. if I have err, 'tis to worldly wisdom only that I have err. 
if we suffer by an act of duty, or even by an act of generosity, be it 
not pleasurable on reflection, that the fault be in other, rather 
than in ourselves?--I have much rather have reason to think other 
unkind, than that they should have any to think I undutiful.
and so, my dear, I be sure have you.
and now for the most concern part of your letter.
you think I must of necessity, as matter be circumstance, be 
Solmes's wife. I will not be very rash, my dear, in protest to the 
contrary: but I think it never can, and, what be still more, never 
ought to be!--My temper, I know, be depend upon. but I have 
heretofore say,* that I have something in I of my father's family, 
as well as of my mother's. and have I any encouragement to follow too 
implicitly the example which my mother set of meekness, and 
resignedness to the will of other? be she not for ever oblige (as 
she be pleased to hint to I) to be of the forbear side? in my 
mother's case, your observation I must own be verify, that those who 
will bear much, shall have much to bear.** what be it, as she say, 
that she have not sacrifice to peace?--Yet, have she by her sacrifice 
always find the peace she have deserve to find? indeed, no!--I be 
afraid the very contrary. and often and often have I have reason (on 
her account) to reflect, that we poor mortal, by our over-solicitude 
to preserve undisturbed the quality we be constitutionally fond of, 
frequently lose the benefit we propose to ourselves from they: since 
the designing and encroach (find out what we most fear to 
forfeit) direct their battery against these our weak place, and, 
make an artillery (if I may so phrase it) of our hope and fear, 
play upon we at their pleasure.
* see letter IX.
** see Letter X.
Steadiness of mind, (a quality which the ill-breed and censorious deny 
to any of our sex) when we be absolutely convinced of be in the 
right [otherwise it be not steadiness, but obstinacy] and when it be 
exert in material case, be a quality, which, as my good Dr. Lewen 
be willnot to say, bring great credit to the possessor of it; at the 
same time that it usually, when try and know, raise such above the 
attempt of the meanly machinating. he use therefore to inculcate 
upon I this steadiness, upon laudable conviction. and why may I not 
think that I be now put upon a proper exercise of it?
I say above, that I never can be, that I never ought to be, Mrs. 
Solmes.--I repeat, that I ought not: for surely, my dear, I should not 
give up to my brother's ambition the happiness of my future life. 
surely I ought not to be the instrument of deprive Mr. Solmes's 
relation of their natural right and reversionary prospect, for the 
sake of far aggrandize a family (although that I be of) which 
already live in great affluence and splendour; and which might be as 
justly dissatisfied, be all that some of it aim at to be obtain, 
that they be not prince, as now they be that they be not peer 
[for when ever be an ambitious mind, as you observe in the case of 
avarice,* satisfy by acquisition?]. the less, surely, ought I to 
give into these grasp view of my brother, as I myself heartily 
despise the end aim at; as I wish not either to change my state, or 
well my fortune; and as I be fully persuade, that happiness and 
rich be two thing, and very seldom meet together.
* see letter X.
yet I dread, I exceedingly dread, the conflict I know I must 
encounter with. it be possible, that I may be more unhappy from the 
due observation of the good doctor's general precept, than be I to 
yield the point; since what I call steadiness be deem stubbornness, 
obstinacy, prepossession, by those who have a right to put what 
interpretation they please upon my conduct.
so, my dear, be we perfect (which no one can be) we could not be 
happy in this life, unless those with whom we have to deal (those more 
especially who have any controul upon we) be govern by the same 
principle. but then do not the good Doctor's conclusion recur,--
that we have nothing to do, but to chuse what be right; to be steady 
in the pursuit of it; and to leave the issue to Providence?
this, if you approve of my motif, (and if you donot, pray inform I) 
must be my aim in the present case.
but what then can I plead for a palliation to myself of my mother's 
suffering on my account? perhaps this consideration will carry some 
force with it--that her difficulty cannot last long; only till this 
great struggle shall be one way or other determine--whereas my 
unhappiness, if I comply, will (from an aversion not to be overcome) 
be for life. to which let I add, that as I have reason to think that 
the present measure be not enter upon with her own natural liking, 
she will have the less pain, should they want the success which I 
think in my heart they ought to want.
I have run a great length in a very little time. the subject touch 
I to the quick. my reflection upon it will give you reason to 
expect from I a perhaps too steady behaviour in a new conference, 
which, I find, I must have with my mother. my father and brother, as 
she be pleased to tell I, dine at my uncle Antony's; and that, as I 
have reason to believe, on purpose to give an opportunity for it.
Hannah inform I, that she hear my father high and angry with my 
mother, at take leave of she: I suppose for be to favourable to 
I; for Hannah hear she say, as in tear, 'indeed, Mr. Harlowe, you 
greatly distress me!--The poor girl do not deserve--' Hannah hear 
no more, but that he say, he would break somebody's heart--mine, I 
suppose--not my mother's, I hope.
as only my sister dine with my mother, I think I should have be 
command down: but she send I up a plate from her table. I 
continue my writing. I could not touch a morsel. I order Hannah 
however to eat of it, that I might not be think sullen.
before I conclude this, I will see whether any thing offer from 
either of my private correspondencie, that will make it proper to add 
to it; and will take a turn in the wood-yard and garden for that 
purpose.
***
I be stop. Hannah shall deposit this. she be order by my 
mother (who ask where I be) to tell I, that she would come up and 
talk with I in my own closet.--She be come! Adieu, my dear.
LETTER XX
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SAT. AFTERNOON.
the expected conference be over: but my difficulty be increase. 
this, as my mother be pleased to tell I, be the last persuasory 
effort that be to be attempt, I will be particular in the account of 
it as my head and my heart will allow it to be.
I have make, say she, as she enter my room, a short as well as 
early dinner, on purpose to confer with you: and I do assure you, that 
it will be the last conference I shall either be permit or incline 
to hold with you on the subject, if you should prove as refractory as 
it be imagine you will prove by some, who be of opinion, that I have 
not the weight with you which my indulgence deserve. but I hope you 
will convince as well they as I of the contrary.
your father both dine and sup at your uncle's, on purpose to give we 
this opportunity; and, accord to the report I shall make on his 
return, (which I have promise shall be a very faithful one,) he will 
take his measure with you.
I be offer to speak--Hear, Clarissa, what I have to tell you, say 
she, before you speak, unless what you have to say will signify to I 
your compliance--say--will it?--if it will, you may speak.
I be silent.
she look with concern and anger upon I--no compliance, I find!--
such a dutiful young creature hitherto!--will you not, can you not, 
speak as I would have you speak?--Then [reject I as it be with 
her hand] continue silent.--I, no more than your father, will bear 
your avow contradiction.
she pause, with a look of expectation, as if she wait for my 
consenting answer.
I be still silent; look down; the tear in my eye.
o thou determine girl!--But say--speak out--be you resolve to stand 
in opposition to we all, in a point our heart be set upon?
may I, Madam, be permit to expostulate?--
to what purpose expostulate with I, Clarissa? your father be 
determine. have I not tell you there be no recede; that the honour 
as well as the interest of the family be concern? be ingenuous: you 
use to be so, even occasionally against yourself:--who at the long 
run must submit--all of we to you; or you to all of us?--If you intend 
to yield at last if you find you cannot conquer, yield now, and with a 
grace--for yield you must, or be none of our child.
I weep. I know not what to say; or rather how to express what I have 
to say.
take notice, that there be flaw in your grandfather's will: not a 
shilling of that estate will be your, if you do not yield. your 
grandfather leave it to you, as a reward of your duty to he and to we
--you will justly forfeit it, if--
permit I, good Madam, to say, that, if it be unjustly bequeath 
I, I ought not to wish to have it. but I hope Mr. Solmes will be 
apprise of these flaw.
this be very pertly say, Clarissa: but reflect, that the forfeiture 
of that estate, through your opposition, will be attend with the 
total loss of your father's favour: and then how destitute must you 
be; how unable to support yourself; and how many benevolent design 
and good action must you give up!
I must accommodate myself, Madam, in the latter case, to my 
circumstance: much only be require where much be give. it become 
I to be thankful for what I have have. I have reason to bless you, 
Madam, and my good Mrs. Norton, for bring I up to be satisfied 
with little; with much less, I will venture to say, than my father's 
indulgence annually confer upon me.--And then I think of the old 
Roman and his lentil.
what perverseness! say my mother.--But if you depend upon the favour 
of either or both of your uncle, vain will be that dependence: they 
will give you up, I do assure you, if your father do, and absolutely 
renounce you.
I be sorry, Madam, that I have have so little merit as to have make no 
deep impression of favour for I in their heart: but I will love 
and honour they as long as I live.
all this, Clarissa, make your prepossession in a certain man's favour 
the more evident. indeed, your brother and sister cannot go any 
where, but they hear of these prepossession.
it be a great grief to I, Madam, to be make the subject of the public 
talk: but I hope you will have the goodness to excuse I for 
observe, that the author of my disgrace within door, the talker 
of my prepossession without, and the reporter of it from abroad, be 
originally the same person.
she severely chid I for this.
I receive her rebuke in silence.
you be sullen, Clarissa: I see you be sullen.--And she walk about 
the room in anger. then turn to I--you can bear the imputation of 
sullenness I see! --you have no concern to clear yourself of it. I 
be afraid of tell you all I be enjoin to tell you, in case you 
be to be unpersuadable: but I find that I have a great opinion of 
your delicacy, of your gentleness, than I need to have--it cannot 
discompose so steady, so inflexible a young creature, to be tell, as I 
now tell you, that the settlement be actually draw; and that you 
will be call down in a very few day to hear they read, and to sign 
they: for it be impossible, if your heart be free, that you can make 
the least objection to they; except it will be an objection with you, 
that they be so much in your favour, and in the favour of all our 
family.
I be speechless, absolutely speechless. although my heart be ready 
to burst, yet could I neither weep nor speak.
I be sorry, say she, for your averseness to this match: [match she 
be pleased to call it!] but there be no help. the honour and 
interest of the family, as your aunt have tell you, and as I have tell 
you, be concern; and you must comply.
I be still speechless.
she fold the warm statue, as she be pleased to call I, in her 
arm; and entreat I, for heaven's sake, to comply.
Speech and tear be lend I at the same time.--you have give I 
life, Madam, say I, clasp my uplifted hand together, and fall 
on one knee; a happy one, till now, have your goodness, and my papa's, 
make it! o do not, do not, make all the remainder of it miserable!
your father, reply she, be resolve not to see you, till he see you 
as obedient a child as you use to be. you have never be put to a 
test till now, that deserve to be call a test. this be, this must 
be, my last effort with you. give I hope, my dear child: my peace be 
concern: I will compound with you but for hope: and yet your father 
will not be satisfied without an implicit, and even a cheerful 
obedience--give I but hope, child!
to give you hope, my dearest, my most indulgent Mamma, be to give you 
every thing. can I be honest, if I give a hope that I cannot confirm?
she be very angry. she again call I perverse: she upbraid I 
with regard only my own prepossession, and respect not either 
her peace of mind or my own duty:--'it be a grating thing, say she, 
for the parent of a child, who delight in she in all the time of 
her helpless infancy, and throughout every stage of her childhood; and 
in every part of her education to womanhood, because of the promise 
she give of prove the most grateful and dutiful of child; to 
find, just when the time arrive which should crown their wish, that 
child stand in the way of her own happiness, and her parent' 
comfort,and, refuse an excellent offer and noble settlement, give 
suspicion to her anxious friend, that she would become the property 
of a vile rake and libertine, who (be the occasion what it will) 
defy her family, and have actually embrue his hand in her brother's 
blood.
'I have have a very hard time of it, say she, between your father and 
you; for, see your dislike, I have more than once plead for you: 
but all to no purpose. I be only treat as a too fond mother, who, 
from motif of a blamable indulgence, encourage a child to stand in 
opposition to a father's will. I be charge with divide the family 
into two part; I and my young daughter stand against my 
husband, his two brother, my son, my eld daughter, and my sister 
Hervey. I have be tell, that I must be convince of the fitness as 
well as advantage to the whole (your brother and Mr. Lovelace out of 
the question) of carry the contract with Mr. Solmes, on which so 
many contract depend, into execution.
'your father's heart, I tell you once more, be in it: he have declare, 
that he have rather have no daughter in you, than one he cannot dispose 
of for your own good: especially if you have own, that your heart be 
free; and as the general good of his whole family be to be promote by 
your obedience. he have plead, poor man! that his frequent gouty 
paroxysm (every fit more threatening than the former) give he no 
extraordinary prospect, either of worldly happiness, or of long day: 
and he hop, that you, who have be suppose to have contribute to 
the lengthening of your grandfather's life, will not, by your 
disobedience, shorten your father's.'
this be a most affect plea, my dear. I weep in silence upon it. 
I could not speak to it. and my mother proceed: 'what therefore can 
be his motif, Clary Harlowe, in the earnest desire he have to see 
this treaty perfect, but the welfare and aggrandizement of his 
family; which already have fortune to become the high condition, 
cannot but aspire to great distinction? however slight such view 
as these may appear to you, Clary, you know, that they be not slight 
one to any other of the family: and your father will be his own judge 
of what be and what be not likely to promote the good of his child. 
your abstractedness, child, (affectation of abstractedness, some call 
it,) savour, let I tell you, of great particularity, than we aim 
to carry. Modesty and humility, therefore, will oblige you rather to 
mistrust yourself of peculiarity, than censure view which all the 
world pursue, as opportunity offer.'
I be still silent; and she proceeded--'it be owe to the good 
opinion, Clary, which your father have of you, and of your prudence, 
duty, and gratitude, that he engage for your compliance, in your 
absence (before you return from Miss Howe); and that he build and 
finished contract upon it, which cannot be make void, or cancel.'
but why then, think I, do they receive I, on my return from Miss 
Howe, with so much intimidating solemnity?--to be sure, my dear, this 
argument, as well as the rest, be obtrude upon my mother.
she go on, 'your father have declare, that your unexpected 
opposition, [unexpected she be pleased to call it,] and Mr. 
Lovelace's continue menace and insult, more and more convince he, 
that a short day be necessary in order to put an end to all that man's 
hope, and to his own apprehension result from the disobedience of 
a child so favour. he have therefore actually order pattern of 
the rich silk to be send for from London--'
I start--I be out of breath--I gasp, at this frightful 
precipitance--I be go to open with warmth against it. I know 
whose the happy expedient must be: female mind, I once hear my 
brother say, that could but be bring to balance on the change of 
their state, might easily be determine by the glare and splendour of 
the nuptial preparation, and the pride of become the mistress of a 
family.--But she be pleased to hurry on, that I might not have time 
to express my disgust at such a communication--to this effect:
'your father therefore, my Clary, cannot, either for your sake, or his 
own, labour under a suspense so affect to his repose. he have even 
think fit to acquaint I, on my pleading for you, that it become 
I, as I value my own peace, [how harsh to such a wife!] and as I 
wish, that he do not suspect that I secretly favour the address of a 
vile rake, (a character which all the sex, he be pleased to say, 
virtuous and vicious, be but too fond of!) to exert my authority over 
you: and that this I may the less scrupulously do, as you have own 
[the old string!] that your heart be free.'
unworthy reflection in my mother's case, surely, this of our sex's 
value a libertine; since she make choice of my father in preference 
to several suitor of equal fortune, because they be of inferior 
reputation for moral!
'your father, add she, at his go out, tell I what he expect 
from I, in case I find out that I have not the requisite influence 
upon you--it be this--that I should directly separate myself from 
you, and leave you singly to take the consequence of your double 
disobedience--I therefore entreat you, my dear Clarissa, conclude 
she, and that in the most earnest and condescend manner, to signify 
to your father, on his return, your ready obedience; and this as well 
for my sake as your own.'
affect by my mother's goodness to I, and by that part of her 
argument which relate to her own peace, and to the suspicion they 
have of she secretly incline to prefer the man so hat by they, to 
the man so much my aversion, I could not but wish it be possible for 
I to obey, I therefore pause, hesitate, consider, and be silent 
for some time. I could see, that my mother hop that the result of 
this hesitation would be favourable to her argument. but then 
recollect, that all be owe to the instigation of a brother and 
sister, wholly actuate by selfish and envious view; that I have not 
deserve the treatment I have of late meet with; that my disgrace be 
already become the public talk; that the man be Mr. Solmes; and that 
my aversion to he be too generally know, to make my compliance 
either creditable to myself or to they: that it would give my brother 
and sister a triumph over I, and over Mr. Lovelace, which they would 
not fail to glory in; and which, although it concern I but little 
to regard on his account, yet might be attend with fatal mischiefs--
and then Mr. Solmes's disagreeable person; his still more disagreeable 
manner; his low understanding--Understanding! the glory of a man, so 
little to be dispense with in the head and director of a family, in 
order to preserve to he that respect which a good wife (and that for 
the justification of her own choice) should pay he herself, and wish 
every body to pay him.--And as Mr. Solmes's inferiority in this 
respectable faculty of the human mind [I must be allow to say this 
to you, and no great self assumption neither] would proclaim to all 
future, as well as to all present observer, what must have be my 
mean inducement. all these reflection crowd upon my remembrance; 
I would, Madam, say I, fold my hand, with an earnestness in which 
my whole heart be engage, bear the cruel torture, bear loss of 
limb, and even of life, to give you peace. but this man, every moment 
I would, at you command, think of he with favour, be the more my 
aversion. you cannot, indeed you cannot, think, how my whole soul 
resist him!--And to talk of contract conclude upon; of pattern; of 
a short day!--save I, save I, o my dear Mamma, save your child, 
from this heavy, from this insupportable evil!--
never be there a countenance that express so significantly, as my 
mother's do, an anguish, which she struggle to hide, under an anger 
she be compel to assume--till the latter overcome the former, 
she turn from I with an uplifted eye, and stamp--strange 
perverseness! be the only word I hear of a sentence that she 
angrily pronounce; and be go. I then, half-frantically I 
believe, lay hold of her gown--have patience with I, dearest Madam! 
say I--do not you renounce I totally!--if you must separate yourself 
from your child, let it not be with absolute reprobation on your own 
part!--my uncle may be hard-hearted--my father may be immovable--I 
may suffer from my brother's ambition, and from my sister's envy!--But 
let I not lose my Mamma's love; at least, her pity.
she turn to I with benigner ray--you have my love! you have my 
pity! but, o my dear girl--I have not your.
indeed, indeed, Madam, you have: and all my reverence, all my 
gratitude, you have!--but in this one point--Cannot I be this once 
obliged?--will no expedient be accept? have I not make a very fair 
proposal as to Mr. Lovelace?
I wish, for both our sake, my dear unpersuadable girl, that the 
decision of this point lie with I. but why, when you know it do 
not, why should you thus perplex and urge me?--to renounce Mr. 
Lovelace be now but half what be aim at. nor will any body else 
believe you in earnest in the offer, if I would. while you remain 
single, Mr. Lovelace will have hope--and you, in the opinion of 
other, inclination.
permit I, dear Madam, to say, that your goodness to I, your 
patience, your peace, weigh more with I, than all the rest put 
together: for although I be to be treat by my brother, and, through 
his instigation, by my father, as a slave in this point, and not as a 
daughter, yet my mind be not that of a slave. you have not bring I 
up to be mean.
so, Clary! you be already at defiance with your father! I have have 
too much cause before to apprehend as much--what will this come to?--
I, and then my dear mamma sigh--I, be force to put up with many 
humours--
that you be, my ever-honour Mamma, be my grief. and can it be 
think, that this very consideration, and the apprehension of what 
may result from a much worse-temper man, (a man who have not half the 
sense of my father,) have not make an impression upon I, to the 
disadvantage of the married life? yet 'tis something of an 
alleviation, if one must bear undue controul, to bear it from a man of 
sense. my father, I have hear you say, Madam, be for year a very 
good-humour gentleman--unobjectionable in person and manner--but 
the man propose to me--
Forbear reflect upon your father: [do I, my dear, in what I have 
repeat, and I think they be the very word, reflect upon my 
father?] it be not possible, I must say again, and again, be all man 
equally indifferent to you, that you should be thus sturdy in your 
will. I be tired out with your obstinacy--the most unpersuadable 
girl--you forget, that I must separate myself from you, if you will 
not comply. you do not remember that you father will take you up, 
where I leave you. once more, however, I will put it to you,--Are you 
determine to brave your father's displeasure?--are you determine to 
defy your uncles?--do you choose to break with we all, rather than 
encourage Mr. Solmes?--Rather than give I hope?
dreadful alternative--but be not my sincerity, be not the integrity of 
my heart, concern in the answer? may not my everlaste happiness 
be the sacrifice? will not the least shadow of the hope you just now 
demand from I, be drive into absolute and sudden certainty? be it 
not seek to ensnare, to entangle I in my own desire of obey, if 
I could give answer that might be construe into hope?--forgive I, 
Madam: bear with your child's boldness in such a cause as this!--
Settlements drawn!--Patterns send for!--an early day!--dear, dear 
Madam, how can I give hope, and not intend to be this man's?
ah, girl, never say your heart be free! you deceive yourself if you 
think it be.
thus to be drive [and I wring my hand through impatience] by the 
instigation of a designing, an ambitious brother, and by a sister, 
that--
how often, Clary, must I forbid your unsisterly reflections?--doe not 
your father, do not your uncle, do not every body, patronize Mr. 
Solmes? and let I tell you, ungrateful girl, and unmovable as 
ungrateful, let I repeatedly tell you, that it be evident to I, that 
nothing but a love unworthy of your prudence can make you a creature 
late so dutiful, now so sturdy. you may guess what your father's 
first question on his return will be. he must know, that I can do 
nothing with you. I have do my part. seek I, if your mind change 
before he come back: you have yet a little more time, as he stay 
supper. I will no more seek you, nor to you.--And away she fling.
what could I do but weep?
I be extremely affected on my mother's account--more, I must need 
say, than on my own. and indeed, all thing consider, and 
especially, that the measure she be engage in, be (as I dare say it 
be) against her own judgment, she deserve more compassion than 
myself.--excellent woman! what pity, that meekness and condescension 
should not be attend with the due reward of those charming grace!
--Yet have she not let violent spirit (as I have elsewhere observe 
with no small regret) find their power over her, it could not have 
be thus.
but here, run away with my pen, I suffer my mother to be angry with I 
on her own account. she hint to I, indeed, that I must seek she, 
if my mind change; which be a condition that amount to a prohibition 
of attend she: but, as she leave I in displeasure, will it not have 
a very obstinate appearance, and look like a kind of renunciation of 
her mediation in my favour, if I go not down before my father return, 
to supplicate her pity, and her kind report to he?
I will attend she. I have rather all the world should be angry with I 
than my mamma!
mean time, to clear my hand from paper of such a nature, Hannah 
shall deposit this. if two or three letter reach you together, they 
will but express from one period to another, the anxiety and 
difficulty which the mind of your unhappy but ever affectionate 
friend labour under.
CL. H.
LETTER XXI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SAT. NIGHT.
I have be down. I be to be unlucky in all I do, I think, be my 
intention ever so good. I have make matter bad instead of well: 
as I shall now tell you.
I find my mother and sister together in my sister's parlour. my 
mother, I fear, by the glow of her fine face, (and as the browner, 
sullener glow in her sister's confirm,) have be express herself 
with warmth, against her unhappier child: perhaps give such an 
account of what have pass, as should clear herself, and convince 
Bella, and, through she, my brother and uncle, of the sincere pain 
she have take with I.
I enter like a dejected criminal; and besought the favour of a 
private audience. my mother's return, both look and word, give but 
too much reason for my above surmise.
you have, say she [look at I with a sternness that never sit 
well on her sweet feature] rather a requesting than a concede 
countenance, Clarissa Harlowe: if I be mistaken, tell I so; and I 
will withdraw with you wherever you will.--Yet whether so, or not, you 
may say what you have to say before your sister.
my mother, I think, might have withdraw with I, as she know that 
I have not a friend in my sister.
I come down, Madam, say I, to beg of you to forgive I for any thing 
you may have take amiss in what pass above respect your honoured 
self; and that you will be pleased to use your endeavour to soften my 
papa's displeasure against I, on his return.
such aggravating look; such lifting up of hand and eye; such a 
furrow forehead, in my sister!
my mother be angry enough without all that; and ask I to what 
purpose I come down, if I be still so intractable.
she have hardly speak the word, when Shorey come in to tell she, that 
Mr. Solmes be in the hall, and desire admittance.
ugly creature! what, at the close of day, quite dark, bring he 
hither?--but, on second thought, I believe it be contrive, that he 
should be here at supper, to know the result of the conference between 
my mother and I, and that my father, on his return, might find we 
together.
I be hurry away, but my mother command I (since I have come down 
only, as she say, to mock she) not to stir; and at the same time see 
if I could behave so to Mr. Solmes, as might encourage she to make the 
favourable report to my father which I have beseech she to make.
my sister triumph. I be vex to be so catch, and to have such an 
angry and cut rebuke give I, with an aspect much more like the 
taunt sister than the indulgent mother, if I may presume to say so: 
for she herself seem to enjoy the surprise upon I.
the man stalk in. his usual walk be by pause, as if (from the same 
vacuity of thought which make Dryden's clown whistle) he be tell 
his step: and first pay his clumsy respect to my mother; then to my 
sister; next to I, as if I be already his wife, and therefore to be 
last in his notice; and sit down by I, tell we in general what 
weather it be. very cold he make it; but I be warm enough. then 
address himself to I: and how do you find it, Miss? be his 
question; and would have take my hand.
I withdraw it, I believe with disdain enough. my mother frown. my 
sister bite her lip.
I could not contain myself: I be never so bold in my life; for I go 
on with my plea, as if Mr. Solmes have not be there.
my mother colour, and look at he, at my sister, and at I. my 
sister's eye be opener and big than ever I see they before.
the man understand I. he hem, and remove from one chair to 
another.
I go on, supplicate for my mother's favourable report: nothing but 
invincible dislike, say I--
what would the girl be at, interrupt my mother? why, Clary! be 
this a subject!--is this!--Is this!--is this a time--and again she 
look upon Mr. Solmes.
I be sorry, on reflection, that I put my mamma into so much confusion
--to be sure it be very saucy in I.
I beg pardon, Madam, say i. but my papa will soon return. and since 
I be not permit to withdraw, it be not necessary, I humbly presume, 
that Mr. Solmes's presence should deprive I of this opportunity to 
implore your favourable report; and at the same time, if he still 
visit on my account [look at he] to convince he, that it cannot 
possibly be to any purpose--
be the girl mad? say my mother, interrupt I.
my sister, with the affectation of a whisper to my mother--this is--
this be spite, Madam, [very spitefully she speak the word,] because 
you command she to stay.
I only look at she, and turn to my mother, permit I, Madam, say 
I, to repeat my request. I have no brother, no sister!--if I ever 
lose my mamma's favour, I be lose for ever!
Mr. Solmes remove to his first seat, and fall to gnaw the head of 
his hazel; a carved head, almost as ugly as his own--I do not think 
the man be so sensible.
my sister rise, with a face all over scarlet; and step to the 
table, where lay a fan, she take it up, and, although Mr. Solmes have 
observe that the weather be cold, fan herself very violently.
my mother come to I, and angrily take my hand, lead I out of that 
parlour into my own; which, you know, be next to it--be not this 
behaviour very bold, very provoking, think you, Clary?
I beg your pardon, Madam, if it have that appearance to you. but 
indeed, my dear Mamma, there seem to be snare lay in wait for I. 
too well I know my brother's drift. with a good word he shall have my 
consent for all he wish to worm I out of--neither he, nor my 
sister, shall need to take half this pains--
my mother be about to leave I in high displeasure.
I besought she to stay: one favour, but one favour, dear Madam, 
say I, give I leave to beg of you--
what would the girl?
I see how every thing be work about.--I never, never can think of 
Mr. Solmes. my papa will be in tumult when he be tell that I cannot. 
they will judge of the tenderness of your heart to a poor child who 
seem devote by every one else, from the willingness you have already 
shewn to hearken to my prayer. there will be endeavour use to 
confine I, and keep I out of your presence, and out of the presence 
of every one who use to love I [this, my dear Miss Howe, be 
threaten]. if this be effect; if it be put out of my power to 
plead my own cause, and to appeal to you, and to my uncle Harlowe, of 
whom only I have hope; then will every ear be open against I, and 
every tale encourage--it be, therefore, my humble request, that, 
add to the disgraceful prohibition I now suffer under, you will 
not, if you can help it, give way to my be deny your ear.
your listen Hannah have give you this intelligence, as she do 
many other.
my Hannah, Madam, listen not--my hannah--
no more in Hannah's behalf--Hannah be know to make mischief--Hannah 
be know--but no more of that bold intermeddler--'tis true your father 
threaten to confine you to your chamber, if you comply not, in 
order the more assuredly to deprive you of the opportunity of 
correspond with those who harden your heart against his will. he 
bid I tell you so, when he go out, if I find you refractory. but 
I be loth to deliver so harsh a declaration; be still in hope that 
you would come down to we in a compliant temper. Hannah have overhear 
this, I suppose; and have tell you of it; as also, that he declare he 
would break your heart, rather than you should break his. and I now 
assure you, that you will be confine, and prohibit make teasing 
appeal to any of we: and we shall see who be to submit, you to we, or 
every body to you.
again I offer to clear Hannah, and to lay the latter part of the 
intelligence to my sister's echo, Betty Barnes, who have boast of it 
to another servant: but I be again bid to be silent on that head. I 
should soon find, my mother be pleased to say, that other could be 
as determined as I be obstinate: and once for all would add, that 
since she see that I build upon her indulgence, and be indifferent 
about involve she in contention with my father, she would now 
assure I, that she be as much determined against Mr. Lovelace, and 
for Mr. Solmes and the family scheme, as any body; and would not 
refuse her consent to any measure that should be think necessary to 
reduce a stubborn child to her duty.
I be ready to sink. she be so good as to lend I her arm to support 
I.
and this, say I, be all I have to hope for from my Mamma?
it be. but, Clary, this one further opportunity I give you--go in 
again to Mr. Solmes, and behave discreetly to he; and let your father 
find you together, upon civil term at least.
my foot move [of themselves, I think] far from the parlour where 
he be, and towards the stair; and there I stop and pause.
if, proceed she, you be determined to stand in defiance of we all--
then indeed you may go up to your chamber (as you be ready to do)--
and God help you!
God help I, indeed! for I cannot give hope of what I cannot intend--
but let I have your prayer, my dear Mamma!--Those shall have mine, 
who have bring I into all this distress.
I be move to go up--
and will you go up, Clary?
I turn my face to she: my officious tear would need plead for I: 
I could not just then speak, and stand still.
good girl, distress I not thus!--dear, good girl, do not thus 
distress I! hold out her hand; but stand still likewise.
what can I do, madam?--what can I do?
go in again, my child--go in again, my dear child!--repeate she; and 
let your father find you together.
what, Madam, to give he hope?--to give hope to Mr. Solmes?
Obstinate, perverse, undutiful Clarissa! with a reject hand, and 
angry aspect; then take your own way, and go up!--But stir not down 
again, I charge you, without leave, or till your father's pleasure be 
know concern you.
she fling away from I with high indignation: and I go up with a 
very heavy heart; and foot as slow as my heart be heavy.
***
my father be come home, and my brother with he. late as it be, they 
be all shut up together. not a door open; not a soul stir. 
Hannah, as she move up and down, be shun as a person infect.
***
the angry assembly be break up. my two uncle and my aunt Hervey be 
send for, it seem, to be here in the morning to breakfast. I shall 
then, I suppose, know my doom. 'tis past eleven, and I be order not 
to go to bed.
TWELVE O'CLOCK.
this moment the key of every thing be take from I. it be 
propose to send for I down: but my father say, he could not bear to 
look upon me.--strange alteration in a few weeks!--shorey be the 
messenger. the tear stand in her eye when she deliver her 
message.
you, my dear, be happy--may you always be so--and then I can never be 
wholly miserable. Adieu, my beloved friend!
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XXII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SUNDAY MORNING, MARCH 5.
Hannah have just bring I from the private place in the garden-wall, 
a letter from Mr. Lovelace, deposit last night, sign also by Lord 
M.
he tell I in it, 'that Mr. Solmes make it his boast, that he be to 
be marry in a few day to one of the shy woman in England: that 
my brother explain his meaning: this shy creature, he say, be I; 
and he assure every one, that his young sister be very soon to be 
Mr. Solmes's wife. he tell I of the pattern bespeak which my 
mother mention to I.'
not one thing escape he that be do or say in this house.
'my sister, he say, report the same thing; and that with such 
particular aggravation of insult upon he, that he cannot but be 
extremely pique, as well at the manner, as from the occasion; and 
express himself with great violence upon it.
'he know not, he say, what my relation' inducement can be to 
prefer such a man as Solmes to he. if advantageous settlement be 
the motive, solme shall not offer what he will refuse to comply with.
'as to his estate and family; the first cannot be except against: 
and for the second, he will not disgrace himself by a comparison so 
odious. he appeal to Lord M. for the regularity of his life and 
manner ever since he have make his address to I, or have hope of my 
favour.'
I suppose he would have his Lordship's signing to this letter to be 
take as a voucher for he.
'he desire my leave (in company with my Lord), in a pacific manner, 
to attend my father and uncle, in order to make proposal that must 
be accept, if they will see he, and hear what they be: and tell 
I, that he will submit to any measure that I shall prescribe, in 
order to bring about a reconciliation.'
he presume to be very earnest with I, 'to give he a private meeting 
some night, in my father's garden, attend by whom I please.'
really, my dear, be you to see his letter, you would think I have 
give he great encouragement, and that I be in direct treaty with 
he; or that he be sure that my friend will drive I into a foreign 
protection; for he have the boldness to offer, in my Lord's name, an 
asylum to I, should I be tyrannically treat in Solmes's behalf.
I suppose it be the way of this sex to endeavour to entangle the 
thoughtless of our by bold supposal and offer, in hope that we 
shall be too complaisant or bashful to quarrel with they; and, if not 
check, to reckon upon our silence, as assent voluntarily give, or 
concession make in their favour.
there be other particular in this letter which I ought to mention to 
you: but I will take an opportunity to send you the letter itself, or 
a copy of it.
for my own part, I be very uneasy to think how I have be draw on 
one hand, and drive on the other, into a clandestine, in short, into 
a mere loverlike correspondence, which my heart condemn.
it be easy to see, if I do not break it off, that Mr. Lovelace's 
advantage, by reason of my unhappy situation, will every day 
increase, and I shall be more and more entangle. yet if I do put an 
end to it, without make it a condition of be free from Mr. 
Solmes's address--May i, my dear, be it good to continue it a little 
long, in order to extricate myself out of the other difficulty, by 
give up all thought of Mr. Lovelace?--Whose advice can I now ask 
but your.
all my relation be meet. they be at breakfast together. Mr. Solmes 
be expect. I be excessively uneasy. I must lay down my pen.
***
they be all go to church together. Grievously disorder they 
appear to be, as Hannah tell I. she believe something be resolve 
upon.
SUNDAY NOON.
what a cruel thing be suspense!--i will ask leave to go to church this 
afternoon. I expect to be deny. but, if I do not ask, they may 
allege, that my not go be owe to myself.
***
I desire to speak with Shorey. Shorey come. I direct she to carry 
to my mother my request for permission to go to church this afternoon. 
what think you be the return? tell she, that she must direct herself 
to her brother for any favour she have to ask.--So, my dear, I be to be 
deliver up to my brother!
I be resolve, however, to ask of he this favour. accordingly, when 
they send I up my solitary dinner, I give the messenger a billet, in 
which I make it my humble request through he to my father, to be 
permit to go to church this afternoon.
this be the contemptuous answer: 'tell she, that her request will be 
take into consideration to-morrow.'
Patience will be the fit return I can make to such an insult. but 
this method will not do with I; indeed it will not! and yet it be 
but the beginning, I suppose, of what I be to expect from my brother, 
now I be deliver up to he.
on recollection, I think it well to renew my request. I do. the 
following be a copy of what I write, and what follow that, of the 
answer send I.
SIR,
I know not what to make of the answer bring to my request of be 
permit to go to church this afternoon. if you design to shew 
your pleasantry by it, I hope that will continue; and then my request 
will be grant.
you know, that I never absent myself, when well, and at home, till 
the two last sunday; when I be advise not to go. my present 
situation be such, that I never more want the benefit of the public 
prayer.
I will solemnly engage only to go thither, and back again.
I hope it cannot be think that I would do otherwise.
my dejection of spirit will give a too just excuse on the score of 
indisposition for avoid visit. nor will I, but by distant 
civility, return the compliment of any of my acquaintance. my 
disgrace, if they be to have an end, need not be proclaim to the 
whole world. I ask this favour, therefore, for my reputation's sake, 
that I may be able to hold up my head in the neighbourhood, if I live 
to see an end of the unmerited severity which seem to be design 
for
your unhappy sister,
CL. HARLOWE.
to MISS clarissa HARLOWE
for a girl to lay so much stress upon go to church, and yet resolve 
to defy her parent, in an article of the great consequence to 
they, and to the whole family, be an absurdity. you be recommend, 
Miss, to the practice of your private devotion. may they be 
efficacious upon the mind of one of the most pervicacious young 
creature that ever be hear of! the intention be, I tell you 
plainly, to mortify you into a sense of your duty. the neighbour you 
be so solicitous to appear well with, already know, that you defy 
that. so, Miss, if you have a real value for your reputation, shew it 
as you ought. it be yet in your own power to establish or impair it.
JA. HARLOWE.
thus, my dear Miss Howe, have my brother get I into his snare; and I, 
like a poor silly bird, the more I struggle, be the more entangled.
LETTER XXIII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
MONDAY MORNING, MARCH 6.
they be resolve to break my heart. my poor Hannah be discharged--
disgracefully discharged!--thu it be.
within half an hour after I have send the poor girl down for my 
breakfast, that bold creature Betty Barnes, my sister's confidant and 
servant, (if a favourite maid and confidant can be deem a servant,) 
come up.
what, Miss, will you please to have for breakfast?
I be surprised. what will I have for breakfast, betty!--how!--what!
--how come it!--Then I name Hannah. I could not tell what to say.
donot be surprised, miss:--but youwill see Hannah no more in this 
house.
God forbid!--is any harm come to hannah?--what! what be the matter 
with Hannah?
why, Miss, the short and the long be this: your papa and mamma think 
Hannah have staid long enough in the house to do mischief; and so she 
be order to troop [that be the confident creature's word]; and I be 
direct to wait upon you in her stead.
I burst into tear. I have no service for you, Betty Barnes; none at 
all. but where be Hannah? cannot I speak with the poor girl? I owe 
her half a year's wage. may I not see the honest creature, and pay 
she her wage? I may never see she again perhaps; for they be 
resolve to break my heart.
and they think you be resolve to break theirs: so tit for tat, Miss.
Impertinent I call she; and ask she, if it be upon such 
confident term that her service be to begin.
I be so very earnest to see the poor maid, that (to oblige I, as she 
say) she go down with my request.
the worthy creature be as earnest to see I; and the favour be 
grant in presence of Shorey and Betty.
I thank she, when she come up, for her past service to I.
her heart be ready to break. and she begin to vindicate her fidelity 
and love; and disclaim any mischief she have ever make.
I tell she, that those who occasion her be turn out of my 
service, make no question of her integrity: that her dismission be 
intend for an indignity to I: that I be very sorry to be oblige 
to part with she, and hop she would meet with as good a service.
never, never, wring her hand, should she meet with a mistress she 
love so well. and the poor creature run on in my praise, and in 
profession of love to I.
we be all apt, you know, my dear, to praise our benefactor, because 
they be our benefactor; as if every body do right or wrong, as they 
oblige or disoblige we. but this good creature deserve to be 
kindly treat; so I could have no merit in favour one whom it 
would have be ungrateful not to distinguish.
I give she a little linen, some lace, and other odd thing; and 
instead of four pound which be due to she, ten guineas: and say, 
if ever I be again allow to be my own mistress, I would think of 
she in the first place.
Betty enviously whisper Shorey upon it.
Hannah tell I, before their face, have no other opportunity, that 
she have be examine about letter to I, and from I: and that she 
have give her pocket to Miss Harlowe, who look into they, and put 
her finger in her stay, to satisfy herself that she have not any.
she give I an account of the number of my pheasant and bantam; and 
I say, they should be my own care twice or thrice a day.
we weep over each other at part. the girl pray for all the 
family.
to have so good a servant so disgracefully dismiss, be very cruel: 
and I could not help say that these method might break my heart, 
but not any other way answer the end of the author of my disgrace.
Betty, with a very saucy fleer, say to Shorey, there would be a trial 
of skill about that she fancy. but I take no notice of it. if this 
wench think that I have rob her young mistress of a lover, as you 
say she have give out, she may believe that it be some degree of merit 
in herself to be impertinent to I.
thus have I be force to part with my faithful Hannah. if you can 
command the good creature to a place worthy of she, pray do for my 
sake.
LETTER XXIV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
MONDAY, NEAR 12 O'CLOCK.
the enclose letter be just now deliver to I. my brother have 
carry all his point.
I send you also the copy of my answer. no more at this time can I 
write!--
MONDAY, MAR. 6.
MISS CLARY,
by command of your father and mother I write expressly to forbid you 
to come into their presence, or into the garden when they be there: 
nor when they be not there, but with Betty Banes to attend you; 
except by particular license or command.
on their blessing, you be forbid likewise to correspond with the 
vile Lovelace; as it be well known you do by mean of your sly 
Hannah. whence her sudden discharge. as be fit.
neither be you to correspond with Miss Howe; who have give herself 
high air of late; and might possibly help on your correspondence with 
that detest libertine. nor, in short, with any body without leave.
you be not to enter into the presence of either of your uncle, 
without their leave first obtain. it be a mercy to you, after such 
a behaviour to your mother, that your father refuse to see you.
you be not to be see in any apartment of the house you so lately 
govern as you please, unless you be command down.
in short, you be strictly to confine yourself to your chamber, except 
now and then, in Betty Barnes's sight (as aforesaid) you take a 
morning or evening turn in the garden: and then you be to go 
directly, and without stop at any apartment in the way, up or down 
the back stair, that the sight of so perverse a young creature may 
not add to the pain you have give every body.
the hourly threatening of your fine fellow, as well as your own 
unheard-of obstinacy, will account to you for all this. what a hand 
have the good and most indulgent of mother have with you, who so long 
plead for you, and undertake for you; even when other, from the 
manner of your set out, despair of move you!--what must your 
perverseness have be, that such a mother can give you up! she 
think it right so to do: nor will take you to favour, unless you make 
the first step, by a compliance with your duty.
as for myself, whom perhaps you think hardly of [in very good company, 
if you do, that be my sole consolation]; I have advise, that you may 
be permit to pursue your own inclination, (some people need no 
great punishment than such a permission,) and not to have the house 
encumber by one who must give they the more pain for the necessity 
she have lay they under of avoid the sight of she, although in it.
if any thing I have write appear severe or harsh, it be still in 
your power (but perhaps will not always be so) to remedy it; and that 
by a single word.
Betty Barnes have order to obey you in all point consistent with her 
duty to those whom you owe it, as well as she.
JA. HARLOWE.
to JAMES HARLOWE, JUNIOR, ESQ.
SIR,
I will only say, that you may congratulate yourself on have so far 
succeed in all your view, that you may report what you please of 
I, and I can no more defend myself, than if I be dead. yet one 
favour, nevertheless, I will beg of you. it be this--that you will 
not occasion more severity, more disgrace, that be necessary for 
carry into execution your further design, whatever they be, 
against
your unhappy sister,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER XXV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
TUESDAY, MARCH 7.
by my last deposit, you will see how I be drive, and what a poor 
prisoner I am.--No regard have to my reputation. the whole matter be 
now before you. can such measure be suppose to soften?--but surely 
they can only mean to try and frighten I into my brother's views!--
all my hope be, to be able to weather this point till my cousin Morden 
come from Florence; and he be soon expect: yet, if they be 
determine upon a short day, I doubt he will not be here in time 
enough to save I.
it be plain by my brother's letter, that my mother have not spar I, 
in the report she be pleased to make of the conference between 
herself and I: yet she be pleased to hint to I, that my brother have 
view which she would have have I try to disappoint. but indeed she 
have engage to give a faithful account of what be to pass between 
herself and I: and it be, doubtless, much more eligible to give up a 
daughter, than to disoblige a husband, and every other person of the 
family.
they think they have do every thing by turn away my poor Hannah: 
but as long as the liberty of the garden, and my poultry-visit, be 
allow I, they will be mistake.
I ask Mrs. Betty, if she have any order to watch or attend I; or 
whether I be to ask her leave whenever I should be dispose to walk 
in the garden, or to go feed my bantams?--lord bless she! what could I 
mean by such a question! yet she own, that she have hear, that I 
be not to go into the garden, when my father, mother, or uncle be 
there.
however, as it behove I to be assure on this head, I go down 
directly, and staid an hour, without question or impediment; and yet a 
good part of the time, I walk under and in sight, as I may say, of 
my brother's study window, where both he and my sister happen to be. 
and I be sure they see I, by the loud mirth they affect, by way of 
insult, as I suppose.
so this part of my restraint be doubtless a stretch of the authority 
give he. the enforcing of that may perhaps come next. but I hope 
not.
TUESDAY NIGHT.
since I write the above, I venture to send a letter by Shorey to my 
mother. I desire she to give it into her own hand, when nobody be 
by.
I shall enclose a copy of it. you will see that I would have it 
thought, that now Hannah be go, I have no way to correspond out of 
the house. I be far from think all I do right. I be afraid this 
be a little piece of art, that be not so. but this be an 
afterthought. the letter go first.
HONOURED MADAM,
have acknowledge to you, that I have receive letter from Mr. 
Lovelace full of resentment, and that I answer they purely to 
prevent further mischief, and have shew you copy of my answer, 
which you do not disapprove of, although you think fit, after you 
have read they, to forbid I any further correspondence with he, I 
think it my duty to acquaint you, that another letter from he have 
since come to my hand, in which he be very earnest with I to permit 
he to wait on my papa, or you, or my two uncle, in a pacific way, 
accompany by Lord M.: on which I beg your command.
I own to you, Madam, that have not the prohibition be renew, and 
have not Hannah be so suddenly dismiss my service, I should have 
make the less scruple to have write an answer, and to have command 
she to convey it to he, with all speed, in order to dissuade he from 
these visit, lest any thing should happen on the occasion that my 
heart ache but to think of.
and here I cannot but express my grief, that I should have all the 
punishment and all the blame, who, as I have reason to think, have 
prevent great mischief, and have not be the occasion of any. for, 
Madam, could I be suppose to govern the passion of either of the 
gentlemen?--Over the one indeed I have have some little influence, 
without give he hitherto any reason to think he have fasten an 
obligation upon I for it.--over the other, who, Madam, have any?--i be 
grieve at heart, to be oblige to lay so great a blame at my 
brother's door, although my reputation and my liberty be both to be 
sacrifice to his resentment and ambition. may not, however, so deep 
a sufferer be permit to speak out?
this communication be as voluntarily make, as dutifully intend, I 
humbly presume to hope, that I shall not be require to produce the 
letter itself. I cannot either in honour or prudence do that, because 
of the vehemence of his style; for have hear [not, I assure you, by 
my mean, or through Hannah's] of some part of the harsh treatment I 
have meet with; he think himself entitle to place it to his own 
account, by reason of speech throw out by some of my relation, 
equally vehement.
if I do not answer he, he will be make desperate, and think himself 
justify (think I shall not think he so) in resent the 
treatment he complain of: if I do, and if, in compliment to I, he 
forbear to resent what he think himself entitle to resent; be 
pleased, Madam, to consider the obligation he will suppose he lay I 
under.
if I be as strongly prepossess in his favour as be suppose, I 
should not have wish this to be consider by you. and permit I, 
as a still further proof that I be not prepossess, to beg of you to 
consider, whether, upon the whole, the proposal I make, of declare 
for the single life (which I will religiously adhere to) be not the 
good way to get rid of his pretension with honour. to renounce he, 
and not be allow to aver, that I will never be the other man's, will 
make he conclude (drive as I be drive) that I be determine in that 
other man's favour.
if this have not its due weight, my brother's strange scheme must be 
try, and I will resign myself to my destiny with all the 
acquiescence that shall be grant to my prayer. and so leave the 
whole to your own wisdom, and whether you choose to consult my papa 
and uncle upon this humble application, or not; or whether I shall be 
allow to write an answer to Mr. Lovelace, or not [and if allow to 
do so, I beg your direction by whom to send it]; I remain,
Honoured Madam,
your unhappy, but ever dutiful daughter,
CL. HARLOWE.
WEDNESDAY MORNING.
I have just receive an answer to the enclose letter. my mother, you 
will observe, have order I to burn it: but, as you will have it in 
your safekeeping, and nobody else will see it, her end will be equally 
answer, as if it be burn. it have neither date nor 
superscription.
CLARISSA,
say not all the blame and all the punishment be yours. I be as much 
blame, and as much punish, as you be; yet be more innocent. when 
your obstinacy be equal to any other person's passion, blame not your 
brother. we judge right, that Hannah carry on your 
correspondencie. now she be go, and you cannot write [we think you 
cannot] to Miss Howe, nor she to you, without our knowledge, one cause 
of uneasiness and jealousy be over.
I have no dislike of Hannah. I do not tell she so; because somebody 
be within hearing when she desire to pay her duty to I at go. I 
give she a caution, in a raise voice, to take care, wherever she go 
to live next, if there be any young lady, how she make party, 
and assist in clandestine correspondencie. but I slide two guineas 
into her hand: nor be I angry to hear that you be still more 
bountiful to she. so much for Hannah.
I donot know what to write, about your answer that man of violence. 
what can you think of it, that such a family as ours, should have such 
a rod hold over it?--For my part, I have not own that I know you 
have correspond. by your last boldness to I [an astonishing one it 
be, to pursue before Mr. Solmes the subject I be force to break 
from above-stair!] you may, as far as I know, plead, that you have my 
countenance for your correspondence with he; and so add to the 
uneasiness between your father and I. you be once my comfort, 
Clarissa; you make all my hardship tolerable:--But now!--However, 
nothing, it be plain, can move you; and I will say no more on that 
head: for you be under your father's discipline now; and he will 
neither be prescribe to, nor entreat.
I should have be glad to see the letter you tell I of, as I see the 
rest. you say, both honour and prudence forbid you to shew it to I.
--O Clarissa! what think you of receive letter that honour and 
prudence forbid you to shew to a mother!--But it be not for I to see 
it, if you would choose to shew it I. I will not be in your secret. 
I will not know that you do correspond. and, as to an answer, take 
your own method. but let he know it will be the last you will 
write. and, if you do write, I willnot see it: so seal it up (if you 
do) and give it to Shorey; and she--yet do not think I give you 
license to write.
we will be upon no condition with he, nor will you be allow to be 
upon any. your father and uncle would have no patience be he to 
come. what have you to do to oblige he with your refusal of Mr. 
Solmes?--Will not that refusal be to give he hope? and while he have 
any, can we be easy or free from his insult? be even your brother 
in fault, as that fault cannot be conquer, be a sister to carry on a 
correspondence that shall endanger her brother? but your father have 
give his sanction to your brother's dislikes, your uncle', and every 
body's!--no matter to whom owe.
as to the rest, you have by your obstinacy put it out of my power to 
do any thing for you. your father take it upon himself to be 
answerable for all consequence. you must not therefore apply to I 
for favour. I shall endeavour to be only an observer: happy, if I 
could be an unconcerned one!--while I have power, you would not let I 
use it as I would have use it. your aunt have be force to engage 
not to interfere but by your father's direction. youwill have severe 
trial. if you have any favour to hope for, it must be from the 
mediation of your uncle. and yet, I believe, they be equally 
determine: for they make it a principle, [alas! they never have 
child!] that that child, who in marriage be not govern by her 
parent, be to be give up as a lose creature!
I charge you, let not this letter be find. burn it. there be too 
much of the mother in it, to a daughter so unaccountably obstinate.
write not another letter to I. I can do nothing for you. but you 
can do every thing for yourself.
***
now, my dear, to proceed with my melancholy narrative.
after this letter, you will believe, that I could have very little 
hope, that an application directly to my father would stand I in any 
stead: but I think it become I to write, be it but to acquit 
myself to myself, that I have leave nothing unattempte that have the 
least likelihood to restore I to his favour. accordingly I write to 
the follow effect:
I presume not, I say, to argue with my papa; I only beg his mercy and 
indulgence in this one point, on which depend my present, and perhaps 
my future, happiness; and beseech he not to reprobate his child for 
an aversion which it be not in her power to conquer. I beg, that I 
may not be sacrifice to project, and remote contingency. I 
complain of the disgrace I suffer in this banishment from his 
presence, and in be confine to my chamber. in every thing but 
this one point, I promise implicit duty and resignation to his will. 
I repeat my offer of a single life; and appeal to he, whether I have 
ever give he cause to doubt my word. I beg to be admit to his, 
and to my mamma's, presence, and that my conduct may be under their 
own eye: and this with the more earnestness, as I have too much reason 
to believe that snare be lay for I; and taunting and reviling 
use on purpose to make a handle of my word against I, when I be not 
permit to speak in my own defence. I conclude with hoping, that my 
brother's instigation may not rob an unhappy child of her father.
***
this be the answer, send without superscription, and unseal, 
although by Betty Barnes, who deliver it with an air, as if she know 
the content.
WEDNESDAY.
I write, perverse girl; but with all the indignation that your 
disobedience deserve. to desire to be forgive a fault you own, and 
yet resolve to persevere in, be a boldness, no more to be equal, 
than pass over. it be my authority you defy. your reflection upon 
a brother, that be an honour to we all, deserve my utmost resentment. 
I see how light all relationship sit upon you. the cause I guess at, 
too. I cannot bear the reflection that naturally arise from this 
consideration. your behaviour to your too-indulgent and too-fond 
mother----But, I have no patience--continue banish from my presence, 
undutiful as you be, till you know how to conform to my will. 
ingrateful creature! your letter but upbraid I for my past
indulgence. write no more to I, till you can distinguish well; and 
till you be convinced of your duty to
a JUSTLY incensed FATHER.
***
this angry letter be accompany by one from my mother, unseal, and 
unsuperscribe also. those who take so much pain to confederate 
every one against I, I make no doubt, oblige she to bear her 
testimony against the poor girl.
my mother's letter be a repetition of some of the severe thing 
that pass between herself and I, of which I have already inform 
you, I shall not need to give you the content--only thus far, that 
she also praise my brother, and blame I for my freedom with he.
LETTER XXVI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY MORN., MARCH 9.
I have another letter from Mr. Lovelace, although I have not answer 
his former.
this man, somehow or other, know every thing that pass in our 
family. my confinement; Hanna's dismission; and more of the 
resentment and resolution of my father, uncle, and brother, than I 
can possibly know, and almost as soon as the thing happen, which he 
tell I of. he cannot come at these intelligencie fairly.
he be excessively uneasy upon what he hear; and his expression, both 
of love to I, and resentment to they, be very fervent. he solicit 
I, 'to engage my honour to he never to have Mr. Solmes.'
I think I may fairly promise he that I will not.
he beg, 'that I will not think he be endeavour to make to himself 
a merit at any man's expense, since he hop to obtain my favour on 
the foot of his own; nor that he seek to intimidate I into a 
consideration for he. but declare, that the treatment he meet with 
from my family be of such a nature, that he be perpetually reproach 
for not resent it; and that as well by Lord M. and Lady Sarah, and 
Lady Betty, as by all his other friend: and if he must have no hope 
from I, he cannot answer for what his despair will make he do.'
indeed, he say, 'his relation, the lady particularly, advise he 
to have recourse to a legal remedy: but how, he ask, can a man of 
honour go to law for verbal abuse give by people entitle to wear 
sword?'
you see, my dear, that my mother seem as apprehensive of mischief as 
myself; and have indirectly offer to let Shorey carry my answer to 
the letter he send I before.
he be full of the favour of the lady of his family to I: to whom, 
nevertheless, I be personally a stranger; except, that I once see Miss 
Patty Montague at Mrs. Knolly's.
it be natural, I believe, for a person to be the more desirous of 
make new friend, in proportion as she lose the favour of old one. 
yet have I rather appear amiable in the eye of my own relation, and 
in your eye, than in those of all the world besides--but these four 
lady of his family have such excellent character, that one cannot 
but wish to be think well of by they. cannot there be a way to find 
out, by Mrs. Fortescue's mean, or by Mr. Hickman, who have some 
knowledge of Lord M. [covertly, however,] what their opinion be of 
the present situation of thing in our family; and of the little 
likelihood there be, that ever the alliance once approve of by they, 
can take effect?
I cannot, for my own part, think so well of myself, as to imagine, 
that they can wish their kinsman to persevere in his view with regard 
to I, through such contempt and discouragements.--not that it would 
concern I, should they advise he to the contrary. by my Lord's 
sign Mr. Lovelace's former letter; by Mr. Lovelace's assurance of 
the continued favour of all his relation; and by the report of 
other; I seem still to stand high in their favour. but, methink, I 
should be glad to have this confirm to I, as from themselves, by the 
lip of an indifferent person; and the rather, because of their 
fortune and family; and take it amiss (as they have reason) to be 
include by our in the contempt throw upon their kinsman.
Curiosity at present be all my motive: nor will there ever, I hope, be 
a strong, notwithstanding your questionable throb--even be the 
merit of Mr. Lovelace much great than they be.
***
I have answer his letter. if he take I at my word, I shall need 
to be less solicitous for the opinion of his relation in my favour: 
and yet one would be glad to be well thought of by the worthy.
this be the substance of my letter:
'I express my surprise at his knowing (and so early) all that pass 
here.'
I assure he, 'that be there not such a man in the world as himself, 
I would not have Mr. Solmes.'
I tell he, 'that to return, as I understand he do, defiance for 
defiance, to my relation, be far from be a proof with I, either 
of his politeness, or of the consideration he pretend to have for I.
'that the moment I hear he visit any of my friend without their 
consent, I will make a resolution never to see he more, if I can help 
it.'
I apprize he, 'that I be connive at in send this letter (although 
no one have see the content) provide it shall be the last I will 
ever write to he: that I have more than once tell he, that the single 
life be my choice; and this before Mr. Solmes be introduce as a 
visitor in our family: that Mr. Wyerley, and other gentleman, know it 
to be my choice, before himself be acquaint with any of we: that I 
have never be induce to receive a line from he on the subject, but 
that I think he have not act ungenerously by my brother; and yet 
have not be so handsomely treat by my friend, as he might have 
expect: but that have he even my friend on his side, I should have 
very great objection to he, be I to get over my choice of a single 
life, so really preferable to I as it be; and that I should have 
declare as much to he, have I not regard he as more than a common 
visiter. on all these account, I desire, that the one more letter, 
which I will allow he to deposit in the usual place, may be the very 
last; and that only, to acquaint I with his acquiescence that it 
shall be so; at least till happy time.'
this last I put in that he may not be quite desperate. but, if he 
take I at my word, I shall be rid of one of my tormentor.
I have promise to lay before you all his letter, and my answer: I 
repeat that promise: and be the less solicitous, for that reason, to 
amplify upon the content of either. but I cannot too often express 
my vexation, to be drive to such streight and difficulty, here at 
home, as oblige I to answer letter, (from a man I have not absolutely 
intend to encourage, and to whom I have really great objection,) 
fill as his be with such warm protestation, and write to I with 
a spirit of expectation.
for, my dear, you never know so bold a supposer. as commentator find 
beauty in an author, to which the author perhaps be a strange; so 
he sometimes compliment I in high strain of gratitude for favour, 
and for a consideration, which I never design he; insomuch that I 
be frequently under a necessity of explain away the attributed 
goodness to he, which, if I shewed, I should have the less opinion of 
myself.
in short, my dear, like a restiff horse, (as I have hear describe by 
sportsman,) he pain one's hand, and half disjoint one's arm, to 
rein he in. and, when you see his letter, you must form no judgment 
upon they, till you have read my answer. if you do, you will indeed 
think you have cause to attribute self-deceit, and throb, and glow, 
to your friend: and yet, at other time, the contradictory nature 
complain, that I shew he as little favour, and my friend as much 
inveteracy, as if, in the rencontre betwixt my brother and he, he have 
be the aggressor; and as if the catastrophe have be as fatal, as it 
might have be.
if he have a design by this conduct (sometimes complain of my 
shyness, at other exalt in my imaginary favour) to induce I at 
one time to acquiesce with his compliment; at another to be more 
complaisant for his complaint; and if the contradiction be not the 
effect of his inattention and giddiness; I shall think he as deep and 
as artful (too probably, as practise) a creature, as ever live; and 
be I to be sure of it, should hate he, if possible, bad than I do 
solme.
but enough for the present of a creature so very various.
LETTER XXVII
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY NIGHT, MARCH 9.
I have not patience with any of the people you be with. I know not 
what to advise you to do. how do you know that you be not punishable 
for be the cause, though to your own loss, that the will of your 
grandfather be not comply with?--will be sacred thing, child. 
you see, that they, even they, think so, who imagine they suffer by a 
will, through the distinction pay you in it. 
I allow of all your noble reasoning for what you do at the time: 
but, since such a charming, such a generous instance of filial duty be 
to go thus unrewarded, why should you not resume?
your grandfather know the family-fail. he know what a noble spirit 
you have to do good. he himself, perhaps, [excuse I, my dear,] have 
do too little in his life-time; and therefore he put it in your 
power to make up for the defect of the whole family. be it to I, 
I would resume it. indeed I would.
you will say, you cannot do it, while you be with they. I donot know 
that. do you think they can use you bad than they do? and be it 
not your right? and do they not make use of your own generosity to 
oppress you? your uncle Harlowe be one trustee; your cousin Morden be 
the other: insist upon your right to your uncle; and write to your 
cousin Morden about it. this, I dare say, will make they alter their 
behaviour to you.
your insolent brother--what have he to do to controul you?--Were it I 
[I wish it be for one month, and no more] Iwould shew he the 
difference. I would be in my own mansion, pursue my charming 
scheme, and make all around I happy. I would set up my own 
chariot. I would visit they when they deserve it. but when my 
brother and sister give themselves air, I would let they know, that I 
be their sister, and not their servant: and, if that do not do, I 
would shut my gate against they; and bid they go and be company for 
each other.
it must be confess, however, that this brother and sister of your, 
judge as such narrow spirit will ever judge, have some reason for 
treat you as they do. it must have long be a mortification to 
they (set disappointed love on her side, and avarice on his, out of 
the question) to be so much eclipse by a young sister. such a sun 
in a family, where there be none but faint twinkler, how could they 
bear it! why, my dear, they must look upon you as a prodigy among 
they: and prodigy, you know, though they obtain our admiration, 
never attract our love. the distance between you and they be immense. 
their eye ache to look up at you. what shade do your full day of 
merit cast upon they! can you wonder, then, that they should embrace 
the first opportunity that offer, to endeavour to bring you down to 
their level?
depend upon it, my dear, you will have more of it, and more still, as 
you bear it.
as to this odious solme, I wonder not at your aversion to he. it be 
needless to say any thing to you, who have so sincere any antipathy to 
he, to strengthen your dislike: yet, who can resist her own talent? 
one of mine, as I have heretofore say, be to give an ugly likeness. 
shall I indulge it?--i will. and the rather, as, in do so, you 
will have my opinion in justification of your aversion to he, and in 
approbation of a steadiness that I ever admire, and must for ever 
approve of, in your temper.
'I be twice in this wretch's company. at one of the time your 
Lovelace be there. I need not mention to you, who have such a pretty 
curiosity, (though at present, only a curiosity, you know,) the 
unspeakable difference.
'Lovelace entertain the company in his lively gay way, and make 
every body laugh at one of his story. it be before this creature 
be think of for you. solme laugh too. it be, however, his 
laugh: for his first three year, at least, I imagine, must have be 
one continual fit of crying; and his muscle have never yet be able 
to recover a risible tone. his very smile [you never see he smile, I 
believe; never at least give he cause to smile] be so little natural 
to his feature, that it appear to he as hideous as the grin of a 
man in malice.
'I take great notice of he, as I do of all the noble lord of the 
creation, in their peculiarity; and be disgusted, nay, shock at 
he, even then. I be glad, I remember, on that particular occasion, 
to see his strange feature recover their natural gloominess; 
though they do this but slowly, as if the muscle which contribute 
to his distortion, have turn upon rusty spring.
'what a dreadful thing must even the love of such a husband be! for 
my part, be I his wife! (but what have I do to myself, to make 
such a supposition?) I should never have comfort but in his absence, 
or when I be quarrel with he. a splenetic woman, who must have 
somebody to find fault with, might indeed be bring to endure such a 
wretch: the sight of he would always furnish out the occasion, and 
all her servant, for that reason, and for that only, would have cause 
to blame their master. but how grievous and apprehensive a thing it 
must be for his wife, have she the least degree of delicacy, to catch 
herself in have do something to oblige he?
'so much for his person. as to the other half of he, he be say to 
be an insinuate, creep mortal to any body he hop to be a gainer 
by: an insolent, overbear one, where he have no such view: and be 
not this the genuine spirit of meanness? he be report to be 
spiteful and malicious, even to the whole family of any single person 
who have once disoblige he; and to his own relation most of all. I 
be tell, that they be none of they such wretch as himself. this 
may be one reason why he be for disinherit they.
'my Kitty, from one of his domestic, tell I, that his tenant hate 
he: and that he never have a servant who speak well of he. vilely 
suspicious of their wrong he (probably from the badness of his own 
heart) he be always change.
'his pocket, they say, be continually cram with key: so that, 
when he would treat a guest, (a friend he have not out of your family), 
he be half as long puzzle which be which, as his niggardly treat 
might be conclude in. and if it be wine, he always fetch it 
himself. nor have he much trouble in do so; for he have very few 
visiter--only those, whom business or necessity bring: for a 
gentleman who can help it, would rather be benight, than put up at 
his house.'
yet this be the man they have find out (for consideration as sordid 
as those he be govern by) for a husband, that be to say, for a lord 
and master, for Miss Clarissa Harlowe!
but, perhaps, he may not be quite so miserable as he be represent. 
character extremely good, or extremely bad, be seldom justly give. 
Favour for a person will exalt the one, as disfavour will sink the 
other. but your uncle Antony have tell my mother, who object to his 
covetousness, that it be intend to tie he up, as he call it, to 
your own term; which would be with a hempen, rather than a 
matrimonial, cord, I dare say. but, be not this a plain indication, 
that even his own recommender think he a mean creature; and that he 
must be article with--perhaps for necessary? but enough, and too 
much, of such a wretch as this!--you must not have he, my dear,--that 
I be clear in--though not so clear, how you will be able to avoid it, 
except you assert the independence to which your estate give you a 
title.
***
here my mother break in upon I. she want to see what I have 
write. I be silly enough to read Solmes's character to she.
she own, that the man be not the most desirable of man; and that he 
have not the happy appearance: but what, say she, be person in a 
man? and I be chidden for set you against comply with your 
father's will. then follow a lecture on the preference to be give 
in favour of a man who take care to discharge all his obligation to 
the world, and to keep all together, in opposition to a spendthrift or 
profligate. a fruitful subject you know, whether any particular 
person be mean by it, or not.
why will these wise parent, by say too much against the person 
they dislike, put one upon defend they? Lovelace be not a 
spendthrift; owe not obligation to the world; though, I doubt not, 
profligate enough. then, put one upon do such but common 
justice, we must need be prepossess, truly!--And so perhaps we be 
put upon curiosity first, that be to say, how such a one or his 
friend may think of one: and then, but too probably, come in a 
distinguish preference, or something that look exceedingly like 
it.
my mother charge I at last, to write that side over again.--But 
excuse I, my good Mamma! I would not have the character lose upon 
any consideration; since my vein run freely into it: and I never write 
to please myself, but I please you. a very good reason why--we have 
but one mind between we--only, that sometimes you be a little too 
grave, methink; I, no doubt, a little too flippant in your opinion.
this difference in our temper, however, be probably the reason that 
we love one another so well, that in the word of Norris, no third 
love can come in betwixt. since each, in the other's eye, have 
something amiss, and each love the other well enough to bear be 
tell of it (and the rather perhaps as neither wish to mend it); this 
take off a good deal from that rivalry which might encourage a little 
(if not a great deal) of that latent spleen, which in time might rise 
into envy, and that into ill-will. so, my dear, if this be the case, 
let each keep she fault, and much good may do she with it: and what an 
hero or heroine must he or she be, who can conquer a constitutional 
fault? let it be avarice, as in some I dare not name: let it be 
gravity, as in my good friend: or let it be flippancy, as in--I need 
not say whom.
it be proper to acquaint you, that I be oblige to comply with my 
mother's curiosity, [my mother have her share, her full share, of 
curiosity, my dear,] and to let she see here-and-there some passage 
in your letters--
I be break in upon--but I will tell you by-and-by what pass between 
my mother and I on this occasion--and the rather, as she have her 
GIRL, her favourite HICKMAN, and your LOVELACE, all at once in her 
eye, in her part of the conversation.
thus it be.
'I cannot but think, Nancy, say she, after all, that there be a 
little hardship in Miss Harlowe's case: and yet (as her mother say) 
it be a grating thing to have a child, who be always note for her 
duty in small point, to stand in opposition to her parent' will in 
the great; yea, in the great of all. and now, to middle the 
matter between both, it be pity, that the man they favour have not that 
sort of merit which a person of a mind so delicate as that of Miss 
Harlowe might reasonably expect in a husband.--but then, this man be 
surely preferable to a libertine: to a libertine too, who have have a 
duel with her own brother; father and mother must think so, be it 
not for that circumstance--and it be strange if they do not know 
well.'
and so they must, think I, from their experience, if no little dirty 
view give they also that prepossession in one man's favour, which 
they be so apt to censure their daughter for have in another's--
and if, as I may add in your case, they have no creep, old, musty 
uncle antony to strengthen their prepossession, as he do my 
mother's. poor, creep, positive soul, what have such an old 
bachelor as he to do, to prate about the duty of child to 
parent; unless he have a notion that parent owe some to their 
child? but your mother, by her indolent meekness, let I call it, 
have spoil all the three brother.
'but you see, child, proceed my mother, what a different behaviour 
mine be to you. I recommend to you one of the sober, yet politest, 
man in england--'
I think little of my mother's politest, my dear. she judge of honest 
Hickman for her daughter, as she would have do, I suppose, twenty 
year ago, for herself.
'of a good family, continue my mother; a fine, clear, and improve 
estate [a prime consideration with my mother, as well as with some 
other folk, whom you know]: and I beg and I pray you to encourage 
he: at least not to use he the bad, for his be so obsequious to 
you.'
yes, indeed! to use he kindly, that he may treat I familiarly--but 
distance to the man-wretch be good--I say.
'yet all will hardly prevail upon you to do as I would have you. what 
would you say, be I to treat you as Miss Harlowe's father and mother 
treat she? 
'what would I say, Madam!--Thatbe easily answer. I would say 
nothing. can you think such usage, and to such a young lady, be to be 
bear?
'come, come, Nancy, be not so hasty: you have hear but one side; and 
that there be more to be say be plain, by your reading to I but 
part of her letter. they be her parent. they must know well. 
Miss Harlowe, as fine a child as she be, must have do something, 
must have say something, (you know how they love she,) to make they 
treat she thus.
'but if she should be blameless, Madam, how do your own supposition 
condemn they?'
then come up Solmes's great estate; his good management of it--'a 
little too NEAR indeed,' be the word!--[o how money-lover, think 
I, will palliate! yet my mother be a princess in spirit to this 
solme!] 'what strange effect, add she, have prepossession and love 
upon young lady!'
I donot know how it be, my dear; but people take high delight in 
find out folk in love. curiosity beget curiosity. I believe 
thatbe the thing.
she proceed to praise Mr. Lovelace's person, and his qualification 
natural and acquire. but then she would judge as mother will judge, 
and as daughter be very loth to judge: but could say nothing in answer 
to your offer of live single; and break with he--if--if--
[three or four ifbe she make of one good one, if] that could be 
depend on.
but still obedience without reserve, reason what I will, be the burden 
of my mother's song: and this, for my sake, as well as for your.
I must need say, that I think duty to parent be a very meritorious 
excellence. but I bless God I have not your trial. we can all be 
good when we have no temptation nor provocation to the contrary: but 
few young person (who can help themselves too as you can) would bear 
what you bear.
I will now mention all that be upon my mind, in relation to the 
behaviour of your father and uncle, and the rest of they, because I 
would not offend you: but I have now a high opinion of my own 
sagacity, than ever I have, in that I could never cordially love any 
one of your family but yourself. I be not bear to like they. but it 
be my duty to be sincere to my friend: and this will excuse her Anna 
Howe to Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
I ought indeed to have except your mother; a lady to be reverence: 
and now to be pity. what must have be her treatment, to be thus 
subjugate, as I may call it? little do the good old viscount think, 
when he marry his darling, his only daughter, to so well-appear a 
gentleman, and to her own liking too, that she would have be so much 
keep down. another would call your father a tyrant, if I must not: 
all the world that know he, do call he so; and if you love your 
mother, you should not be very angry at the world for take that 
liberty.
yet, after all, I cannot help think, that she be the less to be 
pity, as she may be say (be the gout, or what will, the occasion of 
his moroseness) to have long behave unworthy of her birth and fine 
quality, in yield so much as she yield to encroach spirit 
[you may confine the reflection to your brother, if it will pain you 
to extend it]; and this for the sake of preserve a temporary peace 
to herself; which be the less worth endeavour to preserve, as it 
always produce a strength in the will of other, which subject she 
to an arbitrariness that of course grow, and become establish, upon 
her patience.--And now to give up the most deserving of her child 
(against her judgment) a sacrifice to the ambition and selfishness of 
the least deserving!--but I fly from this subject--have I fear, say 
too much to be forgive--and yet much less than be in my heart to say 
upon the over-meek subject.
Mr. Hickman be expect from London this evening. I have desire he 
to inquire after Lovelace's life and conversation in town. if he have 
not inquire, I shall be very angry with he. donot expect a very 
good account of either. he be certainly an intriguing wretch, and 
full of invention.
upon my word, I most heartily despise that sex! I wish they would let 
our father and mother alone; tease they to tease we with their 
golden promise, and protestation and settlement, and the rest of 
their ostentatious nonsense. how charmingly might you and I live 
together, and despise they all!--but to be cajole, wire-draw, and 
ensnare, like silly bird, into a state of bondage, or vile 
subordination; to be court as princess for a few week, in order 
to be treat as slave for the rest of our life. indeed, my dear, 
as you say of Solmes, I cannot endure them!--but for your relation 
[friend no more will I call they, unworthy as they be even of the 
other name!] to take such a wretch's price as that; and to the cutting 
off of all reversion from his own family:--how must a mind but 
commonly just resist such a measure!
Mr. Hickman shall sound Lord M. upon the subject you recommend. but 
beforehand, I can tell you what he and what his sister will say, when 
they be sound. who would not be proud of such a relation as Miss 
Clarissa Harlowe?--Mrs. Fortescue tell I, that they be all your very 
great admirer.
if I have not be clear enough in my advice about what you shall do, 
let I say, that I can give it in one word: it be only by re-urge 
you to resume. if you do, all the rest will follow.
we be tell here, that Mrs. Norton, as well as your aunt hervey, have 
give her opinion on the implicit side of the question. if she can 
think, that the part she have have in your education, and your own 
admirable talent and acquirement, be to be throw away upon such a 
worthless creature as Solmes, I could heartily quarrel with she. you 
may think I say this to lessen your regard for the good woman. and 
perhaps not wholly without cause, if you do. for, to own the truth, 
methink, I donot love she so well as I should do, do you love she so 
apparently less, that I could be out of doubt, that you love I 
well.
your mother tell you, 'that you will have great trial: that you be 
under your father's discipline.'--the word be enough for I to despise 
they who give occasion for its use.--'that it be out of her power to 
help you!' and again: 'that if you have any favour to hope for, it 
must be by the mediation of your uncle.' I suppose you will write to 
the oddity, since you be forbid to see they. but can it be, that 
such a lady, such a sister, such a wife, such a mother, have no 
influence in her own family? who, indeed, as you say, if this be so, 
would marry, that can live single? my choler be again begin to 
rise. RESUME, my dear: and that be all I will give myself time to say 
far, lest I offend you when I cannot serve you--only this, that I 
be
your truly affectionate friend and servant,
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XXVIII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
FRIDAY, MARCH 10.
you will permit I, my dear, to touch upon a few passage in your last 
letter, that affect I sensibly.
in the first place, you must allow I to say, low as I be in spirit, 
that I be very angry with you, for your reflection on my relation, 
particularly on my father and mother, and on the memory of my 
grandfather. nor, my dear, do your own mother always escape the 
keen edge of your vivacity. one cannot one's self forbear to write or 
speak freely of those we love and honour, when grief from imagined 
hard treatment wring the heart: but it go against one to hear any 
body else take the same liberty. then you have so very strong a 
manner of expression where you take a distaste, that when passion have 
subdue, and I come (upon reflection) to see by your severity what I 
have give occasion for, I cannot help condemn myself.
but least of all can I bear that you should reflect upon my mother. 
what, my dear, if her meekness should not be reward? be the want of 
reward, or the want even of a grateful acknowledgement, a reason for 
we to dispense with what we think our duty? they be my father's 
lively spirit that first make he an interest in her gentle bosom. 
they be the same spirit turn inward, as I have heretofore 
observe,* that make he so impatient when the cruel malady seize 
he. he always love my mother: and would not love and PITY 
excusably, nay laudably, make a good wife (who be an hourly witness 
of his pang, when labour under a paroxysm, and his paroxysm 
become more and more frequent, as well as more and more severe) give 
up her own will, her own liking, to oblige a husband, thus afflict, 
whose love for she be unquestionable?--and if so, be it not too 
natural [human nature be not perfect, my dear] that the husband thus 
humour by the wife, should be unable to bear controul from any body 
else, much less contradiction from his child?
* see Letter V. 
if then you would avoid my high displeasure, you must spare my 
mother: and, surely, you will allow I, with she, to pity, as well as 
to love and honour my father.
I have no friend but you to whom I can appeal, to whom I dare 
complain. unhappily circumstanced as I be, it be but too probable 
that I shall complain, because it be but too probably that I shall 
have more and more cause give I for complaint. but be it your part, 
if I do, to sooth my angry passion, and to soften my resentment; and 
this the rather, as you know what an influence your advice have upon 
I; and as you must also know, that the freedom you take with my 
friend, can have no other tendency, but to weaken the sense of my 
duty to they, without answer any good end to myself.
I cannot help own, however, that I be pleased to have you join with 
I in opinion of the contempt which Mr. Solmes deserve from I. but 
yet, permit I to say, that he be not quite so horrible a creature as 
you make he: as to his person, I mean; for with regard to his mind, 
by all I have hear, you have do he but justice: but you have such 
a talent at an ugly likeness, and such a vivacity, that they sometimes 
carry you out of verisimilitude. in short, my dear, I have know you, 
in more instance than one, sit down resolve to write all that wit, 
rather than strict justice, could suggest upon the give occasion. 
perhaps it may be think, that I should say the less on this 
particular subject, because your dislike of he arise from love to 
I: but should it not be our aim to judge of ourselves, and of every 
thing that affect we, as we may reasonably imagine other people would 
judge of we and of our action?
as to the advice you give, to resume my estate, I be determined not to 
litigate with my father, let what will be the consequence to myself. 
I may give you, at another time, a more particular answer to your 
reasoning on this subject: but, at present, will only observe, that 
it be in my opinion, that Lovelace himself would hardly think I worth
addressing, be he to know this would be my resolution. these man, 
my dear, with all their flattery, look forward to the PERMANENT. 
indeed, it be fit they should. for love must be a very foolish thing 
to look back upon, when it have bring person bear to affluence into 
indigence, and lay a generous mind under obligation and dependence.
you very ingeniously account for the love we bear to one another, from 
the difference in our temper. I own, I should not have think of 
that. there may possibly be something in it: but whether there be or 
not, whenever I be cool, and give myself time to reflect, I will love 
you the well for the correction you give, be as severe as you will 
upon I. spare I not, therefore, my dear friend, whenever you think 
I in the least faulty. I love your agreeable raillery: you know I 
always do: nor, however over-serious you think I, do I ever think 
you flippant, as you harshly call it. one of the first condition of 
our mutual friendship be, each should say or write to the other 
whatever be upon her mind, without any offence to be take: a 
condition, that be indeed indispensable in friendship.
I know your mother would be for implicit obedience in a child. I be 
sorry my case be so circumstanced, that I cannot comply. it would be 
my duty to do so, if I could. you be indeed very happy, that you 
have nothing but your own agreeable, yet whimsical, humour to contend 
with, in the choice she invite you to make of Mr. Hickman. how happy 
I should be, to be treat with so much lenity!--i should blush to 
have my mother say, that she beg and pray I, and all in vain, to 
encourage a man so unexceptionable as Mr. Hickman.
indeed, my beloved Miss Howe, I be ashamed to have your mother say, 
with I in her view, 'what strange effect have prepossession and love 
upon young creature of our sex!' this touch I the more sensibly, 
because you yourself, my dear, be so ready to persuade I into it.
I should be very blamable to endeavour to hide any the least bias upon 
my mind, from you: and I cannot but say--that this man--this Lovelace
--i a man that might be like well enough, if he bear such a 
character as Mr. Hickman bear; and even if there be hope of 
reclaim he. and far still I will acknowledge, that I believe 
it possible that one might be drive, by violent measure, step by 
step, as it be, into something that might be call--I donot know 
what to call it--a conditional kind of liking, or so. but as to the 
word love--justifiable and charming as it be in some case, (that be 
to say, in all the relative, in all the social, and, what be still 
beyond both, in all our superior duty, in which it may be properly 
call divine;) it have, methink, in the narrow, circumscribed, 
selfish, peculiar sense, in which you apply it to I, (the man too so 
little to be approve of for his moral, if all that report say of 
he be true,) no pretty sound with it. treat I as freely as you will 
in all other respect, I will love you, as I have say, the well for 
your friendly freedom. but, methink, I could be glad that you would 
not let this imputation pass so glibly from your pen, or your lip, as 
attributable to one of your own sex, whether I be the person or not: 
since the other must have a double triumph, when a person of your 
delicacy (arm with such contempt of they all, as you would have one 
think) can give up a friend, with an exultation over her weakness, as 
a silly, love-sick creature.
I could make some other observation upon the content of your last 
two letter; but my mind be not free enough at present. the occasion 
for the above stick with I; and I could not help take the early 
notice of they.
have write to the end of my second sheet, I will close this 
letter, and in my next, acquaint you with all that have happen here 
since my last.
LETTER xxix
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SATURDAY, MARCH 11.
I have have such taunt message, and such repeat avowal of ill 
office, bring I from my brother and sister, if I do no comply with 
their will, (deliver, too, with provoke sauciness by Betty 
Barnes,) that I have think it proper, before I enter upon my 
intend address to my uncle, in pursuance of the hint give I in my 
mother's letter, to expostulate a little with they. but I have do 
it in such a manner, as will give you (if you please to take it as you 
have do some part of my former letter) great advantage over I. 
in short, you will have more cause than ever, to declare I far go 
in love, if my reason for the change of my style in these letter, 
with regard to Mr. Lovelace, do not engage your more favourable 
opinion.--For I have think proper to give they their own way: and, 
since they will have it, that I have a preferable regard for Mr. 
Lovelace, I give they cause rather to confirm their opinion than doubt 
it.
these be my reason in brief, for the alteration of my style.
in the first place, they have ground their principal argument for my 
compliance with their will, upon my acknowledgement that my heart be 
free; and so, suppose I give up no preferable person, my opposition 
have the look of downright obstinacy in their eye; and they argue, 
that at worst, my aversion to Solmes be an aversion that may be easily 
surmount, and ought to be surmount in duty to my father, and for 
the promotion of family view.
next, although they build upon this argument in order to silence I, 
they seem not to believe I, but treat I as disgracefully, as if I 
be in love with one of my father's footman: so that my conditional 
willingness to give up Mr. Lovelace have procure I no favour.
in the next place, I cannot but think, that my brother's antipathy to 
Mr. Lovelace be far from be well ground: the man's inordinate 
passion for the sex be the crime that be always rung in my ear: and a 
very great one it be: but, do my brother recriminate upon he thus 
in love to me?--No--his whole behaviour shews I, that that be not his 
principal motive, and that he think I rather in his way than 
otherwise.
it be then the call of justice, as I may say, to speak a little in 
favour of a man, who, although provoke by my brother, do not do he 
all the mischief he could have do he, and which my brother have 
endeavour to do he. it might not be amiss therefore, I think, to 
alarm they a little with apprehension, that the method they be 
take with I be the very reverse of those they should take to 
answer the end they design by they. and after all, what be the 
compliment I make Mr. Lovelace, if I allow it to be think that I do 
really prefer he to such a man as he they terrify I with? then, my 
Miss Howe [conclude I] accuse I of a tameness which subject I to 
insult from my brother: I will keep that dear friend in my eye; and 
for all these consideration, try what a little of her spirit will do
--sit it ever so awkwardly upon I.
in this way of thinking, I write to my brother and sister. this be my 
letter to he.
treat as I be, and, in a great measure, if not wholly, by your 
instigation, Brother, you must permit I to expostulate with you upon 
the occasion. it be not my intention to displease you in what I be 
go to write: and yet I must deal freely with you: the occasion 
call for it.
and permit I, in the first place, to remind you, that I be your 
sister; and not your servant; and that, therefore, the bitter 
reviling and passionate language bring I from you, upon an 
occasion in which you have no reason to prescribe to I, be neither 
worthy of my character to bear, nor of yours to offer.
put the case, that I be to marry the man you dislike: and that he 
be not to make a polite or tender husband, be that a reason for you 
to be an unpolite and disoblige brother?--why must you, Sir, 
anticipate my misfortune, be such a case to happen?--let I tell 
you plainly, that the man who could treat I as a wife, bad than you 
of late have treat I as a sister, must be a barbarous man indeed.
ask yourself, I pray you, Sir, if you would thus have treat your 
sister Bella, have she think fit to receive the address of the man 
so much hat by you?--If not, let I caution you, my Brother, not to 
take your measure by what you think will be bear, but rather by what 
ought to be offer.
how would you take it, if you have a brother, who, in a like case, be 
to act by you, as you do by me?--you cannot but remember what a 
laconic answer you give even to my father, who recommend to you Miss 
Nelly D'Oily--you do not like she, be your word: and that be 
think sufficient.
you must need think, that I cannot but know to whom to attribute my 
disgrace, when I recollect my father's indulgence to I, permit 
I to decline several offer; and to whom, that a common cause be 
endeavour to be make, in favour of a man whose person and manner 
be more exceptional than those of any of the gentleman I have be 
permit to refuse.
I offer not to compare the two man together: nor be there indeed the 
least comparison to be make between they. all the difference to the 
one's disadvantage, if I do, be but one point--of the great 
importance, indeed--but to whom of most importance?--to myself, 
surely, be I to encourage his application: of the least to you. 
nevertheless, if you do not, by your strange politic, unite that man 
and I as joint sufferer in one cause, you shall find I as much 
resolve to renounce he, as I be to refuse the other. I have make an 
overture to this purpose: I hope you will not give I reason to 
confirm my apprehension, that it will be owe to you if it be not 
accept.
it be a sad thing to have it to say, without be conscious of ever 
have give you cause of offence, that I have in you a brother, but 
not a friend.
perhaps you will not condescend to enter into the reason of your late 
and present conduct with a foolish sister. but if politeness, if 
civility, be not due to that character, and to my sex, justice be.
let I take the liberty far to observe, that the principal end of 
a young man's education at the university, be, to learn he to reason 
justly, and to subdue the violence of his passion. I hope, Brother, 
that you will not give room for any body who know we both, to 
conclude, that the toilette have teach the one more of the latter 
doctrine, than the university have teach the other. I be truly sorry 
to have cause to say, that I have hear it often remark, that your 
uncontrouled passion be not a credit to your liberal education.
I hope, Sir, that you will excuse the freedom I have take with you: 
you have give I too much reason for it, and you have take much 
great with I, without reason:--so, if you be offend, ought to 
look at the cause, and not at the effect:--then examine yourself, 
that cause will cease, and there will not be any where a more 
accomplish gentleman than my brother.
Sisterly affection, I do assure you, Sir, (unkindly as you have use 
I,) and not the pertness which of late you have be so apt to impute 
to I, be my motive in this hint. let I invoke your return 
kindness, my only brother! and give I cause, I beseech you, to call 
you my compassionate friend. for I be, and ever will be,
your affectionate sister,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
***
this be my brother's answer.
to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
I know there will be no end of your impertinent scribble, if I donot 
write to you. I write therefore: but, without enter into argument 
with such a conceited and pert preacher and questioner, it be, to 
forbid you to plague I with your quaint nonsense. I know not what 
wit in a woman be good for, but to make her overvalue herself, and 
despise every other person. your, Miss Pert, have set you above your 
duty, and above be teach or prescribe to, either by parent, or 
any body else. but go on, Miss: your mortification will be the 
great; thatbe all, child. it shall, I assure you, if I can make it 
so, so long as you prefer that villainous Lovelace, (who be justly 
hat by all your family) to every body. we see by your letter now 
(what we too justly suspect before), most evidently we see, the hold 
he have get of your forward heart. but the strong the hold, the 
great must be the force (and you shall have enough of that) to tear 
such a miscreant from it. in I, notwithstanding your saucy 
lecturing, and your saucy reflection before, you be sure of a 
friend, as well as of a brother, if it be not your own fault. but if 
you will still think of such a wretch as that Lovelace, never expect 
either friend or brother in
JA. HARLOWE.
***
I will now give you a copy of my letter to my sister; with her answer.
in what, my dear Sister, have I offend you, that instead of 
endeavour to soften my father's anger against I, (as I be sure I 
should have do for you, have my unhappy case be your,) you should, 
in so hard-hearte a manner, join to aggravate not only his 
displeasure, but my motherbe against I. make but my case your own, 
my dear Bella; and suppose you be command to marry Mr. Lovelace, 
(to whom you be believe to have such an antipathy,) would you not 
think it a very grievous injunction?--yet cannot your dislike to Mr. 
Lovelace be great than mine be to Mr. Solmes. nor be love and 
hatred voluntary passion.
my brother may perhaps think it a proof of a manly spirit, to shew 
himself an utter stranger to the gentle passion. we have both hear 
he boast, that he never love with distinction: and, have 
predominate passion, and check in his first attempt, perhaps he 
never will. it be the less wonder, then, raw from the college, so 
lately himself the tutor, that he should set up for a tutor, a 
prescriber to our gentler sex, whose taste and manner be 
differently form: for what, accord to his account, be college, 
but class of tyrant, from the upper student over the low, and 
from they to the tutor?--that he, with such masculine passion should 
endeavour to controul and bear down an unhappy sister, in a case where 
his antipathy, and, give I leave to say, his ambition [once you would 
have allow the latter to be his fault] can be gratify by so do, 
may not be quite so much to be wonder at--but that a sister should 
give up the cause of a sister, and join with he to set her father and 
mother against she, in a case that might have be her own--indeed, my 
Bella, this be not pretty in you.
there be a time that Mr. Lovelace be think reclaimable, and when 
it be far from be deem a censurable view to hope to bring back 
to the path of virtue and honour, a man of his sense and 
understanding. I be far from wish to make the experiment: but 
nevertheless will say, that if I have not a regard for he, the 
disgraceful method take to compel I to receive the address of 
such a man as Mr. Solmes be enough to induce it.
do you, my Sister, for one moment, lie aside all prejudice, and 
compare the two man in their birth, their education, their person, 
their understanding, their manner, their air, and their whole 
deportment; and in their fortune too, take in reversion; and then 
judge of both; yet, as I have frequently offer, I will live single 
with all my heart, if that will do.
I cannot thus live in displeasure and disgrace. I would, if I could, 
oblige all my friend. but will it be just, will it be honest, to 
marry a man I cannot endure? if I have not be use to oppose the 
will of my father, but have always delight to oblige and obey, judge 
of the strength of my antipathy, by the painful opposition I be 
oblige to make, and cannot help it.
Pity then, my dear Bella, my sister, my friend, my companion, my 
adviser, as you use to be when I be happy, and plead for
your ever-affectionate,
CL. HARLOWE.
***
to MISS clary HARLOWE
let it be pretty or not pretty, in your wise opinion, I shall speak my 
mind, I will assure you, both of you and your conduct in relation to 
this detest Lovelace. you be a fond foolish girl with all your 
wisdom. your letter shews that enough in twenty place. and as to 
your cannot of live single, nobody will believe you. this be one of 
your fetch to avoid comply with your duty, and the will of the 
most indulgent parent in the world, as yours have be to you, I be 
sure--though now they see themselves finely requite for it.
we all, indeed, once think your temper soft and amiable: but why be 
it? you never be contradict before: you have always your own way. 
but no soon do you meet with opposition in your wish to throw 
yourself away upon a vile rake, but you shew what you be. you cannot 
love Mr. Solmes! thatbe the pretence; but Sister, Sister, let I tell 
you, that be because Lovelace have get into your fond heart:--a wretch 
hat, justly hat, by we all; and who have dip his hand in the 
blood of your brother: yet he you would make our relation, would you?
I have no patience with you, but for put the case of my liking 
such a vile wretch as he. as to the encouragement you pretend he 
receive formerly from all our family, it be before we know he to be 
so vile: and the proof that have such force upon we, ought to have have 
some upon you:--and would, have you not be a foolish forward girl; as 
on this occasion every body see you be.
o how you run out in favour of the wretch!--His birth, his education, 
his person, his understanding, his manner, his air, his fortune--
reversion too take in to augment the surfeit catalogue! what a 
fond string of lovesick praise be here! and yet you would live 
single--yes, I warrant!--when so many imaginary perfection dance 
before your dazzle eye!--but no more--I only desire, that you will 
not, while you seem to have such an opinion of your wit, think every 
one else a fool; and that you can at pleasure, by your whining 
flourish, make we all dance after your lead.
write as often as you will, this shall be the last answer or notice 
you shall have upon this subject from
ARABELLA HARLOWE.
***
I have in readiness a letter for each of my uncle; and meet in the 
garden a servant of my uncle Harlowe, I give he to deliver accord 
to their respective direction. if I be to form a judgment by the 
answer I have receive from my brother and sister, as above, I must 
not, I doubt, expect any good from those letter. but when I have 
try every expedient, I shall have the less to blame myself for, if 
any thing unhappy should fall out. I will send you copy of both, 
when I shall see what notice they will be think worthy of, if of 
any.
LETTER XXX
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SUNDAY NIGHT, MARCH 12.
this man, this Lovelace, give I great uneasiness. he be extremely 
bold and rash. he be this afternoon at our church--in hope to see 
I, I suppose: and yet, if he have such hope, his usual intelligence 
must have fail he.
Shorey be at church; and a principal part of her observation be upon 
his haughty and proud behaviour when he turn round in the pew where 
he sit to our family-pew. my father and both my uncle be there; so 
be my mother and sister. my brother happily be not.--they all come 
home in disorder. nor do the congregation mind any body but he; it 
be his first appearance there since the unhappy rencounter.
what do the man come for, if he intend to look challenge and 
defiance, as Shorey say he do, and as other, it seem, think he 
do, as well as she? do he come for my sake; and, by behave in 
such a manner to those present of my family, imagine he be do I 
either service or pleasure?--He know how they hate he: nor will he 
take pain, would pain do, to obviate their hatred.
you and I, my dear, have often take notice of his pride; and you have 
rally he upon it; and instead of exculpate himself, he have own 
it: and by own it he have think he have do enough.
for my own part, I think pride in his case an improper subject for 
raillery.--people of birth and fortune to be proud, be so needless, so 
mean a vice!--if they deserve respect, they will have it, without 
require it. in other word, for person to endeavour to gain 
respect by a haughty behaviour, be to give a proof that they mistrust 
their own merit: to make confession that they know that their action 
will not attract it.--distinction or quality may be pride in by those 
to whom distinction or quality be a new thing. and then the 
reflection and contempt which such bring upon themselves by it, be a 
counter-balance.
such add advantage, too, as this man have in his person and mien: 
learn also, as they say he be: such a man to be haughty, to be 
imperious!--the line of his own face at the same time condemn he
--how wholly inexcusable!--proud of what? not of do well: the only 
justifiable pride.--proud of exterior advantages!--must not one be lead 
by such a stop-short pride, as I may call it, in he or she who have 
it, to mistrust the interior? some people may indeed be afraid, that 
if they do not assume, they would be trample upon. a very narrow 
fear, however, since they trample upon themselves, who can fear this. 
but this man must be secure that humility would be an ornament to he.
he have talent indeed: but those talent and his personal advantage 
have be snare to he. it be plain they have. and this shews, 
that, weigh in an equal balance, he would be find greatly want.
have my friend confide as they do at first, in that discretion which 
they do not accuse I of be defective in, I dare say I should have 
find he out: and then should have be as resolute to dismiss he, 
as I be to dismiss other, and as I be never to have Mr. Solmes. 
o that they do but know my heart!--it shall soon burst, than 
voluntarily, uncompelle, undriven, dictate a measure that shall cast 
a slur either upon they, or upon my sex.
excuse I, my dear friend, for these grave soliloquy, as I may call 
they. how have I run from reflection to reflection!--But the occasion 
be recent--they be all in commotion below upon it.
Shorey say, that Mr. Lovelace watch my mother's eye, and bow to 
she: and she return the compliment. he always admire my mother. 
she would not, I believe, have hat he, have she not be bid to hate 
he: and have it not be for the rencounter between he and her only 
son.
Dr. Lewen be at church; and observe, as every one else do, the 
disorder into which Mr. Lovelace's appearance* have put all our family, 
be so good as to engage he in conversation, when the service be 
over, till they be all go to their coach.
* see letter XXXI, for Mr. Lovelace's account of his behaviour and 
intention in his appearance at church.
my uncle have my letter in the morning. they, as well as my father, 
be more and more incense against I, it seem. their answer, if 
they vouchsafe to answer I, will demonstrate, I doubt not, the 
unseasonableness of this rash man's presence at our church.
they be angry also, as I understand, with my mother, for return 
his compliment. what an enemy be hatre, even to the common form of 
civility! which, however, more distinguish the payer of a compliment, 
than the receiver. but they all see, they say, that there be but one 
way to put an end to his insult. so I shall suffer: and in what will 
the rash man have benefit himself, or mend his prospect?
I be extremely apprehensive that this bad than ghost-like appearance 
of his, bode some still bold step. if he come hither (and very 
desirous he be of my leave to come) I be afraid there will be murder. 
to avoid that, if there be no other way, I would most willingly be 
bury alive.
they be all in consultation--upon my letter, I suppose--so they be 
in the morning; which occasion my uncle to be at our church. I 
will send you the copy of those letter, as I promise in my last, 
when I see whether I can give you their answer with they. this 
letter be all--I cannot tell what--the effect of apprehension and 
displeasure at the man who have occasion my apprehension. six line 
would have contain all that be in it to the purpose of my story.
CL. H.
LETTER XXXI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY, MARCH 13.
in vain dost thou* and thy compeer press I to go to town, while I be 
in such an uncertainty as I be in at present with this proud beauty. 
all the ground I have hitherto gain with she be entirely owe to 
her concern for the safety of people whom I have reason to hate.
*these gentleman affect what they call the roman style (to wit, 
the thee and the thou) in their letter: and it be an agree rule 
with they, to take in good part whatever freedom they treat each 
other with, if the passage be write in that style.
write then, thou bidd I, if I will not come. that, indeed, I can 
do; and as well without a subject, as with one. and what follow 
shall be a proof of it.
the lady's malevolent brother have now, as I tell thee at M. Hall, 
introduce another man; the most unpromising in his person and 
quality, the most formidable in his offer, that have yet appear.
this man have by his proposal captivate every soul of the Harlowes--
Soul! do I say--there be not a soul among they but my charmer's: and 
she, withstand they all, be actually confine, and otherwise 
maltreat by a father the most gloomy and positive; at the 
instigation of a brother the most arrogant and selfish. but thou 
know their character; and I will not therefore sully my paper with 
they.
but be it not a confounded thing to be in love with one, who be the 
daughter, the sister, the niece, of a family, I must eternally 
despise? and, the devil of it, that love increase with she--what 
shall I call it?--'tis not scorn:--'ti not pride:--'ti not the 
insolence of an adore beauty:--But 'tis to virtue, it seem, that my 
difficulty be owin; and I pay for not be a sly sinner, an 
hypocrite; for be regardless of my reputation; for permittin 
slander to open its mouth against I. but be it necessary for such a 
one as I, who have be use to carry all before I, upon my own 
term--I, who never inspire a fear, that have not a discernibly-
predominant mixture of love in it, to be a hypocrite?--well say the 
poet:
	he who seem virtuous doe but act a part;
	and shew not his own nature, but his art.
well, but it seem I must practise for this art, if it would succeed 
with this truly-admirable creature; but why practise for it?--cannot I 
indeed reform?--I have but one vice;--have I, jack?--thou know my 
heart, if any man live do. as far as I know it myself, thou 
know it. but 'tis a cursed deceiver; for it have many a time 
impose upon its master--Master, do I say? that I be not now; nor 
have I be from the moment I behold this angel of a woman. prepare 
indeed as I be by her character before I see she: for what a mind 
must that be, which, though not virtuous itself, admire not virtue in 
another?--my visit to Arabella, owe to a mistake of the sister, into 
which, as thou hast hear I say, I be lead by the blunder uncle; 
who be to introduce I (but lately come from abroad) to the divinity, 
as I think; but, instead of she, carry I to a mere mortal. and 
much difficulty have I, so fond and forward my lady! to get off without 
forfeit all with a family I intend should give I a goddess.
I have boast that I be once in love before:--and indeed I think I 
be. it be in my early manhood--with that quality jilt, whose 
infidelity I have vow to revenge upon as many of the sex as shall 
come into my power. I believe, in different clime, I have already 
sacrifice an hecatomb to my Nemesis, in pursuance of this vow. but 
upon recollect what I be then, and compare it with what I find 
myself now, I cannot say that I be ever in love before.
what be it then, dost thou ask I, since the disappointment have such 
effect upon I, when I find myself jilt, that I be hardly keep in 
my senses?--why, Iwill grant thee what, as near as I can remember; for 
it be a great while ago:--It be--egad, Jack, I can hardly tell what 
it be--but a vehement aspiration after a novelty, I think. those 
confound poet, with their terrenely-celestial description, do as 
much with I as the lady: they fire my imagination, and set I upon a 
desire to become a goddess-maker. I must need try my new-fledge 
pinion in sonnet, elogy, and madrigal. I must have a Cynthia, a 
Stella, a Sacharissa, as well as the good of they: dart and flame, 
and the devil know what, must I give to my cupid. I must create 
beauty, and place it where nobody else could find it: and many a time 
have I be at a loss for a subject, when my new-create goddess have 
be kind than it be proper for my plaintive sonnet that she should 
be.
then I find I have a vanity of another sort in my passion: I find 
myself well receive among the woman in general; and I think it a 
pretty lady-like tyranny [I be then very young, and very vain!] to 
single out some one of the sex, to make half a score jealous. and I 
can tell thee, it have its effect: for many an eye have I make to 
sparkle with rival indignation: many a cheek glow; and even many a fan 
have I cause to be snap at a sister-beauty; accompany with a 
reflection perhaps at be see alone with a wild young fellow who 
could not be in private with both at once.
in short, Jack, it be more pride than love, as I now find it, that 
put I upon make such a confounded rout about lose that noble 
varletess. I think she lo9ve I at least as well as I believe I 
love she: nay, I have the vanity to suppose she could not help it. my 
friend be pleased with my choice. they want I to be shackle: 
for early do they doubt my moral, as to the sex. they see, that the 
dancing, the singing, the musical lady be all fond of my company: 
for who [I be in a humour to be vain, I think!]--for who dance, who 
sing, who touch the string, whatever the instrument, with a well 
grace than thy friend?
I have no notion of play the hypocrite so egregiously, as to 
pretend to be blind to qualification which every one see and 
acknowledge. such praise-beget hypocrisy! such affectedly 
disclaim attribute! such contemptible praise-traps!--but yet, 
shall my vanity extend only to personal, such as the gracefulness of 
dress, my debonnaire, and my assurance?--self-teach, self-acquire, 
these!--for my part, I value not myself upon they. thou wilt say, I 
have no cause.--perhaps not. but if I have any thing valuable as to 
intellectual, those be not my own; and to be proud of what a man be 
answerable for the abuse of, and have no merit in the right use of, be 
to strut, like the jay, in borrow plumage.
but to return to my fair jilt. I could not bear, that a woman, who 
be the first that have bind I in silken fetter [they be not iron 
one, like those I now wear] should prefer a coronet to I: and when 
the bird be fly, I set more value upon it, that when I have it safe 
in my cage, and could visit in when I please.
but now be I indeed in love. I can think of nothing, of nobody, but 
the divine Clarissa Harlowe--Harlowe!--How that hat word stick in 
my throat--but I shall give she for it the name of love.*
* Lovelace.
	CLARISSA! o therebe music in the name,
	that, soft'ne I to infant tenderness,
	make my heart spring like the first leap of life!
but couldst thou have believe that I, who think it possible for I to 
favour as much as I can be favour; that I, who for this charming 
creature think of forego the life of honour for the life of 
shackle; could adopt these over-tender line of Otway?
I check myself, and leave the first three line of the following 
of Dryden to the family of whiner, find the working of the passion 
in my stormy soul well express by the three last:
	love various mind do variously inspire:
	he stir in gentle nature gentle fire;
	like that of incense on the alter lay.
	but rag flame tempestuous soul invade:
	a fire which ev'ry windy passion blow;
	with pride it mount, and with revenge it glow.
and with revenge it shall glow!--For, dost thou think, that if it be 
not from the hope, that this stupid family be all combine to do my 
work for I, I would bear their insults?--is it possible to imagine, 
that I would be brave as I be brave, threaten as I be threaten, 
by those who be afraid to see I; and by this brutal brother, too, to 
whom I give a life; [a life, indeed, not worth my taking!] have I not a 
great pride in know that by mean of his very spy upon I, I be 
play he off as I please; cool or inflame his violent passion 
as may well suit my purpose; permit so much to be reveal of my 
life and action, and intention, as may give he such a confidence in 
his double-faced agent, as shall enable I to dance his employer upon 
my own wire?
this it be that make my pride mount above my resentment. by this 
engine, whose spring I be continually oil, I play they all off. 
the busy old tarpaulin uncle I make but my ambassador to Queen 
Anabella Howe, to engage she (for example-sake to her princessly 
daughter) to join in their cause, and to assert an authority they be 
resolve, right or wrong, (or I could do nothing,) to maintain.
and what my motive, dost thou ask? no less than this, that my beloved 
shall find no protection out of my family; for, if I know her, fly 
she must, or have the man she hat. this, therefore, if I take my 
measure right, and my familiar fail I not, will secure her mine, in 
spite of they all; in spite of her own inflexible heart: mine, without 
condition; without reformation-promise; without the necessity of a 
siege of year, perhaps; and to be even then, after wear the guise 
of merit-doubt hypocrisy, at an uncertainty, upon a probation 
unapproved of. then shall I have all the rascal and rascalesse of 
the family come creep to I: I prescribe to they; and bring 
that sordidly imperious brother to kneel at the footstool of my 
throne. 
all my fear arise from the little hold I have in the heart of this 
charming frost-piece: such a constant glow upon her lovely feature: 
eye so sparkling: limb so divinely turn: health so florid: youth 
so bloom: air so animate--to have an heart so impenetrable: and I, 
the hitherto successful Lovelace, the addresser--how can it be? yet 
there be people, and I have talk with some of they, who remember 
that she be bear. her nurse Norton boast of her maternal office in 
her early infancy; and in her education gradatim. so there be full 
proof, that she come not from above all at once an angel! how then can 
she be so impenetrable?
but herebe her mistake; nor will she be cure of it--she take the man 
she call her father [her mother have be faultless, have she not be 
her father's wife]; she take the man she call her uncle; the fellow 
she call her brother; and the poor contemptible she call her sister; 
to be her father, to be her uncle, her brother, her sister; and that, 
as such, she owe to some of they reverence, to other respect, let 
they treat she ever so cruelly!--sordid ties!--mere cradle 
prejudices!--for have they not be impose upon she by Nature, when 
she be in a perverse humour, or could she have choose her relation, 
would any of these have be among they?
how my heart rise at her preference of they to I, when she be 
convinced of their injustice to I! convince, that the alliance 
would do honour to they all--herself except; to whom every one owe 
honour; and from whom the most princely family might receive it. but 
how much more will my heart rise with indignation against she, if I 
find she hesitate but one moment (however persecute) about 
prefer I to the man she avowedly hat! but she cannot surely be 
so mean as to purchase her peace with they at so dear a rate. she 
cannot give a sanction to project form in malice, and found in a 
selfishness (and that at her own expense) which she have spirit enough 
to despise in other; and ought to disavow, that we may not think her 
a Harlowe.
by this incoherent ramble thou wilt gather, that I be not likely to 
come up in haste; since I must endeavour first to obtain some 
assurance from the beloved of my soul, that I shall not be sacrifice 
to such a wretch as Solmes! woe be to the fair one, if ever she be 
drive into my power (for I despair of a voluntary impulse in my 
favour) and I find a difficulty in obtain this security.
that her indifference to I be not owe to the superior liking she 
have for any other, be what rivet my chain. but take care, fair one; 
take care, o thou most exalt of female mind, and lovely of 
person, how thou debas thyself by encourage such a competition 
as thy sordid relation have set on foot in mere malice to me!--thou 
wilt say I rave. and so I do:
	perdition catch my soul, but I do love she.
else, could I hear the perpetual reviling of her implacable family?--
else, could I basely creep about--not her proud father's house--but 
his paddock and garden walls?--yet (a quarter of a mile distance 
between we) not hop to behold the least glimpse of her shadow?--
else, should I think myself repay, amply repay, if the fourth, 
fifth, or sixth midnight stroll, through unfrequented path, and over 
briery enclosure, afford I a few cold line; the even expect 
purport only to let I know, that she value the most worthless person 
of her very worthless family, more than she value I; and that she 
would not write at all, but to induce I to bear insult, which unman 
I to bear?--My lodge in the intermediate way at a wretched 
alehouse; disguise like an inmate of it: accommodation equally vile, 
as those I meet with in my westphalian journey. 'tis well, that the 
necessity for all this arise not from scorn and tyranny! but be first 
impose upon herself!
but be ever hero in romance (fight with giant and dragon 
except) call upon to hard trials?--fortune and family, and 
reversionary grandeur on my side! such a wretched fellow my 
competitor!--must I not be deplorably in love, that can go through 
these difficulty, encounter these contempts?--By my soul, I be half 
ashamed of myself: I, who be perjure too, by priority of obligation, 
if I be faithful to any woman in the world?
and yet, why say I, I be half ashamed?--is it not a glory to love she 
whom every one who see she either love, or revere, or both? Dryden 
say,
	the cause of love can never be assign'd:
	'tis in no face;--but in the lover's mind.
--And Cowley thus address beauty as a mere imaginary:
	Beauty! thou wild fantastic ape,
	who dost in ev'ry country change thy shape:
	here black; there brown; here tawny; and there white!
	Thou flatt'rer, who comply'st with ev'ry sight!
	who hast no certain what, nor where.
but both these, have they be her contemporary, and know she, would 
have confess themselves mistaken: and, take together person, mind, 
and behaviour, would have acknowledge the justice of the universal 
voice in her favour.
	--full many a lady
	Ihave ey'd with good regard; and many a time
	Th' harmony of their tongue hath into bondage
	bring my too-diligent ear. for sev'ral virtue
	have I like several woman. never any
	with so full a soul, but some defect in she
	do quarrel with the noble grace she ow'd,
	and put it to the foil. but SHE!--O SHE!
	so perfect and so peerless be create,
	of ev'ry creature's good.
	SHAKESP.	
thou art curious to know, if I have not start a new game? if it be 
possible for so universal a lover to be confine so long to one 
object?--Thou know nothing of this charming creature, that thou 
canst put such question to I; or think thou know I well 
than thou dost. all thatbe excellent in her sex be this lady!--until 
by MATRIMONIAL	or EQUAL intimacy, I have find she less than 
angel, it be impossible to think of any other. then there be so many 
stimulative to such a spirit as mine in this affair, besides love: 
such a field of stratagem and contrivance, which thou know to be 
the delight of my heart. then the rewarding end of all!--to carry off 
such a girl as this, in spite of all her watchful and implacable 
friend; and in spite of a prudence and reserve that I never meet with 
in any of the sex;--what a triumph!--what a triumph over the whole 
sex!--And then such a revenge to gratify; which be only at present 
politically rein in, eventually to break forth with great fury--be 
it possible, think thou, that there can be room for a thought that 
be not of she, and devote to she?
***
by the device I have this moment receive, I have reason to think, 
that I shall have occasion for thee here. hold thyself in readiness 
to come down upon the first summon. 
let Belton, and Mowbray, and Tourville, likewise prepare themselves. 
I have a great mind to contrive a method to send James Harlowe to 
travel for improvement. never be there a booby 'squire that more 
want it. contrive it, do I say? I have already contrive it; 
could I but put it in execution without be suspect to have a hand 
in it. this I be resolve upon; if I have not his sister, I will have 
he.
but be this as it may, there be a present likelihood of room for 
glorious mischief. a confederacy have be for some time form 
against I; but the uncle and the nephew be now to be double-
servante [single-servante they be before]; and those servant be 
to be double armed when they attend their master abroad. this 
indicate their resolute enmity to I, and as resolute favour to 
solme.
the reinforce order for this hostile apparatus be owe it seem to 
a visit I make yesterday to their church.--a good place I think to 
begin a reconciliation in; suppose the head of the family to be 
christian, and that they mean something by their prayer. my hope 
be to have an invitation (or, at least, to gain a pretence) to 
accompany home the gloomy sire; and so get an opportunity to see my 
goddess: for I believe they durst not but be civil to I, at least. 
but they be fill with terror it seem at my entrance; a terror 
they could not get over. I see it indeed in their countenance; and 
that they all expect something extraordinary to follow.--And so it 
should have do, have I be more sure than I be of their daughter's 
favour. yet not a hair of any of their stupid head do I intend to 
hurt.
you shall all have your direction in writing, if there be occasion. 
but after all, I dare say there will be no need but to shew your face 
in my company.
such face never could four man shew--Mowbray's so fierce and so 
fight: Belton's so pert and so pimply: Tourville's so fair and so 
foppish: thine so rough and so resolute: and I your leader!--what 
heart, although meditate hostility, must those be which we shall 
not appall?--each man occasionally attend by a servant or two, long 
ago choose for quality resemble those of his master.
thus, Jack, as thou desir, have I written.--written upon something; 
upon nothing; upon REVENGE, which I love; upon LOVE, which I hate, 
heartily hate, because 'tis my master: and upon the devil know what 
besides: for look back, I be amazed at the length of it. Thou 
may read it: I would not for a king's ransom. but so as I do but 
write, thou say thou wilt be please.
be pleased then. I command thee to be please: if not for the 
writer's or write sake, for thy word's sake. and so in the royal 
style (for be I not likely to be thy king and thy emperor in the great 
affair before we?) I bid thee very heartily
Farewell.
LETTER XXXII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
TUESDAY, MARCH 14.
I now send you copy of my letter to my uncle: with their answer. 
be pleased to return the latter by the first deposit. I leave they 
for you to make remark upon. I shall make none.
to JOHN HARLOWE, ESQ.
SAT. MARCH 11.
allow I, my honoured second Papa, as in my happy day you teach I 
to call you, to implore your interest with my papa, to engage he to 
dispense with a command, which, if insist upon, will deprive I of 
my free-will, and make I miserable for my whole life.
for my whole life! let I repeat: be that a small point, my dear 
Uncle, to give up? be not I to live with the man? be any body else? 
shall I not therefore be allow to judge for myself, whether I can, 
or cannot, live happily with he?
should it be ever so unhappily, will it be prudence to complain or 
appeal? if it be, to whom could I appeal with effect against a 
husband? and would not the invincible and avow dislike I have for 
he at set out, seem to justify any ill usage from he, in that 
state, be I to be ever so observant of he? and if I be to be at 
all observant of he, it must be from fear, not love.
once more, let I repeat, that this be not a small point to give up: 
and that it be for life. why, I pray you, good Sir, should I be make 
miserable for life? why should I be deprive of all comfort, but that 
which the hope that it would be a very short one, would afford I?
marriage be a very solemn engagement, enough to make a young 
creature's heart ache, with the good prospect, when she think 
seriously of it!--To be give up to a strange man; to be engraft 
into a strange family; to give up her very name, as a mark of she 
become his absolute and dependent property; to be oblige to prefer 
this strange man to father, mother--to every body:--and his humour to 
all her own--or to contend, perhaps, in breach of avow duty, for 
every innocent instance of free-will. to go no where; to make 
acquaintance; to give up acquaintance; to renounce even the strict 
friendship, perhaps; all at his pleasure, whether she think it 
reasonable to do so or not. surely, Sir, a young creature ought not 
to be oblige to make all these sacrifice but for such a man as she 
can love. if she be, how sad must be the case! how miserable the 
life, if it can be call life!
I wish I could obey you all. what a pleasure would it be to I, if I 
could!--marry first, and love will come after, be say by one of my 
dear friend! but this be a shocking assertion. a thousand thing 
may happen to make that state but barely tolerable, where it be 
enter into with mutual affection: what must it then be, where the 
husband can have no confidence in the love of his wife: but have reason 
rather to question it, from the preference he himself believe she 
would have give to somebody else, have she have her own option? what 
doubt, what jealousy, what want of tenderness, what unfavourable 
prepossession, will there be, in a matrimony thus circumstance! how 
will every look, every action, even the most innocent, be liable to 
misconstruction!--while, on the other hand, an indifference, a 
carelessness to oblige, may take place; and fear only can constrain 
even an appearance of what ought to be the effect of undisguised love!
think seriously of these thing, dear, good Sir, and represent they to 
my father in that strong light which the subject will bear; but in 
which my sex, and my tender year and inexperience, will not permit I 
to paint it; and use your powerful interest, that your poor niece may 
not be consign to a misery so durable.
I offer to engage not to marry at all, if that condition may be 
accept. what a disgrace be it to I to be thus sequester from 
company, thus banish my papa's and mamma's presence; thus slight 
and desert by you, Sir, and my other kind uncle! and to be hinder 
from attend at that public worship, which, be I out of the way of 
my duty, would be most likely to reduce I into the right path again!
--is this the way, Sir; can this be think to be the way to be take 
with a free and open spirit? may not this strange method rather 
harden than convince? I cannot bear to live in disgrace thus. the 
very servant so lately permit to be under my own direction, hardly 
dare to speak to I; my own servant discard with high mark of 
undeserved suspicion and displeasure, and my sister's maid set over 
I.
the matter may be too far pushed.--indeed it may.--And then, perhaps, 
every one will be sorry for their part in it.
may I be permit to mention an expedient?--'if I be to be watch, 
banish, and confine; suppose, Sir, it be to be at your house?'--
then the neighbouring gentry will the less wonder, that the person of 
whom they use to think so favourably, appear not at church here; and 
that she receive not their visit.
I hope there can be no objection to this. you use to love to have I 
with you, Sir, when all go happily with I: and will you not now 
permit I, in my trouble, the favour of your house, till all this 
displeasure be overblown?--upon my word, Sir, I will not stir out of 
door, if you require the contrary of I: nor will I see any body, 
but whom you will allow I to see; provide Mr. Solmes be not bring 
to persecute I there.
Procure, then, this favour for I; if you cannot procure the still 
great, that of a happy reconciliation (which nevertheless I presume 
to hope for, if you will be so good as to plead for I); and you will 
then add to those favour and to that indulgence, which have bind I, 
and will for ever bind I to be
your dutiful and oblige niece,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
the ANSWER
SUNDAY NIGHT.
MY DEAR NIECE,
it grieve I to be force to deny you any thing you ask. yet it must 
be so; for unless you can bring your mind to oblige we in this one 
point, in which our promise and honour be engage before we 
believe there could be so sturdy an opposition, you must never expect 
to be what you have be to we all.
in short, Niece, we be in an embattle phalanx. your reading make 
you a stranger to nothing but what you should be most acquainted with. 
so you will see by that expression, that we be not to be pierce by 
your persuasion, and invincible persistence. we have agree all to 
be move, or none; and not to comply without one another. so you know 
your destiny; and have nothing to do but to yield to it.
let I tell you, the virtue of obedience lie not in oblige when you 
can be oblige again. but give up an inclination, and there be some 
merit in that.
as to your expedient; you shall not come to my house, Miss Clary; 
though this be a prayer I little think I ever should have deny 
you: for be you to keep your word as to see nobody but whom we 
please, yet can you write to somebody else, and receive letter from 
he. this we too well know you can, and have do--more be the shame 
and the pity!
you offer to live single, Miss--we wish you marry: but because you 
may not have the man your heart be set upon, why, truly, you will have 
nobody we shall recommend: and as we know, that somehow or other you 
correspond with he, or at least do as long as you could; and as he 
defy we all, and would not dare to do so, if he be not sure of you 
in spite of we all, (which be not a little vexatious to we, you must 
think,) we be resolve to frustrate he, and triumph over he, rather 
than that he should triumph over we: thatbe one word for all. so 
expect not any advocateship from I: I will not plead for you; and 
thatbe enough. from
your displeased uncle,
JOHN HARLOWE.
P.S. for the rest I refer to my brother Antony.
***
to ANTONY HARLOWE, ESQ.
SATURDAY, MARCH 11.
HONOURED SIR, 
as you have think fit to favour Mr. Solmes with your particular 
recommendation, and be very earnest in his behalf, rank he (as 
you tell I, upon introduce he to I) among your select friend; 
and expect my regard to he accordingly; I beg your patience, 
while I offer a few thing, out of many that I could offer, to your 
serious consideration, on occasion of his address to I, if I be to 
use that word.
I be charge with prepossession in another person's favour. you will 
be please, Sir, to remember, that till my brother return from 
Scotland, that other person be not absolutely discouraged, nor be I 
forbid to receive his visit. I believe it will not be pretend, 
that in birth, education, or personal endowment, a comparison can be 
make between the two. and only let I ask you, Sir, if the one would 
have be think of for I, have he not make such offer, as, upon my 
word, I think, I ought not in justice to accept of, nor he to propose: 
offer, which if he have not make, I dare say, my papa would not have 
require they of he.
but the one, it seem, have many faults:--is the other faultless?--the 
principal thing object to Mr. Lovelace (and a very inexcusable one) 
be that he be immoral in his love--be not the other in his hatreds?--
Nay, as I may say, in his love too (the object only differ) if the 
love of money be the root of all evil.
but, Sir, if I be prepossess, what have Mr. Solmes to hope for?--Why 
should he persevere? what must I think of the man who would wish I 
to be his wife against my inclination?--and be it not a very harsh 
thing for my friend to desire to see I married to one I cannot love, 
when they will not be persuade but that there be one whom I do love?
treat as I be, now be the time for I to speak out or never.--let I 
review what it be Mr. Solmes depend upon on this occasion. do he 
believe, that the disgrace which I supper on his account, will give 
he a merit with I? do he think to win my esteem, through my 
uncle' sternness to I; by my brother's contemptuous usage; by my 
sister's unkindness; by be deny to visit, or be visit; and to 
correspond with my choose friend, although a person of unexceptionable 
honour and prudence, and of my own sex; my servant to be tear from I, 
and another servant set over I; to be confine, like a prisoner, to 
narrow and disgraceful limit, in order avowedly to mortify I, and to 
break my spirit; to be turn out of that family-management which I 
love, and have the great pleasure in it, because it be an ease, as 
I think, to my mamma, and what my sister choose not; and yet, though 
time hang heavy upon my hand, to be so put out of my course, that I 
have as little inclination as liberty to pursue any of my choice 
delights?--are these step necessary to reduce I to a level so low, 
as to make I a fit wife for this man?--Yet these be all he can have 
to trust to. and if his reliance be on these measure, I would have 
he to know, that he mistake meekness and gentleness of disposition 
for servility and baseness of heart.
I beseech you, Sir, to let the natural turn and bent of his mind and 
my mind be consider: what be his quality, by which he would hope 
to win my esteem?--dear, dear Sir, if I be to be compel, let it be 
in favour of a man that can read and write--that can teach I 
something: for what a husband must that man make, who can do nothing 
but command; and need himself the instruction he should be qualified 
to give?
I may be conceite, Sir; I may be vain of my little reading; of my 
writing; as of late I have more than once be tell I be. but, Sir, 
the more unequal the propose match, if so: the well opinion I have 
of myself, the bad I must have of he; and the more unfit be we for 
each other.
indeed, Sir, I must say, I think my friend have put a high value 
upon I. my brother pretend once, that it be owe to such value, 
that Mr. Lovelace's address be prohibited.--Can this be; and such a 
man as Mr. Solmes be intend for I?
as to his propose settlement, I hope I shall not incur your great 
displeasure, if I say, what all who know I have reason to think (and 
some have upbraid I for), that I despise those motif. dear, dear 
Sir, what be settlement to one who have as much of her own as she 
wish for?--who have more in her own power, as a single person, than 
it be probable she would be permit to have at her disposal, as a 
wife?--whose expense and ambition be moderate; and who, if she have 
superfluity, would rather dispense they to the necessitous, than lie 
they by her useless? if then such narrow motif have so little 
weight with I for my own benefit, shall the remote and uncertain view 
of family-aggrandizement, and that in the person of my brother and 
his descendent, be think sufficient to influence I?
have the behaviour of that brother to I of late, or his consideration 
for the family (which have so little weight with he, that he could 
choose to hazard a life so justly precious as an only son's, rather 
than not ratify passion which he be above attempt to subdue, and, 
give I leave to say, have be too much indulged in, either with 
regard to his own good, or the peace of any body relate to he;) have 
his behaviour, I say, deserve of I in particular, that I should make 
a sacrifice of my temporal (and, who know? of my eternal) happiness, 
to promote a plan form upon chimerical, at least upon unlikely, 
contingency; as I will undertake to demonstrate, if I may be 
permit to examine it?
I be afraid you will condemn my warmth: but do not the occasion 
require it? to the want of a great degree of earnestness in my 
opposition, it seem, it be owe, that such advance have be make, 
as have be make. then, dear Sir, allow something, I beseech you, 
for a spirit raise and embitter by disgrace, which (know my own 
heart) I be confident to say, be unmerite.
but why have I say so much, in answer to the suppose charge of 
prepossession, when I have declare to my mamma, as now, Sir, I do to 
you, that if it be not insist upon that I shall marry any other 
person, particularly this Mr. Solmes, I will enter into any 
engagement never to have the other, nor any man else, without their 
consent; that be to say, without the consent of my father and my 
mother, and of you my uncle, and my eld uncle, and my cousin Morden, 
as he be one of the trustee for my grandfather's bounty to me?--as to 
my brother indeed, I cannot say, that his treatment of I have be of 
late so brotherly, as to entitle he to more than civility from I: 
and for this, give I leave to add, he would be very much my debtor.
if I have not be explicit enough in declare my dislike to Mr. 
Solmes (that the prepossession which be charge upon I may not be 
suppose to influence I against he) I do absolutely declare, that 
be there no such man as Mr. Lovelace in the world, I would not have 
Mr. Solmes. it be necessary, in some one of my letter to my dear 
friend, that I should write so clearly as to put this matter out of 
all doubt: and to whom can I well address myself with an 
explicitness that can admit of no mistake, than to that uncle who 
profess the high regard for plain-dealing and sincerity?
let I, for these reason, be still more particular in some of my 
exception to he.
Mr. Solmes appear to I (to all the world, indeed) to have a very 
narrow mind, and no great capacity: he be coarse and indelicate; as 
rough in his manner as in his person: he be not only narrow, but 
covetous: be possess of great wealth, he enjoy it not; nor have 
the spirit to communicate to a distress of any kind. do not his own 
sister live unhappily, for want of a little of his superfluity? and 
suffer not he his aged uncle, the brother of his own mother, to owe 
to the generosity of stranger the poor subsistence he pick up from 
half-a-dozen families?--you know, Sir, my open, free, communicative 
temper: how unhappy must I be, circumscribe in his narrow, selfish 
circle! out of which be with-hold by this diabolical parsimony, he 
dare no more stir, than a conjurer out of his; nor would let I.
such a man, as this, love!--Yes, perhaps he may, my grandfather's 
estate; which he have tell several person (and could not resist 
hint the same thing tome, with that sort of pleasure which a low 
mind take, when it intimate its own interest as a sufficient motive 
for it to expect another's favour) lie so extremely convenient for 
he, that it would double the value of a considerable part of his own. 
that estate, and an alliance which would do credit to his obscurity 
and narrowness, they make he think he can love, and induce he to 
believe he do: but at most, he be but a second-place love. rich 
be, be, and always will be, his predominant passion. his be leave 
he by a miser, on this very account: and I must be oblige to forego 
all the choice delight of my life, and be as mean as he, or else be 
quite unhappy. Pardon, Sir, this severity of expression--one be apt 
to say more than one would of a person one dislike, when more be say 
in his favour than he can possibly deserve; and when he be urge to my 
acceptance with so much vehemence, that there be no choice leave I.
whether these thing be perfectly so, or not, while I think they be, 
it be impossible I should ever look upon Mr. Solmes in the light he be 
offer to I. Nay, be he to be prove ten time well than I have 
represent he, and sincerely think he; yet would he be still ten 
time more disagreeable to I than any other man I know in the world. 
let I therefore beseech you, Sir, to become an advocate for your 
niece, that she may not be make a victim to a man so highly disgustful 
to she.
you and my other uncle can do a great deal for I, if you please, with 
my papa. be persuade, Sir, that I be not govern by obstinacy in 
this case; but by aversion; an aversion I cannot overcome: for, if I 
have but endeavour to reason with myself, (out of regard to the duty 
I owe to my father's will,) my heart have recoil, and I have be 
averse to myself, for offering but to argue with myself, in behalf of 
a man who, in the light he appear to I, have no one merit; and who, 
know this aversion, could not persevere as he do, if he have the 
spirit of a man.
if, Sir, you can think of the content of this letter reasonable, I 
beseech you to support they with your interest. if not--I shall be 
most unhappy!--nevertheless, it be but just in I so to write, as that 
Mr. Solmes may know what he have to trust to.
Forgive, dear Sir, this tedious letter; and suffer it to have weight 
with you; and you will for ever oblige
your dutiful and affectionate niece,
CL. HARLOWE.
***
MR. ANTONY HARLOWE, to MISS CL. HARLOWE
NIECE CLARY,
you have well not write to we, or to any of we. to I, particularly, 
you have well never to have set pen to paper, on the subject whereon 
you have write. he that be first in his own cause, saith the wise 
man, seemeth just: but his neighbour cometh and searcheth he. and 
so, in this respect, I will be your neighbour: for I will search your 
heart to the bottom; that be to say, if your letter be write from 
your heart. yet do I know what a task I have undertake, because of 
the knack you be note for at writing. but in defence of a father's 
authority, in behalf of the good, and honour, and prosperity of the 
family one come of, what a hard thing it would be, if one could not 
beat down all the argument a rebel child (how loth I be to write down 
that word of Miss Clary Harlowe!) can bring, in behalf of her 
obstinacy!
in the first place, donot you declare (and that contrary to your 
declaration to your mother, remember that, girl!) that you prefer the 
man we all hate, and who hat we as bad!--then what a character have 
you give of a worthy man! I wonder you dare write so freely of one 
we all respect--but possibly it may be for that very reason.
how you begin your letter!--because I value Mr. Solmes as my friend, 
you treat he the bad--thatbe the plain dunstable of the matter, 
Miss!--I be not such a fool but I can see that.--And so a noted 
whoremonger be to be choose before a man who be a money-lover!--let I 
tell you, Niece, this little become so nice a one as you have be 
always reckon. who, think you, do more injustice, a prodigal man 
or a saving man?--The one save his own money; the other spend other 
people's. but your favourite be a sinner in grain, and upon record.
the devilbe in your sex! God forgive I for say so--the nice of 
they will prefer a vile rake and wh--I suppose I must not repeat the 
word:--the word will offend, when the vicious denominate by that word 
will be chosen!--I have not be a bachelor to this time, if I have not 
see such a mass of contradiction in you all.--such gnat-strainer 
and camel-swallower, as venerable Holy Writ have it.
what name will perverseness call thing by!--a prudent man, who 
intend to be just to every body, be a covetous man!--while a vile, 
profligate rake be christen with the appellation of a gallant man; 
and a polite man, Iwill warrant you!
it be my firm opinion, Lovelace would not have so much regard for you 
as he profess, but for two reason. and what be these?--why, out 
of spite to all of we--one of they. the other, because of your 
independent fortune. I wish your good grandfather have not leave what 
he do so much in your own power, as I may say. but little do he 
imagine his beloved grand-daughter would have turn upon all her 
friend as she have do!
what have Mr. Solmes to hope for, if you be prepossess! hey-day! 
be this you, cousin Clary!--Has he then nothing to hope for from your
father's, and mother's, and our recommendations?--no, nothing at all,
it seems!--o brave!--I should think that this, with a dutiful child, 
as we take you to be, be enough. depend on this your duty, we 
proceed: and now there be no help for it: for we will not be balk: 
neither shall our friend Mr. Solmes, I can tell you that.
if your estate be convenient for he, what then? do that (pert 
cousin) make it out that he do not love you? he have need to expect 
some good with you, that have so little good to hope for from you; mind 
that. but pray, be not this estate our estate, as we may say? have 
we not all an interest in it, and a prior right, if right be to have 
take place? and be it not more than a good old man's dotage, God 
rest his soul! that give it you before we all?--Well then, ought we 
not to have a choice who shall have it in marriage with you? and would 
you have the conscience to wish we to let a vile fellow, who hat we 
all, run away with it?--you bid I weigh what you write: do you weigh 
this, girl: and it will appear we have more to say for ourselves than 
you be aware of.
as to your hard treatment, as you call it, thank yourself for that. 
it may be over when you will: so I reckon nothing upon that. you be 
not banish and confine till all entreaty and fair speech be 
try with you: mind that. and Mr. Solmes cannot help your obstinacy: 
let that be observe too.
as to be visit, and visit; you never be fond of either: so 
thatbe a grievance put into the scale to make weight.--as to disgrace, 
thatbe as bad to we as to you: so fine a young creature! so much as 
we use to brag of you too!--and besides, this be all in your power, 
as the rest.
but your heart recoil, when you would persuade yourself to obey your 
parent--finely describe, be it not!--too truly describe, I own, as 
you go on. I know that you may love he if you will. I have a good 
mind to bid you hate he; then, perhaps, you would like he the 
well: for I have always find a most horrid romantic perverseness in 
your sex.--to do and to love what you should not, be meat, drink, and 
vesture, to you all.
I be absolutely of your brother's mind, that reading and writing, 
though not too much for the wit of you young girl, be too much for 
your judgments.--You say, you may be conceite, Cousin; you may be 
vain!--and so you be, to despise this gentleman as you do. he can 
read and write as well as most gentleman, I can tell you that. who 
tell you Mr. Solmes cannot read and write? but you must have a 
husband who can learn you something!--i wish you know but your duty as 
well as you do your talent--that, Niece, you have of late day to 
learn; and Mr. Solmes will therefore find something to instruct you 
in. I will not shew he this letter of your, though you seem to 
desire it, lest it should provoke he to be too severe a schoolmaster, 
when you be his'n.
but now I think of it, suppose you be the reader at your pen than he
--you will make the more useful wife to he; willnot you? for who so 
good an economist as you?--And you may keep all of his account, and 
save yourselves a steward.--and, let I tell you, this be a fine 
advantage in a family: for those steward be often sad dog, and 
creep into a man's estate before he know where he be; and not seldom 
be he force to pay they interest for his own money.
I know not why a good wife should be above these thing. it be well 
than lie a-bed half the day, and junketing and card-play all the 
night, and make yourself wholly useless to every good purpose in 
your own family, as be now the fashion among ye. the duce take you 
all that do so, say i!--only that, thank my star, I be a bachelor.
then this be a province you be admirably verse in: you grieve that 
it be take from you here, you know. so here, Miss, with Mr. Solmes 
you will have something to keep account of, for the sake of you and 
your child: with the other, perhaps you will have an account to 
keep, too--but an account of what will go over the left shoulder; only 
of what he squander, what he borrow, and what he owe, and never 
will pay. come, come, Cousin, you know nothing of the world; a man's 
a man; and you may have many partner in a handsome man, and costly 
one too, who may lavish away all you save. Mr. Solmes therefore for 
my money, and I hope for your.
but Mr. Solmes be a coarse man. he be not delicate enough for your 
niceness; because I suppose he dress not like a fop and a coxcomb, 
and because he lay not himself out in complimental nonsense, the 
poison of female mind. he be a man of sense, that I can tell you. 
no man talk more to the purpose to we: but you fly he so, that he 
have no opportunity give he, to express it to you: and a man who 
love, if he have ever so much sense, look a fool; especially when he 
be despise, and treat as you treat he the last time he be in 
your company.
as to his sister; she throw herself away (as you want to do) against 
his full warning: for he tell she what she have to trust to, if she 
marry where she do marry. and he be as good as his word; and so 
an honest man ought: offence against warning ought to be smart for. 
take care this be not your case: mind that.
his uncle deserve no favour from he; for he would have circumvent 
Mr. Solmes, and get Sir Oliver to leave to himself the estate he have 
always design for he his nephew, and bring he up in the hope of 
it. too ready forgiveness do but encourage offence: thatbe your 
good father's maxim: and there would not be so many headstrong 
daughter as there be, if this maxim be keep in mind.--punishment 
be of service to offender; reward should be only to the meriting: 
and I think the former be to be deal out rigourously, in willful 
case.
as to his love; he shew it but too much for your deserving, as they 
have be of late; let I tell you that: and this be his misfortune; 
and may in time perhaps be yours. 
as to his parsimony, which you wickedly call diabolical, [a very free 
word in your mouth, let I tell ye], little reason have you of all 
people for this, on whom he propose, of his own accord, to settle all 
he have in the world: a proof, let he love rich as he will, that he 
love you well. but that you may be without excuse on this score, 
we will tie he up to your own term, and oblige he by the marriage-
article to allow you a very handsome quarterly sum to do what you 
please with. and this have be tell you before; and I have say it to 
Mrs. Howe (that good and worthy lady) before her proud daughter, that 
you might hear of it again.
to contradict the charge of prepossession to Lovelace, you offer never 
to have he without our consent: and what be this saying, but that 
you will hope on for our consent, and to wheedle and tire we out? 
then he will always be in expectation while you be single: and we be 
to live on at this rate (be we?) vex by you, and continually 
watchful about you; and as continually expose to his insolence and 
threat. remember last Sunday, girl!--what might have happen, have 
your brother and he met?--Moreover, you cannot do with such a spirit 
as his, as you can with worthy Mr. Solmes: the one you make tremble; 
the other will make you quake: mind that--and you will not be able to 
help yourself. and remember, that if there should be any 
misunderstanding between one of they and you, we should all interpose; 
and with effect, no doubt: but with the other, it would be self-do, 
self-have; and who would either care or dare to put in a word for you? 
nor let the supposition of matrimonial difference frighten you: 
honey-moon last not now-a-day above a fortnight; and Dunmow flitch, 
as I have be inform, be never claim; though some say once it 
be. marriage be a queer state, Child, whether pair by the party 
or by their friend. out of three brother of we, you know, there be 
but one have courage to marry. and why be it, do you think? we be 
wise by other people's experience.
donot despise money so much: you may come to know the value of it: 
that be a piece of instruction that you be to learn; and which, 
accord to your own notion, Mr. Solmes will be able to teach you.
I do indeed condemn your warmth. I will not allow for disgrace you 
bring upon yourself. if I think they unmerite, I would be your 
advocate. but it be always my notion, that child should not 
dispute their parent' authority. when your grandfather leave his 
estate to you, though his three son, and a grandson, and your elder 
sister, be in be, we all acquiesce: and why? because it be our 
father's doing. do you imitate that example: if you will not, those 
who set it you have the more reason to hold you inexcusable: mind 
that, Cousin.
you mention your brother too scornfully: and, in your letter to he, 
be very disrespectful; and so indeed you be to your sister, in the 
letter you write to she. your brother, Madam, be your brother; and 
third old than yourself, and a man: and pray be so good as not to 
forget what be due to a brother, who (next to we three brother) be 
the head of the family, and on whom the name depend--as upon your 
dutiful compliance lay down for the honour of the family you be come 
of. and pray now let I ask you, if the honour of that will not be an 
honour to you?--If you donot think so, the more unworthy you. you 
shall see the plan, if you promise not to be prejudice against it 
right or wrong. if you be not besotte to that man, I be sure you 
will like it. if you be, be Mr. Solmes an angel, it would signify 
nothing: for the devil be love, and love be the devil, when it get 
into any of your head. many example have I see of that.
if there be no such man as Lovelace in the world, you would not have 
Mr. solmes.--you would not, Miss!--Very pretty, truly!--We see how 
your spirit be embitter indeed.--wonder not, since it be come to 
your will notbe, that those who have authority over you, say, you 
shall have the other. and I be one: mind that. and if it behove you 
to speak out, Miss, it behove US not to speak in. whatbe sauce for 
the goose be sauce for the gander: take that in your thought too.
I humbly apprehend, that Mr. Solmes have the spirit of a man, and a 
gentleman. I would admonish you therefore not to provoke it. he 
pity you as much as he love you. he say, he will convince you of 
his love by deed, since he be not permit by you to express it by 
word. and all his dependence be upon your generosity hereafter. we 
hope he may depend upon that: we encourage he to think he may. and 
this hearten he up. so that you may lay his constancy at your 
parent' and your uncle' door; and this will be another mark of your 
duty, you know.
you must be sensible, that you reflect upon your parent, and all of 
we, when you tell I you cannot in justice accept of the settlement 
propose to you. this reflection we should have wonder at from you 
once; but now we donot.
there be many other very censurable passage in this free letter of 
your; but we must place they to the account of your embitter 
spirit. I be glad you mention that word, because we should have 
be at a loss what to have call it.--I should much rather 
nevertheless have have reason to give it a well name.
I love you dearly still, Miss. I think you, though my niece, one of 
the fine young gentlewoman I ever see. but, upon my conscience, I 
think you ought to obey your parent, and oblige I and my brother 
John: for you know very well, that we have nothing but your good at 
heart: consistently indeed with the good and honour of all of we. 
what must we think of any one of it, who would not promote the good of 
the whole? and who would set one part of it against another?--which 
God forbid, say i!--you see I be for the good of all. what shall I 
get by it, let thing go as they will? do I want any thing of any 
body for my own sake?--doe my brother john?--well, then, Cousin 
Clary, what would you be at, as I may say?
o but you cannot love Mr. Solmes!--But, I say, you know not what you 
can do. you encourage yourself in your dislike. you permit your 
heart (little do I think it be such a froward one) to recoil. take 
it to task, Niece; drive it on as fast as it recoil, [we do so in all 
our sea-fight, and land-fight too, by our sailor and soldier, or 
we should not conquer]; and we be all sure you will overcome it. and 
why? because you ought. so we think, whatever you think: and whose 
thought be to be prefer? you may be witty than we; but, if you 
be wise, we have live some of we, let I tell you, to very little 
purpose, thirty or forty year long than you.
I have write as long a letter as your. I may not write in so 
lively, or so polite a style as my Niece: but I think I have all the 
argument on my side: and you will vastly oblige I, if you will shew 
I, by your compliance with all our desire, that you think so too. 
if you do not, you must not expect an advocate, or even a friend, in 
I, dearly as I love you. for then I shall be sorry to be call
your uncle,
ANT. HARLOWE.
TUESDAY, two in the morning.
POSTSCRIPT.
you must send I no more letter: but a compliable one you may send. 
but I need not have forbid you; for I be sure this, by fair argument, 
be unanswerable--I know it be. I have write day and night, I may 
say, ever since Sunday morning, only church-time, or the like of that: 
but this be the last, I can tell you, from
ANT. H.
LETTER XXXIII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY, MARCH 16.
have meet with such bad success in my application to my relation, I 
have take a step that will surprise you. it be no other than write 
a letter to Mr. Solmes himself. I send it, and have his answer. he 
have certainly help in it. for I have see a letter of his, and 
indifferently word, as poorly spell. yet the superscription be of 
his dictating, I dare say, for he be a formal wretch. with these, I 
shall enclose one from my brother to I, on occasion of mine to Mr. 
Solmes. I do think that it be possible to discourage the man from 
proceeding; and if I could have do that, it would have answer all 
my wish. it be worth the trial. but youwill see nothing will do. 
my brother have take his measure too securely.
to ROGER SOLMES, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 15.
SIR,
you will wonder to receive a letter from I; and more still at the 
uncommon subject of it. but the necessity of the case will justify 
I, at least in my own apprehension; and I shall therefore make no 
other apology for it.
when you first come acquaint with our family, you find the writer 
of this one of the happy creature in the world; belove by the 
good and most indulgent of parent; and rejoice in the kind favour 
of two affectionate uncle, and in the esteem of every one.
but how be this scene now changed!--you be pleased to cast a 
favourable eye upon I. you address yourself to my friend: your 
proposal be approve of by they--approve of without consult I; 
as if my choice and happiness be of the least signification. those 
who have a right to all reasonable obedience from I, insist upon it 
without reserve. I have not the felicity to think as they do; almost 
the first time my sentiment differ from theirs. I besought they to 
indulge I in a point so important to my future happiness: but, alas, 
in vain! and then (for I think it be but honest) I tell you my 
mind; and even that my affection be engage. but, to my 
mortification and surprise, you persist, and still persist.
the consequence of all be too grievous for I to repeat: you, who have 
such free access to the rest of the family, know it too well--too well 
you know it, either for the credit of your own generosity, or for my 
reputation. I be use, on your account, as I never before be use, 
and never before be think to deserve to be use; and this be the 
hard, the impossible, condition of their return favour, that I must 
prefer a man to all other, that of all other I cannot prefer.
thus distressed, and make unhappy, and all to your sake, and through 
your cruel perseverance, I write, Sir, to demand of you the peace of 
mind you have rob I of: to demand of you the love of so many dear 
friend, of which you have deprive I; and, if you have the 
generosity that should distinguish a man, and a gentleman, to adjure 
you not to continue an address that have be attend with such cruel 
effect to the creature you profess to esteem.
if you really value I, as my friend would make I believe, and as 
you have declare you do, must it not be a mean and selfish value? a 
value that can have no merit with the unhappy object of it, because it 
be attend with effect so grievous to she? it must be for your own 
sake only, not for mine. and even in this point you must be mistake: 
for, would a prudent man wish to marry one who have not a heart to 
give? who cannot esteem he? who therefore must prove a bad wife!--
and how cruel would it be to make a poor creature a bad wife, whose 
pride it would be to make a good one!
if I be capable of judge, our temper and inclination be vastly 
different. any other of my sex will make you happy than I can. the 
treatment I meet with, and the obstinacy, as it be call, with which 
I support myself under it, ought to convince you of this; be I not 
able to give so good a reason for this my suppose perverseness, as 
that I cannot consent to marry a man whom I cannot value.
but if, Sir, you have not so much generosity in your value for I, as 
to desist for my own sake, let I conjure you, by the regard due to 
yourself, and to your own future happiness, to discontinue your suit, 
and place your affection on a worthy object: for why should you 
make I miserable, and yourself not happy? by this mean you will do 
all that be now in your power to restore to I the affection of my 
friend; and, if that can be, it will leave I in as happy a state as 
you find I in. you need only to say, that you see there be no 
hope, as you will perhaps complaisantly call it, of succeed with 
I [and indeed, Sir, there cannot be a great truth]; and that you 
will therefore no more think of I, but turn your thought another 
way.
your compliance with this request will lay I under the high 
obligation to your generosity, and make I ever
your well-wisher, and humble servant,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
to MISS clarissa HARLOWE
these most humbly present.
DEAREST MISS,
your letter have have a very contrary effect upon I, to what you seem 
to have expect from it. it have doubly convince I of the 
excellency of your mind, and of the honour of your disposition. call 
it selfish, or what you please, I must persist in my suit; and happy 
shall I be, if by patience and perseverance, and a steady and 
unalterable devoir, I may at last overcome the difficulty lay in my 
way.
as your good parent, your uncle, and other friend, be absolutely 
determine you shall never have Mr. Lovelace, if they can help it; and 
as I presume no other person be in the way, I will contentedly wait 
the issue of this matter. and forgive I, dearest Miss, but a person 
should soon persuade I to give up to he my estate, as an instance 
of my generosity, because he could not be happy without it, than I 
would a much more valuable treasure, to promote the felicity of 
another, and make his way easy to circumvent myself.
pardon I, dear Miss; but I must persevere, though I be sorry you 
suffer on my account, as you be pleased to think; for I never before 
see the woman I could love: and while there be any hope, and that you 
remain undisposed of to some happy man, I must and will be
your faithful and obsequious admirer, 
ROGER SOLMES.
MARCH 16.
***
MR. JAMES HARLOWE, to MISS CL. HARLOWE
MARCH 16.
what a fine whim you take into your head, to write a letter to Mr. 
Solmes, to persuade he to give up his pretension to you!--of all the 
pretty romantic flight you have delight in, this be certainly one 
of the most extraordinary. but to say nothing of what fire we all 
with indignation against you (your own your prepossession in a 
villain's favour, and your impertinence to I, and your sister, and 
your uncle; one of which have give it you home, child), how can you 
lay at Mr. Solmes's door the usage you so bitterly complain of?--you 
know, little fool as you be, that it be your fondness for Lovelace 
that have bring upon you all these thing; and which would have 
happen, whether Mr. Solmes have honour you with his address or 
not.
as you must need know this to be true, consider, pretty witty Miss, 
if your fond, love-sick heart can let you consider, what a fine figure 
all your expostulation with we, and charge upon Mr. Solmes, make!--
with what propriety do you demand of he to restore to you your former 
happiness (as you call it, and merely call it; for if you think our 
favour so, you would restore it to yourself), since it be yet in your 
own power to do so? therefore, Miss Pert, none of your pathetic, 
except in the right place. depend upon it, whether you have Mr. 
Solmes, or not, you shall never have your heart's delight, the vile 
rake Lovelace, if our parent, if our uncle, if I, can hinder it. 
no! you fall angel, you shall not give your father and mother such a 
son, nor I such a brother, in give yourself that profligate wretch 
for a husband. and so set your heart at rest, and lie aside all 
thought of he, if ever you expect forgiveness, reconciliation, or a 
kind opinion, from any of your family; but especially from he, who, 
at present, style himself
your brother,
JAMES HARLOWE.
P.S. I know your knack at letter-writing. if you send I an answer 
for this, I will return it unopened; for I will not argue with your 
perverseness in so plain a case--only once for all, I be willing to 
put you right as to Mr. Solmes; whom I think to blame to trouble his 
head about you.
LETTER XXXIV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY, MARCH 17.
I receive, with great pleasure, the early and cheerful assurance of 
your loyalty and love. and let our principal and most trusty friend 
name in my last know that I do.
I would have thee, Jack, come down, as soon as thou canst. I believe 
I shall not want the other so soon. yet they may come down to Lord 
M.'s. I will be there, if not to receive they, to satisfy my lord, 
that there be no new mischief in hand, which will require his second 
intervention.
for thyself, thou must be constantly with I: not for my security: the 
family dare do nothing but bully: they bark only at a distance: but 
for my entertainment: that thou mayest, from the Latin and the english 
classic, keep my lovesick soul from droop.
Thou hadst well come to I here, in thy old corporal's coat: thy 
servant out of livery; and to be upon a familiar footing with I, as a 
distant relation, to be provide for by thy interest above--I mean not 
in Heaven, thou mayest be sure. thou wilt find I at a little 
alehouse, they call it an inn; the White Hart, most terribly wound, 
(but by the weather only,) the sign: in a sorry village, within five 
mile from Harlowe-place. every body know harlowe-place, for, like 
versaille, it be spring up from a dunghill, within every elderly 
person's remembrance. every poor body, particularly, know it: but 
that only for a few year past, since a certain angel have appear 
there among the son and daughter of man.
the people here at the Hart be poor, but honest; and have get it 
into their head, that I be a man of quality in disguise; and there be 
no reining-in their officious respect. here be a pretty little 
smirk daughter, seventeen six day ago. I call she my Rose-bud. 
her grandmother (for there be no mother), a good neat old woman, as 
ever fill a wicker chair in a chimney-corner, have besought I to be 
merciful to she.
this be the right way with I. many and many a pretty rogue have I 
spar, whom I do not spare, have my power be acknowledge, and my 
mercy in time implore. but the debellare superbo should be my 
motto, be I to have a new one.
this simple chit (for there be a simplicity in her thou wouldst be 
highly pleased with: all humble; all officious; all innocent--I love 
she for her humility, her officiousness, and even for her innocence) 
will be pretty amusement to thee; while I combat with the weather, and 
dodge and creep about the wall and purlieus of Harlowe-place. Thou 
wilt see in her mind, all that her superior have be teach to 
conceal, in order to render themselves less natural, and of 
consequence less pleasing.
but I charge thee, that thou do not (what I would not permit myself to 
do for the world--I charge thee, that thou do not) crop my rose-bud. 
she be the only flower of fragrance, that have blow in this vicinage 
for ten year past, or will for ten year to come: for I have look 
backward to the have-be's, and forward to the will-be's; have but 
too much leisure upon my hand in my present waiting.
I never be so honest for so long together since my matriculation. it 
behove I so to be--some way or other, my recess at this little inn 
may be find out; and it will then be think that my rose-bud have 
attract I. a report in my favour, from simplicity so amiable, 
may establish I; for the grandmother's relation to my rose-bud may be 
swear to: and the father be an honest, poor man; have no joy, but in 
his Rose-bud.--O Jack! spare thou, therefore, (for I shall leave thee 
often alone with she, spare thou) my Rose-bud!--Let the rule I never 
depart from, but it cost I a long regret, be observe to my Rose-
bud!--never to ruin a poor girl, whose simplicity and innocence be 
all she have to trust to; and whose fortune be too low to save she 
from the rude contempt of bad mind than her own, and from an 
indigence extreme: such a one will only pine in secret; and at last, 
perhaps, in order to refuge herself from slanderous tongue and 
virulence, be induce to tempt some guilty stream, or seek her end in 
the knee-encircle garter, that peradventure, be the first attempt 
of abandon love.--No defiance will my Rose-bud breathe; no self-
dependent, thee-doubt watchfulness (indirectly challenge thy 
inventive machination to do their bad) will she assume. 
Unsuspicious of her danger, the lamb's throat will hardly shun thy 
knife!--o be not thou the butcher of my lambkin!
the less thou be so, for the reason I be go to give thee--the 
gentle heart be touch by love: her soft bosom heave with a passion 
she have not yet find a name for. I once catch her eye follow a 
young carpenter, a widow neighbour's son, live [to speak in her 
dialect] at the little white house over the way. a gentle youth he 
also seem to be, about three year old than herself: playmate from 
infancy, till his eighteenth and her fifteenth year furnish a reason 
for a great distance in shew, while their heart give a well for 
their be near than ever--for I soon perceive the love 
reciprocal. a scrape and a bow at first see his pretty mistress; 
turn often to salute she follow eye; and, when a winding lane 
be to deprive he of her sight, his whole body turn round, his hat 
more reverently doff than before. this answer (for, unseen, I be 
behind she) by a low courtesy, and a sigh, that Johnny be too far off 
to hear!--happy whelp! say I to myself.--i withdraw; and in tript my 
Rose-bud, as if satisfied with the dumb shew, and wish nothing 
beyond it.
I have examine the little heart. she have make I her confidant. she 
own, she could love Johnny Barton very well: and Johnny Barton have 
tell she, he could love she well than any maiden he ever see--but, 
alas! it must not be think of. why not be think of!--She donot 
know!--and then she sigh: but Johnny have an aunt, who will give he 
an hundred pound, when his time be out; and her father cannot give 
she but a few thing, or so, to set she out with: and though Johnny's 
mother say, she know not where Johnny would have a pretty, or 
notabler wife, yet--and then she sigh again--what signify 
talking?--I would not have Johnny be unhappy and poor for me!--For 
what good would that do I, you know, Sir!
what would I give [by my soul, my angel will indeed reform I, if her 
friend' implacable folly ruin we not both!--what would I give] to 
have so innocent and so good a heart, as either my Rose-bud's, or 
Johnny's!
I have a confound mischievous one--by nature too, I think!--a good 
motion now-and-then rise from it: but it die away presently--a love 
of intrigue--an invention for mischief--a triumph in subdue--fortune 
encouraging and supporting--and a constitution--what signify 
palliate? but I believe I have be a rogue, have I be a 
plough-boy.
but the devilbe in this sex! eternal misguider. who, that have once 
trespass with they, ever recover his virtue? and yet where there 
be not virtue, which nevertheless we freeliver be continually 
plot to destroy, what be there even in the ultimate of our wish 
with them?--preparation and expectation be in a manner every thing: 
reflection indeed may be something, if the mind be harden above 
feel the guilt of a past trespass: but the fruition, what be there
in that? and yet that be the end, nature will not be satisfied 
without it.
see what grave reflection an innocent subject will produce! it give 
I some pleasure to think, that it be not out of my power to reform: 
but then, Jack, I be afraid I must keep well company than I do at 
present--for we certainly harden one another. but be not cast down, 
my boy; there will be time enough to give the whole fraternity warn 
to choose another leader: and I fancy thou wilt be the man.
mean time, as I make it my rule, whenever I have commit a very 
capital enormity, to do some good by way of atonement; and as I 
believe I be a pretty deal indebted on that score, I intend, before I 
leave these part (successfully shall I leave they I hope, or I shall 
be tempt to double the mischief by way of revenge, though not to my 
Rose-bud any) to join an hundred pound to Johnny's aunt's hundred 
pound, to make one innocent couple happy.--I repeat therefore, and 
for half a dozen more therefore, spare thou my rose-bud.
an interruption--another letter anon; and both shall go together.
LETTER XXXV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
I have find out by my watchful spy almost as many of my charmer's 
motion, as those of the rest of her relation. it delight I to 
think how the rascal be caress by the uncle and nephew; and let 
into their secret; yet it proceed all the time by my line of 
direction. I have charge he, however, on forfeiture of his present 
weekly stipend, and my future favour, to take care, that neither my 
beloved, nor any of the family suspect he: I have tell he that he 
may indeed watch her egress and regress; but that only keep off 
other servant from her path; yet not to be see by her himself.
the dear creature have tempt he, he tell they, with a bribe [which 
she never offer] to convey a letter [which she never write] to Miss 
Howe; he believe, with one enclose (perhaps to I): but he decline 
it: and he beg they would take notice of it to she. this bring 
he a stingy shilling; great applause; and an injunction follow it 
to all the servant, for the strict look-out, lest she should 
contrive some way to send it--and, above an hour after, an order be 
give he to throw himself in her way; and (express his concern for 
deny her request) to tender his service to she, and to bring they 
her letter: which it will be proper for he to report that she have 
refuse to give he.
now seest thou not, how many good end this contrivance answer?
in the first place, the lady be secure by it, against her own 
knowledge, in the liberty allow she of take her private walk in 
the garden: for this attempt have confirm they in their belief, that 
now they have turn off her maid, she have no way to send a letter out 
of the house: if she have, she would not have run the risque of 
tempt a fellow who have not be in her secret--so that she can 
prosecute unsuspectedly her correspondence with I and Miss Howe.
in the next place, it will perhaps afford I an opportunity of a 
private interview with she, which I be meditate, let she take it as 
she will; have find out by my spy (who can keep off every body 
else) that she go every morning and evening to a wood-house remote 
from the dwelling-house, under pretence of visit and feed a set 
of bantam-poultry, which be produce from a breed that be her 
grandfather's, and of which for that reason she be very fond; as also 
of some other curious fowl bring from the same place. I have an 
account of all her motion here. and as she have own to I in one of 
her letter that she correspond privately with Miss Howe, I presume 
it be by this way.
the interview I be meditate, will produce her consent, I hope, to 
other favour of the like kind: for, should she not choose the place 
in which I be expect to see she, I can attend she any where in the 
ramble Dutch-taste garden, whenever she will permit I that honour: 
for my implement, high Joseph Leman, have procure I the opportunity 
of get two key make to the garden-door (one of which I have give 
he for reason good); which door open to the haunted coppice, as 
tradition have make the servant think it; a man have be find 
hang in it about twenty year ago: and Joseph, upon proper notice, 
will leave it unbolt.
but I be oblige previously to give he my honour, that no mischief 
should happen to any of my adversary, from this liberty: for the 
fellow tell I, that he love all his master: and, only that he 
know I be a man of honour; and that my alliance will do credit to the 
family; and after prejudice be overcome, every body will think so; 
or he would not for the world act the part he do.
there never be a rogue, who have not a salvo to himself for be so.
--What a praise to honesty, that every man pretend to it, even at the 
instant that he know he be pursue the method that will perhaps 
prove he a knave to the whole world, as well as to his own 
conscience! 
but what this stupid family can mean, to make all this necessary, I 
cannot imagine. my revenge and my love be uppermost by turn. if 
the latter succeed not, the gratifying of the former will be my only 
consolation: and, by all thatbe good, they shall feel it; although for 
it I become an exile from my native country for ever.
I will throw myself into my charmer's presence. I have twice already 
attempt it in vain. I shall then see what I may depend upon from 
her favour. if I think I have no prospect of that, I should be 
tempt to carry she off. that would be a rape worthy of Jupiter!
but all gentle shall be my movement: all respectful, even to 
reverence, my address to she--her hand shall be the only witness to 
the pressure of my lip--my trembling lip: I know it will tremble, if I 
do not bid it tremble. as soft my sigh, as the sigh of my gentle 
Rose-bud. by my humility will I invite her confidence: the loneliness 
of the place shall give I no advantage: to dissipate her fear, and 
engage her reliance upon my honour for the future, shall be my whole 
endeavour: but little will I complain of, not at all will I threaten, 
those who be continually threaten I: but yet with a view to act 
the part of Dryden's lion; to secure my love, or to let loose my 
vengeance upon my hunter.
	what tho' his mighty soul his grief contain?
	he meditate revenge who least complain:
	and like a lion slumb're in his way,
	or sleep dissembling, while he wait his prey,
	his fearless foe within his distance draw,
	constrain his roaring, and contract his paw:
	till at the last, his time for fury find,
	he shoot with sudden vengeance from the ground:
	the prostrate vulgar pass o'er, and spare,
	but, with a lordly rage, his hunter tear.
letter xxxvi
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SATURDAY, MARCH 18.
I have be fright out of my wit--still be in a manner out of 
breath--thus occasion--I go down, under the usual pretence, in 
hope to find something from you. concerned at my disappointment, I 
be return from the wood-house, when I hear a rustling as of 
somebody behind a stack of wood. I be extremely surprised: but still 
more, to behold a man come from behind the furthermost stack. oh! 
think I, at that moment, the sin of a prohibit correspondence!
in the same point of time that I see he, he besought I not to be 
fright: and, still near approach I, throw open a horseman's 
coat: and who should it be but Mr. Lovelace!--I could not scream out 
(yet attempt to scream, the moment I see a man; and again, when I 
see who it be); for I have no voice: and have I not catch hold of a 
prop which support the old roof, I should have sink.
I have hitherto, as you know, keep he at a distance: and now, as I 
recover myself, judge of my first emotion, when I recollect his 
character from every mouth of my family; his enterprise temper; and 
find myself alone with he, in a place so near a bye-lane, and so 
remote from the house.
but his respectful behaviour soon dissipate these fear, and give I 
other; lest we should be see together, and information of it give 
to my brother: the consequence of which, I could readily think, would 
be, if not further mischief, an imputed assignation, a strict 
confinement, a forfeited correspondence with you, my beloved friend, 
and a pretence for the most violent compulsion: and neither the one 
set of reflection, nor the other, acquit he to I for his bold 
intrusion.
as soon therefore as I could speak, I express with the great 
warmth my displeasure; and tell he, that he care not how much he 
expose I to the resentment of all my friend, provide he could 
gratify his own impetuous humour. I then command he to leave the 
place that moment; and be hurry from he, when he throw himself in 
the way at my foot, beseech my stay for one moment; declare, that 
he suffer himself to be guilty of this rashness, as I think it, to 
avoid one much greater:--for, in short, he could not bear the hourly 
insult he receive from my family, with the thought of have so 
little interest in my favour, that he could not promise himself that 
his patience and forbearance would be attend with any other issue 
than to lose I for ever, and be triumph over and insult upon it.
this man, you know, have very ready knee. you have say, that he 
ought, in small point, frequently to offend, on purpose to shew what 
an address he be master of.
he run on, express his apprehension that a temper so gentle and 
obliging, as he say mine be, to every body but he, (and a 
dutifulness so exemplary incline I to do my part to other, whether 
they do theirs or not by I,) would be work upon in favour of a 
man set up in part to be revenge upon myself, for my grandfather's 
envy distinction of I; and in part to be revenge upon he, for 
have give life to one, who would have take his; and now seek to 
deprive he of hope dearer to he than life.
I tell he, he might be assure, that the severity and ill-usage I meet 
with would be far from effect the proposed end: that although I 
could, with great sincerity, declare for a single life (which have 
always be my choice); and particularly, that if ever I marry, if 
they would not insist upon the man I have an aversion to, it should not 
be with the man they disliked--
he interrupt I here: he hop I would forgive he for it; but he 
could not help express his great concern, that, after so many 
instance of his passionate and obsequious devotion--
and pray, Sir, say I, let I interrupt you in my turn;--why donot you 
assert, in still plainer word, the obligation you have lay I under 
by this your boasted devotion? why donot you let I know, in term as 
high as your implication, that a perseverance I have not wish for, 
which have set all my relation at variance with I, be a merit that 
throw upon I the guilt of ingratitude for not have answer it as 
you seem to expect?
I must forgive he, he say, if he, who pretend only to a 
comparative merit, (and otherwise think no man live could deserve 
I,) have presume to hope for a great share in my favour, than he 
have hitherto meet with, when such man as Mr. Symmes, Mr. Wyerley, and 
now, lastly, so vile a reptile as this solme, however discourage by 
myself, be make his competitor. as to the perseverance I 
mention, it be impossible for he not to persevere: but I must 
need know, that be he not in be, the term Solmes have propose 
be such, as would have involve I in the same difficulty with my 
relation that I now labour under. he therefore take the liberty to 
say, that my favour to he, far from increase those difficulty, 
would be the readiest way to extricate I from they. they have make it 
impossible [he tell I, with too much truth] to oblige they any way, 
but by sacrifice myself to Solmes. they be well apprize besides 
of the difference between the two; one, whom they hop to manage as 
they please; the other, who could and would protect I from every 
insult; and who have natural prospect much superior to my brother's 
foolish view of a title.
how come this man to know so well all our foible? but I more 
wonder, how he come to have a notion of meet I in this place?
I be very uneasy to be go; and the more as the night come on apace. 
but there be no getting from he, till I have hear a great deal more 
of what he have to say.
as he hop, that I would one day make he the happy man in the 
world, he assure I, that he have so much regard for my fame, that he 
would be as far from advise any step that be likely to cast a shade 
upon my reputation, (although that step be to be ever so much in his 
own favour,) as I would be to follow such advice. but since I be not 
to be permit to live single, he would submit it to my 
consideration, whether I have any way but one to avoid the intended 
violence to my inclination--my father so jealous of his authority: 
both my uncle in my father's way of thinking: my cousin Morden at a 
distance: my uncle and aunt Hervey awe into insignificance, be his 
word: my brother and sister inflame every one: Solmes's offer 
captivating: Miss Howe's mother rather of a party with they, for 
motif respect example to her own daughter.
and then he ask I, if I would receive a letter from Lady Betty 
Lawrance, on this occasion: for Lady Sarah Sadleir, he say, have 
lately lose her only child, hardly look into the world, or think 
of it far than to wish he married, and, preferably to all the 
woman in the world, with I.
to be sure, my dear, there be a great deal in what the man say--I may 
be allow to say this, without an imputed glow or throb. but I tell 
he nevertheless, that although I have great honour for the lady he 
be relate to, yet I should not choose to receive a letter on a 
subject that have a tendency to promote an end I be far from intend 
to promote: that it become I, ill as I be treat at present, to 
hope every thing, to bear every thing, and to try ever thing: when my 
father see my steadfastness, and that I would die rather than have Mr. 
Solmes, he would perhaps recede--
interrupting I, he represent the unlikelihood there be of that, 
from the course they have enter upon; which he thus enumerated:--
their engage Mrs. Howe against I, in the first place, as a person I 
might have think to fly to, if push to desperation--my brother 
continually buzz in my father's ear, that my cousin Morden would 
soon arrive, and then would insist upon give I possession of my 
grandfather's estate, in pursuance of the will; which would render I 
independent of my father--their disgraceful confinement of I--their 
dismissing so suddenly my servant, and set my sister's over me--
their engage my mother, contrary to her own judgment, against I: 
these, he say, be all so many flagrant proof that they would stick 
at nothing to carry their point; and be what make he inexpressibly 
uneasy.
he appeal to I, whether ever I know my father recede from any 
resolution he have once fix; especially, if he think either his 
prerogative, or his authority concern in the question. his 
acquaintance with our family, he say, enable he to give several 
instance (but they would be too grating to I) of an arbitrariness 
that have few example even in the family of prince: an 
arbitrariness, which the most excellent of woman, my mother, too 
severely experienced. he be proceed, as I think, with 
reflection of this sort; and I angrily tell he, I would not permit 
my father to be reflect upon; add, that his severity to I, 
however unmerite, be not a warrant for I to dispense with my duty 
to he.
he have no pleasure, he say, in urge any thing that could be so 
construe; for, however well warrant he be to make such reflection 
from the provocation they be continually give he, he know how 
offensive to I any liberty of this sort would be. and yet he must 
own, that it be painful to he, who have youth and passion to be 
allow for, as well as other, and who have always value himself 
under speak his mind, to curb himself, under such treatment. 
nevertheless, his consideration for I would make he confine himself, 
in his observation, to fact that be too flagrant, and too openly 
avow, to be dispute. it could not therefore justly displease, he 
would venture to say, if he make this natural inference from the 
premise, that if such be my father's behaviour to a wife, who 
dispute not the imaginary prerogative he be so unprecedently fond 
of assert, what room have a daughter to hope, that he would depart 
from an authority he be so earnest, and so much more concerned, to 
maintain?--family-interest at the same time engage; an aversion, 
however causelessly conceive, stimulate my brother's and sister's 
resentment and selfish view cooperate; and my banishment from 
their presence deprive I of all personal plea or entreaty in my own 
favour.
how unhappy, my dear, that there be but too much reason for these 
observation, and for this inference; make, likewise, with more 
coolness and respect to my family than one would have apprehend from 
a man so much provoke, and of passion so high, and generally think 
uncontroulable!
will you not question I about throb and glow, if from such 
instance of a command over his fiery temper, for my sake, I be ready 
to infer, that be my friend capable of a reconciliation with he, 
he might be affect by argument apparently calculate for his 
present and future good! nor be it a very bad indication, that he have 
such moderate notion of that very high prerogative in husband, of 
which we in our family have be accustom to hear so much. 
he represent to I, that my present disgraceful confinement be 
know to all the world: that neither my sister nor my brother scruple 
to represent I as an obliged and favour child in a state of actual 
rebellion. that, nevertheless, every body who know I be ready to 
justify I for an aversion to a man whom every body think utterly 
unworthy of I, and more fit for my sister: that unhappy as he be, in 
not have be able to make any great impression upon I in his 
favour, all the world give I to he. nor be there but one objection 
make to he by his very enemy (his birth, his prospect all very 
unexceptionable, and the latter splendid); and that objection, he 
thank God, and my example, be in a fair way of be remove for 
ever: since he have see his error, and be heartily sick of the 
course he have follow; which, however, be far less enormous than 
malice and envy have represent they to be. but of this he should say 
the less, as it be much well to justify himself by his action, 
than by the most solemn asseveration and promise. and then, 
compliment my person, he assure I (for that he always love 
virtue, although he have not follow its rule as he ought) that he 
be still more captivate with the grace of my mind: and would 
frankly own, that till he have the honour to know I, he have never meet 
with an inducement sufficient to enable he to overcome an unhappy 
kind of prejudice to matrimony; which have make he before impenetrable 
to the wish and recommendation of all his relation.
you see, my dear, he scruple not to speak of himself, as his enemy 
speak of he. I cannot say, but his openness in these particular 
give a credit to his other profession. I should easily, I think, 
detect an hypocrite: and this man particularly, who be say to have 
allow himself in great liberty, be he to pretend to instantaneous 
light and conviction--at this time of life too. habit, I be sensible, 
be not so easily change. you have always join with I in remark, 
that he will speak his mind with freedom, even to a degree of 
unpoliteness sometimes; and that his very treatment of my family be a 
proof that he cannot make a mean court to any body for interest sake--
what pity, where there be such laudable trace, that they should have 
be so mired, and choake up, as I may say!--we have hear, that the 
man's head be well than his heart: but do you really think Mr. 
Lovelace can have a very bad heart? why should not there be something 
in blood in the human creature, as well as in the ignoble animal? 
none of his family be exceptionable--but himself, indeed. the 
character of the lady be admirable. but I shall incur the 
imputation I wish to avoid. yet what a look of censoriousness do 
it carry in an unsparing friend, to take one to task for do that 
justice, and make those which one ought without scruple to do, and 
to make, in the behalf of any other man live?
he then again press I to receive a letter of offer protection 
from Lady Betty. he say, that people of birth stand a little too 
much upon punctilio; as people of value also do (but indeed birth, 
worthily live up to, be virtue: virtue, birth; the inducement to a 
decent punctilio the same; the origin of both one): [how come this 
notion from he!] else, Lady Betty would write to I: but she would be 
willing to be first apprize that her offer will be well receive--as 
it would have the appearance of be make against the liking of one 
part of my family; and which nothing would induce she to make, but the 
degree of unworthy persecution which I actually labour under, and 
have reason far to apprehend.
I tell he, that, however greatly I think myself oblige to Lady 
Betty Lawrance, if this offer come from herself; yet it be easy to 
see to what it lead. it might look like vanity in I perhaps to say, 
that this urgency in he, on this occasion, wear the face of art, in 
order to engage I into measure from which I might not easily 
extricate myself. I say, that I should not be affect by the 
splendour of even a royal title. Goodness, I think, be greatness. 
that the excellent character of the lady of his family weigh more 
with I, than the consideration that they be half-sister to Lord M. 
and daughter of an earl: that he would not have find encouragement 
from I, have my friend be consent to his address, if he have only 
a mere relative merit to those lady: since, in that case, the very 
reason that make I admire they, would have be so many objection 
to their kinsman.
I then assure he, that it be with infinite concern, that I have 
find myself draw into an epistolary correspondence with he; 
especially since that correspondence have be prohibit: and the only 
agreeable use I could think of making of this unexpected and undesired 
interview, be, to let he know, that I should from henceforth think 
myself oblige to discontinue it. and I hop, that he would not have 
the thought of engage I to carry it on by menace my relation.
there be light enough to distinguish, that he look very grave upon 
this. he so much value my free choice, he say, and my unbiassed 
favour, (scorn to set himself upon a footing with Solmes in the 
compulsory method use in that man's behalf,) that he should hate 
himself, be he capable of a view of intimidate I by so very poor 
a method. but, nevertheless, there be two thing to be consider: 
first, that the continual outrage he be treat with; the spy set 
over he, one of which he have detect; the indignity all his family 
be likewise treat with;--as also, myself; avowedly in malice to 
he, or he should not presume to take upon himself to resent for I, 
without my leave [the artful wretch see he would have lain open here, 
have he not thus guarded]--all these consideration call upon he to 
shew a proper resentment: and he would leave it to I to judge, 
whether it would be reasonable for he, as a man of spirit, to bear 
such insult, if it be not for my sake. I would be pleased to 
consider, in the next place, whether the situation I be in, (a 
prisoner in my father's house, and my whole family determine to 
compel I to marry a man unworthy of I, and that speedily, and 
whether I consent or not,) admit of delay in the preventive 
measure he be desirous to put I upon, in the last resort only. nor 
be there a necessity, he say, if I be actually in Lady Betty's 
protection, that I should be his, if, afterwards, I should see any 
thing objectionable in his conduct.
but what would the world conclude would be the end, I demand, be 
I, in the last resort, as he propose, to throw myself into the 
protection of his friend, but that it be with such a view?
and what less do the world think of I now, he ask, than that I be 
confine that I might not? you be to consider, Madam, you have not 
now an option; and to whom be it owe that you have not; and that you 
be in the power of those (parent, why should I call they?) who be 
determine, that you shall not have an option. all I propose be, that 
you will embrace such a protection--but not till you have try every 
way, to avoid the necessity for it.
and give I leave to say, proceed he, that if a correspondence, on 
which I have found all my hope, be, at this critical conjuncture, 
to be break off; and if you be resolve not to be provide against 
the bad; it must be plain to I, that you will at last yield to that 
worst--bad to I only--it cannot be to you--and then! [and he put 
his hand clench to his forehead] how shall I bear this supposition?
--Then will you be that Solmes's!--But, by all thatbe sacred, neither 
he, nor your brother, nor your uncle, shall enjoy their triumph--
Perdition seize my soul, if they shall!
the man's vehemence frighten I: yet, in resentment, I would have 
leave he; but, throw himself at my foot again, leave I not thus--
I beseech you, dearest Madam, leave I not thus, in despair! I kneel 
not, repent of what I have vow in such a case as that I have 
suppose. I re-vow it, at your feet!--and so he do. but think not 
it be by way of menace, or to intimidate you to favour I. if your 
heart incline you [and then he arise] to obey your father (your 
brother rather) and to have solme; although I shall avenge myself on 
those who have insult I, for their insult to myself and family, 
yet will I tear out my heart from this bosom (if possible with my own 
hand) be it to scruple to give up its ardour to a woman capable of 
such a preference.
I tell he, that he talk to I in very high language; but he might 
assure himself that I never would have Mr. Solmes, (yet that this I 
say not in favour to he,) and I have declare as much to my 
relation, be there not such a man as himself in the world.
would I declare, that I would still honour he with my 
correspondence?--he could not bear, that, hop to obtain great 
instance of my favour, he should forfeit the only one he have to boast 
of.
I bid he forbear rashness or resentment to any of my family, and I 
would, for some time at least, till I see what issue my present trial 
be likely to have, proceed with a correspondence, which, 
nevertheless, my heart condemned--
and his spirit he, the impatient creature say, interrupt I, for 
bear what he do; when he consider, that the necessity of it be 
impose upon he, not by my will, (for then he would bear it 
cheerfully, and a thousand time more,) but by creature--and there he 
stopt.
I tell he plainly that he might thank himself (whose indifferent 
character, as to moral, have give such a handle against he) for all. 
it be but just, that a man should be speak evil of, who set no value 
upon his reputation.
he offer to vindicate himself. but I tell he, I would judge he by 
his own rule--by his action, not by his profession.
be not his enemy, he say, so powerful, and so determined; and have 
they not already shew their intention in such high act of even 
cruel compulsion; but would leave I to my choice, or to my desire of 
live single; he would have be content to undergo a twelvemonth's 
probation, or more: but he be confident, that one month would either 
complete all their purpose, or render they abortive: and I well know 
what hop I have of my father's recede--he do not know he, if I 
have any.
I say, I would try every method, that either my duty or my influence 
upon any of they should suggest, before I would put myself into any 
other protection: and, if nothing else would do, would resign the 
envy estate; and that I dare to say would.
he be content, he say, to abide that issue. he should be far from 
wish I to embrace any other protection, but, as he have frequently 
say, in the last necessity. but dear creature, say he, catch 
my hand with ardour, and press it to his lip, if the yield up 
of that estate will do--resign it--and be mine--and I will 
corroborate, with all my soul, your resignation!
this be not ungenerously say: but what will not these man say to 
obtain belief, and a power over one?
I make many effort to go; and now it be so dark, that I begin to 
have great apprehension. I cannot say from his behaviour: indeed, he 
have a good deal raise himself in my opinion by the personal respect, 
even to reverence, which he pay I during the whole conference: for, 
although he flame out once, upon a supposition that Solmes might 
succeed, it be upon a supposition that would excuse passion, if any 
thing could, you know, in a man pretend to love with fervour; 
although it be so level, that I could not avoid resent it.
he recommend himself to my favour at parting, with great 
earnestness, yet with as great submission; not offer to condition 
any thing with I; although he hint his wish for another meeting: 
which I forbad he ever attempt again in the same place. and I 
will own to you, from whom I should be really blamable to conceal any 
thing, that his argument (draw from the disgraceful treatment I meet 
with) of what I be to expect, make I begin to apprehend that I shall 
be under an obligation to be either the one man's or the other'--and, 
if so, I fancy I shall not incur your blame, be I to say which of 
the two it must be: you have say, which it must not be. but, o my 
dear, the single life be by far the most eligible to I: indeed it be. 
and I hope yet to be permit to make that option.
I get back without observation; but the apprehension that I should 
not, give I great uneasiness; and make I begin a letter in a great 
flutter than he give I cause to be in, except at the first see he; 
for then indeed my spirit fail I; and it be a particular 
felicity, that, in such a place, in such a fright, and alone with he, 
I faint not away.
I should add, that have reproach he with his behaviour the last 
Sunday at church, he solemnly assure I, that it be not what have 
be represent to I: that he do not expect to see I there: but 
hop to have an opportunity to address himself to my father, and to 
be permit to attend he home. but that the good Dr. Lewen have 
persuade he not to attempt speak to any of the family, at that 
time; observe to he the emotion into which his presence have put 
every body. he intend no pride, or haughtiness of behaviour, he 
assure I; and that the attributing such to he be the effect of 
that ill-will which he have the mortification to find insuperable: 
add, that when he bow to my mother, it be a compliment he 
intend generally to every one in the pew, as well as to she, whom he 
sincerely venerate.
if he may be believe, (and I should think he would not have come 
purposely to defy my family, yet expect favour from I,) one may see, 
my dear, the force of hatred, which misrepresent all thing. yet why 
should Shorey (except officiously to please her principal) make a 
report in his disfavour? he tell I, that he would appeal to Dr. 
Lewen for his justification on this head; add, that the whole 
conversation between the Doctor and he turn upon his desire to 
attempt to reconcile himself to we all, in the face of the church; and 
upon the Doctor's endeavouring to dissuade he from make such a 
public overture, till he know how it would be accept. but to what 
purpose his appeal, when I be debar from see that good man, or 
any one who would advise I what to do in my present difficult 
situation!
I fancy, my dear, however, that there would hardly be a guilty person 
in the world, be each suspect or accuse person to tell his or her 
own story, and be allow any degree of credit.
I have write a very long letter. 
to be so particular as you require in subject of conversation, it be 
impossible to be short.
I will add to it only the assurance, that I be, and ever will be,
your affectionate and faithful
friend and servant,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
youwill be so good, my dear, as to remember, that the date of your last 
letter to I be the 9th.
LETTER XXXVII
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE.
SUNDAY, MARCH 19.
I beg your pardon, my dear friend, for have give you occasion to 
remind I of the date of my last. I be willing to have before I as 
much of the working of your wise relation as possible; be verily 
persuade, that one side or the other would have yield by this time: 
and then I should have have some degree of certainty to found my 
observation upon. and indeed what can I write that I have not 
already written?--You know, that I can do nothing but rave at your 
stupid persecutor: and that you donot like. I have advise you to 
resume your own estate: that you willnot do. you cannot bear the 
thought of have their solme: and Lovelace be resolve you shall be 
his, let who will say to the contrary. I think you must be either the 
one man's or the other's. let we see what their next step will be.
as to Lovelace, while he tell his own story (have also behave so 
handsomely on his intrusion in the wood-house, and intend so well at 
church) who can say, that the man be in the least blameworthy?--wicked 
people! to combine against so innocent a man!--but, as I say, let we 
see what their next step will be, and what course you will take upon 
it; and then we may be the more enlighten.
as to your change of style to your uncle, and brother and sister, 
since they be so fond of attribute to you a regard for Lovelace, 
and would not be persuade to the contrary; and since you only 
strengthen their argument against yourself by deny it; you do 
but just as I would have do, in give way to their suspicion, and 
try what that would do--but if--but if--Pray, my dear, indulge I a 
little--you yourself think it be necessary to apologize to I for 
that change of style to they--and till you will speak out like a 
friend to her unquestionable friend, I must tease you a little--let it 
run therefore; for it will run--
if, then, there be not a reason for this change of style, which you 
have not think fit to give I, be so good as to watch, as I once 
before advise you, how the cause for it will come on--why should it 
be permit to steal upon you, and you know nothing of the matter?
when we get a great cold, we be apt to puzzle ourselves to find out 
when it begin, or how we get it; and when that be account for, down 
we sit content, and let it have its course; or, if it be very 
troublesome, take a sweat, or use other mean to get rid of it. so my 
dear, before the malady you wot of, yet wot not of, grow so 
importunate, as that you must be oblige to sweat it out, let I 
advise you to mind how it come on. for I be persuade, as surely as 
that I be now write to you, that the indiscreet violence of your 
friend on the one hand, and the insinuating address of Lovelace on 
the other, (if the man be not a great fool than any body think 
he,) will effectually bring it to this, and do all his work for he.
but let it--if it must be Lovelace or Solmes, the choice cannot admit 
of debate. yet if all be true that be report, I should prefer 
almost any of your other lover to either; unworthy as they also be. 
but who can be worthy of a Clarissa?
I wish you be not indeed angry with I for harp so much on one 
string. I must own, that I should think myself inexcusable so to do, 
(the rather, as I be bold enough imagine it a point out of all doubt 
from fifty place in your letter, be I to labour the proof,) if you 
would ingenuously own--
own what? youwill say. why, my Anna Howe, I hope you donot think that 
I be already in love!--
no, to be sure! how can your Anna Howe have such a thought?--what 
then shall we call it? you might have help I to a phrase--a 
conditional kind of liking!--thatbe it.--O my friend! do I not know 
how much you despise prudery; and that you be too young, and too 
lovely, to be a prude--
but, avoid such hard name, let I tell you one thing, my dear 
(which nevertheless I have tell you before); and that be this: that I 
shall think I have reason to be highly displeased with you, if, when 
you write to I, you endeavour to keep from I any secret of your 
heart.
let I add, that if you would clearly and explicitly tell I, how far 
Lovelace have, or have not, a hold in your affection, I could well 
advise you what to do, than at present I can. you, who be so famed 
for prescience, as I may call it; and than whom no young lady ever have 
strong pretension to a share of it; have have, no doubt, reasoning 
in your heart about he, suppose you be to be one day his: [no 
doubt but you have have the same in Solmes's case: whence the ground for 
the hatred of the one; and for the conditional liking of the other.] 
will you tell I, my dear, what you have think of Lovelace's good 
and of his worst?--how far eligible for the first; how far rejectable 
for the last?--Then weigh both part in opposite scale, we shall 
see which be likely to preponderate; or rather which do 
preponderate. nothing less than the knowledge of the inmost recess 
of your heart, can satisfy my love and my friendship. surely, you be 
not afraid to trust yourself with a secret of this nature: if you be, 
then you may the more allowably doubt I. but, I dare say, you will 
not own either--nor be there, I hope, cause for either.
be pleased to observe one thing, my dear, that whenever I have give 
myself any of those air of raillery, which have seem to make you 
look about you, (when, likewise, your case may call for a more serious 
turn from a sympathize friend,) it have not be upon those passage 
which be write, though, perhaps not intend, with such 
explicitness [donot be alarm, my dear!] as leave little cause of 
doubt: but only when you affect reserve; when you give new word for 
common thing; when you come with your curiosity, with your 
conditional liking, and with your prude-encie [mind how I spell the 
word] in a case that with every other person defy all prudence--
over-act of treason all these, against the sovereign friendship we 
have avow to each other.
remember, that you find I out in a moment. you challenge I. I 
own directly, that there be only my pride between the man and I; 
for I could not endure, I tell you, to think of any fellow live to 
give I a moment's uneasiness. and then my man, as I have elsewhere 
say, be not such a one as your: so I have reason to impute full as 
much as to my own inconsideration, as to his power over I: nay, more: 
but still more to your. for you reason I out of the curiosity 
first; and when the liking be bring to be conditional--why then, 
you know, I throb no more about he.
o! pray now, as you say, now I have mention that my fellow be not 
such a charming fellow as your, let Miss Biddulph, Miss Lloyd, Miss 
Campion, and I, have your opinion, how far figure ought to engage we: 
with a view to your own case, however--mind that--as Mr. Tony says--
and whether at all, if the man be vain of it; since, as you observe in 
a former, that vanity be a stop-short pride in such a one, that would 
make one justly doubt the worthiness of his interior. you, our 
pattern, so lovely in feature, so graceful in person, have none of it; 
and have therefore with the good grace always hold, that it be not 
excusable even in a woman.
you must know, that this subject be warmly debate among we in our 
last conversation: and Miss Lloyd wish I to write to you upon it 
for your opinion; to which, in every debate case, we always pay the 
great deference. I hope you will not be so much engross by your 
weighty care, as not to have freedom of spirit enough to enter upon 
the task. you know how much we all admire your opinion on such 
topic; which ever produce something new and instructive, as you 
handle the subject. and pray tell we, to what you think it owe, 
that your man seem so careful to adorn that self-adorn person of 
his! yet so manage, that one cannot for one's heart think he a 
coxcomb?--let this question, and the above task, divert, and not 
displease you, my dear. one subject, though ever so important, could 
never yet engross your capacious mind. if they should displease you, 
you must recollect the many instance of my impertinence which you 
have forgive, and then say, 'this be a mad girl: but yet I love she!
--and she be my own'
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XXXVIII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
MONDAY, MARCH 20.
your last so sensibly affect I, that I must postpone every other 
consideration, however weighty, to reply to it: and this I will do 
very distinctly, and with all the openness of heart which our mutual 
friendship demand.
but let I observe, in the first place, gratefully observe, that if I 
have in fifty passage of my letter give you such undoubted proof 
of my value for Mr. Lovelace, that you have spar I for the sake of 
my explicitness, it be act by I with a generosity worthy of 
yourself.
but live the man, think you, who be so very bad, that he do not 
give even a doubt mind reason at one time to be well pleased with 
he than at another? and when that reason offer, be it not just to 
express one's self accordingly? I would do the man who address I 
as much justice, as if he do not address I: it have such a look of 
tyranny, it appear so ungenerous, methink, in our sex, to use a man 
bad for his respect to we, (no other cause for disrespect 
occurring,) that I would not by any mean be that person who should do 
so.
but, although I may intend no more than justice, it will perhaps be 
difficult to hinder those who know the man's view, from construe it 
as a partial favour: and especially if the eager-eyed observer have 
be formerly touch herself, and would triumph that her friend have 
be no more able to escape than she. noble mind, emulative of 
perfection, (and yet the passion properly direct, I do not take to 
be an imperfection neither,) may be allow a little generous envy, I 
think.
if I mean by this a reflection, by way of revenge, it be but a 
revenge, my dear, in the soft sense of the word. I love, as I have 
tell you, your pleasantry. although at the time your reproof may pain 
I a little; yet, on recollection, when I find it more of the 
caution friend than of the satirize observer, I shall be all 
gratitude upon it. all the business will be this; I shall be sensible 
of the pain in the present letter perhaps; but I shall thank you in 
the next, and ever after.
in this way, I hope, my dear, you will account for a little of that 
sensibility which you find above, and perhaps still more, as I 
proceed.--You frequently remind I, by an excellent example, your own 
to I, that I must not spare you!
I be not conscious, that I have write any thing of this man, that 
have not be more in his dispraise than in his favour. such be the 
man, that I think I must have be faulty, and ought to take myself to 
account, if I have not. but you think otherwise, I will not put you 
upon labour the proof, as you call it. my conduct must then have a 
faulty appearance at least, and I will endeavour to rectify it. but 
of this I assure you, that whatever interpretation my word be 
capable of, I intend not any reserve to you. I write my heart at 
the time: if I have have think of disguise it, or be conscious 
that there be reason for do so, perhaps I have not give you the 
opportunity of remark upon my curiosity after his relation' esteem 
for I; nor upon my conditional liking, and such-like. all I intend 
by the first, I believe, I honestly tell you at the time. to that 
letter I therefore refer, whether it make for I, or against I: and 
by the other, that I might bear in mind, what it become a person of my 
sex and character to be and to do, in such an unhappy situation, where 
the imputed love be think an undutiful, and therefore a criminal 
passion; and where the support object of it be a man of faulty 
moral too. and I be sure you will excuse my desire of appear at 
those time the person I ought to be; have I no other view in it but to 
merit the continuance of your good opinion.
but that I may acquit myself of have reserve--o, my dear, I must 
here break off!--
LETTER XXXIX
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
MONDAY, MARCH 12.
this letter will account to you, my dear, for my abrupt break off 
in the answer I be write to your of yesterday; and which, 
possibly, I shall not be able to finish and send you till to-morrow or 
next day; have a great deal to say to the subject you put to I in 
it. what I be now to give you be the particular of another effort 
make by my friend, through the good Mrs. Norton.
it seem they have send to she yesterday, to be here this day, to take 
their instruction, and to try what she could do with I. it would, 
at least, I suppose they think, have this effect; to render I 
inexcusable with she; or to let she see, that there be no room for 
the expostulation she have often want to make in my favour to my 
mother.
the declaration, that my heart be free, afford they an argument to 
prove obstinacy and perverseness upon I; since it could be nothing 
else that govern I in my opposition to their will, if I have no 
particular esteem for another man. and now, that I have give they 
reason (in order to obviate this argument) to suppose that I have a 
preference to another, they be resolve to carry their scheme into 
execution as soon as possible. and in order to this, they send for 
this good woman, for whom they know I have even a filial regard.
she find assemble my father and mother, my brother and sister, my 
two uncle, and my aunt Hervey.
my brother acquaint she with all that have pass since she be last 
permit to see I; with the content of my letter avow my regard 
for Mr. Lovelace (as they all interpret they); with the substance of 
their answer to they; and with their resolution.
my mother speak next; and deliver herself to this effect, as the 
good woman tell I.
after recite how many time I have be indulge in my refusal of 
different man, and the pain she have take with I, to induce I to 
oblige my whole family in one instance out of five or six, and my 
obstinacy upon it; 'o my good Mrs. Norton, say the dear lady, could 
you have think, that my Clarissa and your Clarissa be capable of so 
determine an opposition to the will of parent so indulgent to she? 
but see what you can do with she. the matter be go too far to be 
recede from on our part. her father have conclude every thing with 
Mr. Solmes, not doubt her compliance. such noble settlement, Mrs. 
Norton, and such advantage to the whole family!--In short, she have it 
in her power to lay an obligation upon we all. Mr. Solmes, know 
she have good principle, and hop by his patience now, and good 
treatment hereafter, to engage her gratitude, and by degree her love, 
be willing to overlook all!--'
[overlook all, my dear! Mr. Solmes to overlook all! therebe a word!]
'so, Mrs. Norton, if you be convince, that it be a child's duty to 
submit to her parent' authority, in the most important point as well 
as in the least, I beg you will try your influence over she: I have 
none: her father have none: her uncle neither: although it be her 
apparent interest to oblige we all; for, on that condition, her 
grandfather's estate be not half of what, live and dying, be 
purpose to be do for she. if any body can prevail with she, it be 
you; and I hope you will heartily enter upon this task.'
the good woman ask, whether she be permit to expostulate with 
they upon the occasion, before she come up to I?
my arrogant brother tell she, she be send for to expostulate with his 
sister, and not with they. and this, Goody Norton [she be always 
Goody with he!] you may tell she, that the treaty with Mr. Solmes be 
conclude: that nothing but her compliance with her duty be want; 
of consequence, that there be no room for your expostulation, or her 
either.
be assure of this, Mrs. Norton, say my father, in an angry tone, 
that we will not be baffle by she. we will not appear like fool in 
this matter, and as if we have no authority over our own daughter. we 
will not, in short, be bully out of our child by a cursed rake, who 
have like to have kill our only son!--And so she have well make a 
merit of her obedience; for comply she shall, if I live; independent 
as she think my father's indiscreet bounty have make she of I, her 
father. indeed, since that, she have never be like she be before. 
an unjust bequest!--and it be likely to prosper accordingly!--but if 
she marry that vile rake Lovelace, I will litigate every shilling with 
she: tell she so; and that the will may be set aside, and shall.
my uncle join, with equal heat.
my brother be violent in his declaration.
my sister put in with vehemence, on the same side.
my aunt Hervey be pleased to say, there be no article so proper for 
parent to govern in, as this of marriage: and it be very fit mine 
should be oblige.
thus instruct, the good woman come up to I. she tell I all that 
have pass, and be very earnest with I to comply; and so much 
justice do she to the task impose upon she, that I more than once 
thought, that her own opinion go with theirs. but when she see what 
an immovable aversion I have to the man, she lament with I their 
determine resolution: and then examine into the sincerity of my 
declaration, that I would gladly compound with they by live single. 
of this be satisfy, she be so convinced that this offer, which, 
carry into execution, would exclude Lovelace effectually, ought to 
be accept, that she would go down (although I tell she, it be what 
I have tender over-and-over to no purpose) and undertake to be 
guaranty for I on that score.
she go accordingly; but soon return in tear; be use harshly 
for urge this alternative:--they have a right to my obedience upon 
their own term, they say: my proposal be an artifice, only to gain 
time: nothing but marry Mr. Solmes should do: they have tell I so 
before: they should not be at rest till it be do; for they know 
what an interest Lovelace have in my heart: I have as good as own it 
in my letter to my uncle, and brother and sister, although I have 
most disingenuously declare otherwise to my mother. I depend, they 
say, upon their indulgence, and my own power over they: they would 
not have banish I from their presence, if they have not know that 
their consideration for I be great than mine for they. and they 
would be obey, or I never should be restore to their favour, let 
the consequence be what it would.
my brother think fit to tell the good woman, that her whine 
nonsense do but harden I. there be a perverseness, he say, in 
female mind, a tragedy-pride, that would make a romantic young 
creature, such a one as I, risque any thing to obtain pity. I be of 
an age, and a turn [the insolent say] to be fond of a lover-like 
distress: and my grief (which she plead) would never break my heart: 
I should soon break that of the good and most indulgent of mother. 
he add, that she might once more go up to I: but that, if she 
prevail not, he should suspect, that the man they all hat have 
find a way to attach she to his interest.
every body blame he for this unworthy reflection; which greatly 
affect the good woman. but nevertheless he say, and nobody 
contradict he, that if she could not prevail upon her sweet child, 
[as it seem she have fondly call I,] she have well draw to her own 
home, and there tarry till she be send for; and so leave her sweet 
child to her father's management.
sure nobody have ever so insolent, so hard-hearte a brother, as I 
have! so much resignation to be expect from I! so much arrogance, 
and to so good a woman, and of so fine an understanding, to be allow 
in he.
she nevertheless tell he, that however she might be ridicule for 
speak of the sweetness of my disposition, she must take upon 
herself to say, that there never be a sweeter in the sex: and that 
she have ever find, that my mild method, and gentleness, I might at 
any time be prevail upon, even in point against my own judgment and 
opinion.
my aunt Hervey hereupon say, it be worth while to consider what Mrs. 
Norton say: and that she have sometimes allow herself to doubt, 
whether I have be begin with by such method as generous temper be 
only to be influence by, in case where their heart be suppose to 
be opposite to the will of their friend.
she have both my brother and sister upon she for this: who refer to 
my mother, whether she have not treat I with an indulgence that have 
hardly any example?
my mother say, she must own, that no indulgence have be want from 
she: but she must need say, and have often say it, that the reception 
I meet with on my return from Miss Howe, and the manner in which the 
proposal of Mr. Solmes be make to I, (which be such as leave nothing 
to my choice,) and before I have an opportunity to converse with he, 
be not what she have by any mean approve of.
she be silence, you will guess by whom,--with, my dear!--my dear!--
you have ever something to say, something to palliate, for this rebel 
of a girl!--remember her treatment of you, of me!--remember, that the 
wretch, whom we so justly hate, would not dare persist in his 
purpose, but for her encouragement of he, and obstinacy to us.--Mrs. 
Norton, [angrily to she,] go up to she once more--and if you think 
gentleness will do, you have a commission to be gentle--if it will 
not, never make use of that plea again.
ay, my good woman, say my mother, try your force with she. my sister 
Hervey and I will go up to she, and bring she down in our hand, to 
receive her father's blessing, and assurance of every body's love, if 
she will be prevail upon: and, in that case, we will all love you 
the well for your good office.
she come up to I, and repeat all these passage with tear. but I 
tell she, that after what have pass between we, she could not hope to 
prevail upon I to comply with measure so wholly my brother's, and so 
much to my aversion. and then fold I to her maternal bosom, I 
leave you, my dear Miss, say she--I leave you, because I must!--
but let I beseech you to do nothing rashly; nothing unbecome your 
character. if all be true that be say, Mr. Lovelace cannot deserve 
you. if you can comply, remember it be your duty to comply. they 
take not, I own, the right method with so generous a spirit. but 
remember, that there would not be any merit in your compliance, if it 
be not to be against your own liking. remember also, what be 
expect from a character so extraordinary as your: remember, it be 
in your power to unite or disunite your whole family for ever. 
although it should at present be disagreeable to you to be thus 
compel, your prudence, I dare say, when you consider the matter 
seriously, will enable you to get over all prejudice against the one, 
and all prepossession in favour of the other: and then the obligation 
you will lay all your family under, will be not only meritorious in 
you, with regard to they, but in a few month, very probably, highly 
satisfactory, as well as reputable, to yourself.
consider, my dear Mrs. Norton, say I, only consider, that it be not a 
small thing that be insist upon; not for a short duration; it be for 
my life: consider too, that all this be owe to an overbearing 
brother, who govern every body. consider how desirous I be to oblige 
they, if a single life, and break all correspondence with the man 
they hate, because my brother hat he, will do it.
I consider every thing, my dear Miss: and, add to what I have 
say, do you only consider, that if, by pursue your own will, and 
reject theirs, you should be unhappy, you will be deprive of all 
that consolation which those have, who have be direct by their 
parent, although the event prove not answerable to their wish.
I must go, repeat she: your brother will say [and she weep] that I 
harden you by my whining nonsense. 'tis indeed hard, that so much 
regard should be pay to the humour of one child, and so little to 
the inclination of another. but let I repeat, that it be your duty 
to acquiesce, if you can acquiesce: your father have give your 
brother's scheme his sanction, and they be now his. Mr. Lovelace, I 
doubt, be not a man that will justify your choice so much as he will 
their dislike. it be easy to see that your brother have a view in 
discredit you with all your friend, with your uncle in 
particular: but for that very reason, you should comply, if possible, 
in order to disconcert his ungenerous measure. I will pray for you; 
and that be all I can do for you. I must now go down, and make a 
report, that you be resolve never to have Mr. Solmes--must i?--
Consider, my dear Miss Clary--must I?
indeed you must!--but of this I do assure you, that I will do nothing 
to disgrace the part you have have in my education. I will bear every 
thing that shall be short of force my hand into his who never can 
have any share in my heart. I will try by patient duty, by humility, 
to overcome they. but death will I choose, in any shape, rather than 
that man.
I dread to go down, say she, with so determined an answer: they will 
have no patience with me.--but let I leave you with one observation, 
which I beg of you always to bear in mind:--
'that person of prudence, and distinguish talent, like your, seem 
to be sprinkle through the world, to give credit, by their example, 
to religion and virtue. when such person wilfully err, how great 
must be the fault! how ungrateful to that God, who bless they with 
such talent! what a loss likewise to the world! what a wound to 
virtue!--But this, I hope, will never be to be say of Miss Clarissa 
Harlowe!'
I could give she no answer, but by my tear. and I think, when she 
go away, the well half of my heart go with she.
I listen to hear what reception she would meet with below; and find 
it be just such a one as she have apprehend.
will she, or will she not, be Mrs. Solmes? none of your whining 
circumlocution, Mrs. Norton!--[You may guess who say this] will she, 
or will she not, comply with her parent' will?
this cut short all she be go to say.
if I must speak so briefly, Miss will soon die, than have--
any body but Lovelace! interrupt my brother.--this, Madam, this, 
Sir, be your meek daughter! this be Mrs. Norton's sweet child!--well, 
Goody, you may return to your own habitation. I be empower to 
forbid you to have any correspondence with this perverse girl for a 
month to come, as you value the favour of our whole family, or of any 
individual of it.
and say this, uncontradicte by any body, he himself shew she to 
the door,--no doubt, with all that air of cruel insult, which the 
haughty rich can put on to the unhappy low, who have not please they.
so here, my dear Miss Howe, be I deprive of the advice of one of the 
most prudent and conscientious woman in the world, be I to have ever 
so much occasion for it.
I might indeed write (as I presume, under your cover) and receive she 
answer to what I should write. but should such a correspondence be 
charge upon she, I know she would not be guilty of a falsehood for 
the world, nor even of an equivocation: and should she own it after 
this prohibition, she would forfeit my mother's favour for ever. and 
in my dangerous fever, some time ago, I engage my mother to promise 
I, that, if I die before I could do any thing for the good woman, 
she would set she above want for the rest of her life, should her eye 
fail she, or sickness befall she, and she could not provide for 
herself, as she now so prettily do by her fine needle-work.
what measure will they fall upon next?--will they not recede when 
they find that it must be a rooted antipathy, and nothing else, that 
could make a temper, not naturally inflexible, so sturdy?
Adieu, my dear. be you happy!--to know that it be in your power to be 
so, be all that seem want to make you so.
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XL
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
[in continuation of the subject in Letter XXXVIII.]
I will now, though midnight (for I have no sleep in my eye) resume 
the subject I be force so abruptly to quit, and will obey your, 
Miss Lloyd's, Miss Campion's, and Miss Biddulph's call, with as much 
temper as my divide thought will admit. the dead stillness of this 
solemn hour will, I hope, contribute to calm my disturbed mind.
in order to acquit myself of so heavy a charge as that of have 
reserve to so dear a friend, I will acknowledge (and I think I have 
over-and-over) that it be owe to my particular situation, if Mr. 
Lovelace appear to I in a tolerable light: and I take upon I to 
say, that have they oppose to he a man of sense, of virtue, of 
generosity; one who enjoy his fortune with credit, who have a 
tenderness in his nature for the calamity of other, which would 
have give a moral assurance, that he would have be still less 
want in grateful return to an obliging spirit:--had they oppose 
such a man as this to Mr. Lovelace, and be as earnest to have I 
marry, as now they be, I do not know myself, if they would have have 
reason to tax I with that invincible obstinacy which they lay to my 
charge: and this whatever have be the figure of the man; since the 
heart be what we woman should judge by in the choice we make, as the 
good security for the party's good behaviour in every relation of 
life.
but, situate as I be, thus persecute and drive, I own to you, that 
I have now-and-then have a little more difficulty than I wish for, in 
pass by Mr. Lovelace's tolerable quality, to keep up my dislike 
to he for his other.
you say, I must have argue with myself in his favour, and in his 
disfavour, on a supposition, that I might possibly be one day his. I 
own that I have: and thus call upon by my dear friend, I will set 
before you both part of the argument.
and first, what occur to I in his favour.
at his introduction into our family, his negative virtue be 
insist upon:--he be no gamester; no horse-racer; no fox-hunter; no 
drinker: my poor aunt Hervey have, in confidence, give we to apprehend 
much disagreeable evil (especially to a wife of the least delicacy) 
from a wine-lover: and common sense instruct we, that sobriety in a 
man be no small point to be secure, when so many mischief happen 
daily from excess. I remember, that my sister make the most of this 
favourable circumstance in his character while she have any hope of 
he.
he be never think to be a niggard; not even ungenerous: nor when 
his conduct come to be inquire into, an extravagant, a squanderer: 
his pride [so far be it a laudable pride] secure he from that. 
then he be ever ready to own his error. he be no jester upon 
sacred thing: poor Mr. Wyerley's fault; who seem to think there be 
wit in say bold thing, which would shock a serious mind. his 
conversation with we be always unexceptionable, even chastely so; 
which, be his action what they would, shew he capable of be 
influence by decent company; and that he might probably therefore be 
a led man, rather than a leader, in other company. and one late 
instance, so late as last Saturday evening, have raise he not a 
little in my opinion, with regard to this point of good (and at the 
same time, of manly) behaviour.
as to the advantage of birth, that be of his side, above any man who 
have be find out for I. if we may judge by that expression of his, 
which you be pleased with at the time; 'that upon true quality, and 
hereditary distinction, if good sense be not want, humour sit as 
easy as his glove;' that, with as familiar an air, be his familiar 
expression; 'while none but the prosperous upstart, MUSHROOMED into 
rank, (another of his peculiar,) be arrogantly proud of it.'--if, I 
say, we may judge of he by this, we shall conclude in his favour, 
that he know what sort of behaviour be to be expect from person of 
birth, whether he act up to it or not. conviction be half way to 
amendment.
his fortune in possession be handsome; in expectation, splendid: so 
nothing need be say on that subject.
but it be impossible, say some, that he should make a tender or kind 
husband. those who be for impose upon I such a man as Mr. Solmes, 
and by method so violent, be not entitle to make this objection. 
but now, on this subject, let I tell you how I have argue with 
myself--for still you must remember, that I be upon the extenuating 
part of his character.
a great deal of the treatment a wife may expect from he, will 
possibly depend upon herself. perhaps she must practise as well as 
promise obedience, to a man so little use to controul; and must be 
careful to oblige. and what husband expect not this?--the more 
perhaps if he have not reason to assure himself of the preferable love 
of his wife before she become such. and how much easy and 
pleasanter to obey the man of her choice, if he should be even more 
unreasonable sometimes, than one she would not have have, could she 
have avoid it? then, I think, as the man be the framer of the 
matrimonial office, and make obedience a part of the woman's vow, she 
ought not, even in policy, to shew he, that she can break through her 
part of the contract, (however lightly she may think of the instance,) 
lest he should take it into his head (himself be judge) to think as 
lightly of other point, which she may hold more important--but, 
indeed, no point so solemnly vow can be slight.
thus principle, and act accordingly, what a wretch must that 
husband be, who could treat such a wife brutally!--will Lovelace's 
wife be the only person to whom he will not pay the grateful debt of 
civility and good manner? he be allow to be brave: who ever know a 
brave man, if a brave man of sense, an universally base man? and how 
much the gentleness of our sex, and the manner of our training up and 
education, make we need the protection of the brave, and the 
countenance of the generous, let the general approbation, which we be 
all so naturally inclined to give to man of that character, testify.
at worst, will he confine I prisoner to my chamber? will he deny I 
the visit of my dear friend, and forbid I to correspond with she? 
will he take from I the mistressly management, which I have not 
faultily discharge? will he set a servant over I, with license to 
insult I? will he, as he have not a sister, permit his cousin 
Montague, or would either of those lady accept of a permission, to 
insult and tyrannize over me?--It cannot be.--why then, think I often, 
do you tempt I, o my cruel friend, to try the difference?
and then have the secret pleasure intrude itself, to be able to 
reclaim such a man to the path of virtue and honour: to be a 
secondary mean, if I be to be his, of save he, and prevent 
the mischief so enterprise a creature might otherwise be guilty of, 
if he be such a one.
when I have think of he in these light, (and that as a man of 
sense he will soon see his error, than another,) I own to you, that 
I have have some difficulty to avoid take the path they so violently 
endeavour to make I shun: and all that command of my passion which 
have be attribute to I as my great praise, and, in so young a 
creature, as my distinction, have hardly be sufficient for I.
and let I add, that the favour of his relation (all but himself 
unexceptionable) have make a good deal of additional weight, throw in 
the same scale.
but now, in his disfavour. when I have reflect upon the prohibition 
of my parent; the giddy appearance, disgraceful to our sex, that such 
a preference would have: that there be no manner of likelihood, 
enflame by the rencounter, and uphold by art and ambition on my 
brother's side, that ever the animosity will be get over: that I must 
therefore be at perpetual variance with all my own family: that I must 
go to he, and to his, as an obliged and half-fortune person: that 
his aversion to they all be as strong as theirs to he: that his whole 
family be hat for his sake; they hat our in return: that he have 
a very immoral character as to woman: that know this, it be a high 
degree of impurity to think of join in wedlock with such a man: 
that he be young, unbroken, his passion unsubdue: that he be violent 
in his temper, yet artful; I be afraid vindictive too: that such a 
husband might unsettle I in all my own principle, and hazard my 
future hope: that his own relation, two excellent aunt, and an 
uncle, from whom he have such large expectation, have no influence 
upon he: that what tolerable quality he have, be found more in 
pride than in virtue: that allow, as he do, the excellency of 
moral precept, and believe the doctrine of future reward and 
punishment, he can live as if he despise the one, and defy the 
other: the probability that the taint arise from such free 
principle, may go down into the manner of posterity: that I know 
these thing, and the importance of they, should be more inexcusable 
than one who know they not; since an error against judgment be bad, 
infinitely bad, than an error in judgment. reflect upon these 
thing, I cannot help conjure you, my dear, to pray with I, and to 
pray for I, that I may not be push upon such indiscreet measure, 
as will render I inexcusable to myself: for that be the test, after 
all. the world's opinion ought to be but a secondary consideration.
I have say in his praise, that he be extremely ready to own his 
error: but I have sometimes make a great drawback upon this article, 
in his disfavour; have be ready to apprehend, that this 
ingenuousness may possibly be attributable to two cause, neither of 
they, by any mean, creditable to he. the one, that his vice be so 
much his master, that he attempt not to conquer they; the other, 
that he may think it policy, to give up one half of his character to 
save the other, when the whole may be blamable: by this mean, 
silence by acknowledgment the objection he cannot answer; which may 
give he the praise of ingenuousness, when he can obtain no other, and 
when the challenge proof might bring out, upon discussion, other 
evil. these, you will allow, be severe construction; but every 
thing his enemy say of he cannot be false. 
I will proceed by-and-by.
***
sometimes we have both think he one of the most undesigning merely 
witty man we ever know; at other time one of the deep creature we 
ever converse with. so that when in one visit we have imagine we 
fathom he, in the next he have make we ready to give he up as 
impenetrable. this impenetrableness, my dear, be to be put among the 
shade in his character. yet, upon the whole, you have be so far of 
his party, that you have contest that his principal fault be over-
frankness, and too much regardlessness of appearance, and that he be 
too giddy to be very artful: you would have it, that at the time he 
say any thing good, he mean what he speak; that his variableness 
and levity be constitutional, owe to sound health, and to a soul 
and body [that be your observation] fit for and please with each 
other. and hence you conclude, that could this consentaneousness [as 
you call it] of corporal and animal faculty be point by 
discretion; that be to say, could his vivacity be confine within the 
pale of but moral obligation, he would be far from be rejectable 
as a companion for life.
but I use then to say, and I still be of opinion, that he want a 
heart: and if he do, he want every thing. a wrong head may be 
convince, may have a right turn give it: but who be able to give a 
heart, if a heart be want? Divine Grace, work a miracle, or 
next to a miracle, can only change a bad heart. should not one fly the 
man who be but suspect of such a one? what, o what, do parent do, 
when they endeavour to force a child's inclination, but make she think 
well than otherwise she would think of a man obnoxious to 
themselves, and perhaps whose character will not stand examination?
I have say, that I think Mr. Lovelace a vindictive man: upon my word, 
I have sometimes doubt, whether his perseverance in his address to 
I have not be the more obstinate, since he have find himself so 
disagreeable to my friend. from that time I verily think he have be 
the more fervent in they; yet court they not, but set they at 
defiance. for this indeed he plead disinterestedness [I be sure he 
cannot politeness]; and the more plausibly, as he be apprize of the 
ability they have to make it worth his while to court they. 'tis true 
he have declare, and with too much reason, (or there would be no 
bear he,) that the low submission on his part would not be 
accept; and to oblige I, have offer to seek a reconciliation with 
they, if I would give he hope of success.
as to his behaviour at church, the Sunday before last, I lay no stress 
upon that, because I doubt there be too much outward pride in his 
intentional humility, or Shorey, who be not his enemy, could not have 
mistaken it.
I do not think he so deeply learn in human nature, or in ethic, as 
some have think he. donot you remember how he star at the 
follow trite observation, which every moralist could have 
furnish he with? complain as he do, in a half-menacing strain, 
of the obloquy raise against him--'that if he be innocent, he 
should despise the obloquy: if not, revenge would not wipe off his 
guilt.' 'that nobody ever think of turn a sword into a sponge!' 
'that it be in his own power by reformation of an error lay to his 
charge by an enemy, to make that enemy one of his good friend; and 
(which be the noble revenge in the world) against his will; since 
an enemy would not wish he to be without the fault he tax he 
with.'
but the intention, he say, be the wound.
how so, I ask he, when that cannot wound without the application? 
'that the adversary only hold the sword: he himself point it to his 
breast:--and why should he mortally resent that malice, which he might 
be the well for as long as he lived?'--what could be the reading he 
have be say to be master of, to wonder, as he do, at these 
observation?
but, indeed, he must take pleasure in revenge; and yet hold other to 
be inexcusable for the same fault. he be not, however, the only one 
who can see how truly blamable those error be in another, which they 
hardly think such in themselves.
from these consideration, from these over-balance, it be, that I 
say, in a former, that I would not be in love with this man for the 
world: and it be go far than prudence would warrant, when I 
be for compound with you, by the word conditional liking, which 
you so humourously rally.
well but, methink you say, what be all this to the purpose? this be 
still but reasoning: but, if you be in love, you be: and love, like 
the vapour, be the deeply rooted for have no sufficient cause 
assignable for its hold. and so you call upon I again to have no 
reserve, and so-forth.
why then, my dear, if you will have it, I think, that, with all his 
preponderate fault, I like he well than I ever think I should 
like he; and, those fault consider, well perhaps than I ought to 
like he. and I believe, it be possible for the persecution I labour 
under to induce I to like he still more--especially while I can 
recollect to his advantage our last interview, and as every day 
produce strong instance of tyranny, I will call it, on the other 
side.--In a word, I will frankly own (since you cannot think any thing 
I say too explicit) that be he now but a moral man, I would prefer 
he to all the man I ever see.
so that this be but conditional liking still, youwill say: nor, I hope, 
be it more. I never be in love as it be call; and whether this be 
it, or not, I must submit to you. but will venture to think it, if it 
be, no such mighty monarch, no such unconquerable power, as I have 
hear it represent; and it must have meet with great encouragement 
than I think I have give it, to be absolutely unconquerable--since I 
be persuade, that I could yet, without a throb, most willingly give 
up the one man to get rid of the other.
but now to be a little more serious with you: if, my dear, my 
particularly-unhappy situation have drive (or lead I, if you please) 
into a liking of the man; and if that like have, in your opinion, 
incline I to love he, should you, whose mind be susceptible of the 
most friendly impression, who have such high notion of the delicacy 
which ought to be observe by our sex in these matter, and who 
actually do enter so deeply into the distress of one you love--
should you have push so far that unhappy friend on so very nice a 
subject?--especially, when I aim not (as you could prove by fifty 
instance, it seem) to guard against be find out. have you 
rally I by word of mouth in the manner you do, it might have be 
more in character; especially, if your friend's distress have be 
surmount, and if she have affect prudish air in revolve the 
subject: but to sit down to write it, as methink I see you, with a 
gladden eye, and with all the archness of exultation--indeed, my 
dear, (and I take notice of it, rather for the sake of your own 
generosity, than for my sake, for, as I have say, I love your 
raillery,) it be not so very pretty; the delicacy of the subject, and 
the delicacy of your own mind, consider.
I lie down my pen here, that you may consider of it a little, if you 
please.
***
I resume, to give you my opinion of the force which figure or person 
ought to have upon our sex: and this I shall do both generally as to 
the other sex, and particularly as to this man; whence you will be 
able to collect how far my friend be in the right, or in the wrong, 
when they attribute a good deal of prejudice in favour of one man, and 
in disfavour of the other, on the score of figure. but, first, let I 
observe, that they see abundant reason, on compare Mr. Lovelace and 
Mr. Solmes together, to believe that this may be a consideration with 
I; and therefore they believe it be.
there be certainly something very plausible and attractive, as well as 
creditable to a woman's choice, in figure. it give a favourable 
impression at first sight, in which we wish to be confirm: and if, 
upon further acquaintance, we find reason to be so, we be pleased 
with our judgment, and like the person the well, for have give we 
cause to compliment our own sagacity, in our first-sighted 
impression. but, nevertheless, it have be generally a rule with I, 
to suspect a fine figure, both in man and woman; and I have have a good 
deal of reason to approve my rule;--with regard to man especially, who 
ought to value themselves rather upon their intellectual than personal 
quality. for, as to our sex, if a fine woman should be lead by the 
opinion of the world, to be vain and conceite upon her form and 
feature; and that to such a degree, as to have neglect the more 
material and more durable recommendation, the world will be ready to 
excuse she; since a pretty fool, in all she say, and in all she do, 
will please, we know not why.
but who would grudge this pretty fool her short day! since, with her 
summer's sun, when her butterfly flutter be over, and the winter of 
age and furrow arrive, she will feel the just effect of have 
neglect to cultivate her well faculty: for then, lie another 
Helen, she will be unable to bear the reflection even of her own 
glass, and be sink into the insignificance of a mere old woman, she 
will be entitle to the contempt which follow that character. while 
the discreet matron, who carry up [we will not, in such a one's 
case, say down] into advanced life, the ever-amiable character of 
virtuous prudence and useful experience, find solid veneration take 
place of airy admiration, and more than supply the want of it.
but for a man to be vain of his person, how effeminate! if such a one 
happen to have genius, it seldom strike deep into intellectual 
subject. his outside usually run away with he. to adorn, and 
perhaps, intend to adorn, to render ridiculous that person, take 
up all his attention. all he do be personal; that be to say, for 
himself: all he admire, be himself: and in spite of the correction of 
the stage, which so often and so justly expose a coxcomb, he usually 
dwindle down, and sink into that character; and, of consequence, 
become the scorn of one sex, and the jest of the other.
this be generally the case of your fine figure of man, and of those 
who value themselves on dress and outward appearance: whence it be, 
that I repeat, that mere person in a man be a despicable 
consideration. but if a man, besides figure, have learn, and such 
talent as would have distinguish he, whatever be his form, then 
indeed person be an addition: and if he have not run too egregiously 
into self-admiration, and if he have preserve his moral, he be truly 
a valuable being.
Mr. Lovelace have certainly taste; and, as far as I be able to 
determine, he have judgment in most of the politer art. but although 
he have a humourous way of carry it off, yet one may see that he 
value himself not a little, both on his person and his part, and 
even upon his dress; and yet he have so happy an ease in the latter, 
that it seem to be the least part of his study. and as to the 
former, I should hold myself inexcusable, if I be to add to his 
vanity by shew the least regard for what be too evidently so much 
his.
and now, my dear, let I ask you, have I come up to your expectation? 
if I have not, when my mind be more at ease, I will endeavour to 
please you well. for, methink, my sentence drag, my style creep, 
my imagination be sink, my spirit serve I not, only to tell you, 
that whether I have more or less, I be wholly devoted to the command 
of my dear Miss Howe.
P.S. the insolent Betty Barnes have just now fire I anew, by 
report to I the follow expression of the hideous creature, 
solmes--'that he be sure of the coy girl; and that with little labour 
to himself. that be I ever so averse to he beforehand, he can depend 
upon my principle; and it will be a pleasure to he to see by what 
pretty degree I shall come to.' [Horrid wretch!] 'that it be Sir 
Oliver's observation, who know the world perfectly well, that fear be 
a well security than love, for a woman's good behaviour to her 
husband; although, for his part, to such a fine creature [truly] he 
would try what love would do, for a few week at least; be 
unwilling to believe what the old knight use to aver, that fondness 
spoil more wife than it make good.'
what think you, my dear, of such a wretch as this! tutor, too, by 
that old surly misogynist, as he be deem, Sir Oliver?--
LETTER XLI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
TUESDAY, MARCH 21.
how willingly would my dear mother shew kindness to I, be she 
permit! none of this persecution should I labour under, I be sure, 
if that regard be pay to her prudence and fine understanding, which 
they so well deserve. whether owe to she, or to my aunt, or to 
both, that a new trial be to be make upon I, I cannot tell, but this 
morning her Shorey deliver into my hand the follow condescending 
letter.
my dear girl,
for so I must still call you; since dear you may be to I, in every 
sense of the word--we have take into particular consideration some 
hint that fall yesterday from your good Norton, as if we have not, at 
Mr. Solmes's first application, treat you with that condescension, 
wherewith we have in all other instance treat you. if it even have 
be so, my dear, you be not excusable to be want in your part, 
and to set yourself to oppose your father's will in a point which he 
have enter too far, to recede with honour. but all yet may be well. 
on your single will, my child, depend all our happiness.
your father permit I to tell you, that if you now at last comply 
with his expectation, all past disobligation shall be bury in 
oblivion, as if they have never be: but withal, that this be the last 
time that that grace will be offer you.
I hint to you, you must remember,* that pattern of the rich 
silk be send for. they be come. and as they be come, your 
father, to shew how much he be determine, will have I send they up 
to you. I could have wish they might not have accompany this 
letter, but there be not great matter in that. I must tell you, that 
your delicacy be not quite so much regard as I have once think it 
deserve to be.
* see Letter XX.
these be the new, as well as rich, that we could procure; 
answerable to our situation in the world; answerable to the fortune, 
additional to your grandfather's estate, design you; and to the 
noble settlement agree upon.
your father intend you six suit (three of they dress suit) at his 
own expense. you have an entire new suit; and one beside, which I 
think you never wear but twice. as the new suit be rich, if you 
choose to make that one of the six, your father will present you with 
an hundred guineas in lieu.
Mr. Solmes intend to present you with a set of jewel. as you have 
your grandmother's and your own, if you choose to have the former new 
set, and to make they serve, his present will be make in money; a very 
round sum--which will be give in full property to yourself; besides a 
fine annual allowance for pin-money, as it be call. so that your 
objection against the spirit of a man you think bad of than it 
deserve, will have no weight; but you will be more independent than a 
wife of less discretion than we attribute to you, perhaps ought to be. 
you know full well, that I, who first and last bring a still large 
fortune into the family than you will carry to Mr. Solmes, have not a 
provision make I of near this that we have make for you.--Where 
people marry to their liking, term be the least thing stand upon--
yet should I be sorry if you cannot (to oblige we all) overcome a 
dislike.
wonder not, Clary, that I write to you thus plainly and freely upon 
this subject. your behaviour hitherto have be such, that we have have 
no opportunity of enter minutely into the subject with you. yet, 
after all that have pass between you and I in conversation, and 
between you and your uncle by letter, you have no room to doubt what 
be to be the consequence.--either, child, we must give up our 
authority, or you your humour. you cannot expect the one. we have 
all the reason in the world to expect the other. you know I have tell 
you more than once, that you must resolve to have Mr. Solmes, or never 
to be look upon as our child.
the draught of the settlement you may see whenever you will. we think 
there can be no room for objection to any of the article. there be 
still more in they in our family's favour, than be stipulate at 
first, when your aunt talk of they to you. more so, indeed, than we 
could have ask. if, upon perusal of they, you think any alteration 
necessary, it shall be made.--do, my dear girl, send to I within this 
day or two, or rather ask I, for the perusal of they.
as a certain person's appearance at church so lately, and what he 
give out every where, make we extremely uneasy, and as that 
uneasiness will continue while you be single, you must not wonder 
that a short day be intend. this day fortnight we design it to be, 
if you have no objection to make that I shall approve of. but if you 
determine as we would have you, and signify it to we, we shall not 
stand with you for a week or so.
your sightline of person may perhaps make some think this alliance 
disparaging. but I hope you will not put such a personal value upon 
yourself: if you do, it will indeed be the less wonder that person 
should weigh with you (however weak the consideration!) in another 
man.
thus we parent, in justice, ought to judge: that our two daughter 
be equally dear and valuable to we: if so, why should Clarissa think 
that a disparagement, which Arabella would not (nor we for she) have 
think any, have the address be make to her?--you will know what I 
mean by this, without my explain myself far.
signify to we, now, therefore, your compliance with our wish. and 
then there be an end of your confinement. an act of oblivion, as I 
may call it, shall pass upon all your former refractoriness: and you 
will once more make we happy in you, and in one another. you may, in 
this case, directly come down to your father and I, in his study; 
where we will give you our opinion of the pattern, with our hearty 
forgiveness and blessing.
come, be a good child, as you use to be, my Clarissa. I have 
(notwithstanding your past behaviour, and the hopelessness which some 
have express in your compliance) undertake this one time more for 
you. Discredit not my hope, my dear girl. I have promise never 
more to interfere between your father and you, if this my most earnest 
application succeed not. I expect you down, love. your father 
expect you down. but be sure donot let he see any thing uncheerful 
in your compliance. if you come, I will clasp you to my fond heart, 
with as much pleasure as ever I press you to it in my whole life. 
you donot know what I have suffer within these few week past; nor 
ever will be able to guess, till you come to be in my situation; which 
be that of a fond and indulgent mother, pray night and day, and 
struggle to preserve, against the attempt of more ungovernable 
spirit, the peace and union of her family.
but you know the term. come not near we, if you have resolve to be 
undutiful: but this, after what I have write, I hope you cannot be.
if you come directly, and, as I have say, cheerfully, as if your 
heart be in your duty, (and you tell I it be free, you know,) I 
shall then, as I say, give you the most tender proof how much I be
your truly affectionate Mother.
***
think for I, my dear friend, how I must be affect by this 
letter; the content of it be so surprisingly terrifying, yet so 
sweetly urged!--o why, cry I to myself, be I oblige to undergo this 
severe conflict between a command that I cannot obey, and language so 
condescendingly moving!--could I have be sure of be strike dead 
at the alter before the ceremony have give the man I hate a title to 
my vow, I think I could have submit to have be lead to it. but 
to think of live with and live for a man one abhor, what a sad 
thing be that!
and then, how could the glare of habit and ornament be suppose any 
inducement to one, who have always hold, that the principal view of a 
good wife in the adorning of her person, ought to be, to preserve the 
affection of her husband, and to do credit to his choice; and that she 
should be even fearful of attract the eye of others?--in this 
view, must not the very richness of the pattern add to my disgusts?--
great encouragement, indeed, to think of adorn one's self to be the 
wife of Mr. Solmes!
upon the whole, it be not possible for I to go down upon the 
prescribe condition. do you think it was?--And to write, if my 
letter would have be read, what could I write that would be 
admit, and after what I have write and say to so little effect?
I walk backward and forward. I throw down with disdain the 
pattern. now to my closet retire I; then quit it, throw myself 
upon the settee; then upon this chair, then upon that; then into one 
window, then into another--I know not what to do!--and while I be in 
this suspense, have again take up the letter to re-peruse it, Betty 
come in, remind I, by order, that my papa and mamma wait for I 
in my father's study.
tell my mamma, say I, that I beg the favour of see she here for 
one moment, or to permit I to attend she any where by herself.
I listen at the stair-head--you see, my dear, how it be, cry my 
father, very angrily: all your condescension (as your indulgence 
heretofore) be throw away. you blame your son's violence, as you 
call it [I have some pleasure in hear this]; but nothing else will 
do with she. you shall not see she alone. be my presence an 
exception to the bold creature?
tell she, say my mother to Betty, she know upon what term she may 
come down to we. nor will I see she upon any other.
the maid bring I this answer. I have recourse to my pen and ink; 
but I tremble so, that I could not write, nor know what to say, have I 
steady finger. at last Betty bring I these line from my 
father.
UNDUTIFUL and PERVERSE CLARISSA,
no condescension, I see, will move you. your mother shall not see 
you; nor will I. prepare however to obey. you know our pleasure. 
your uncle Antony, your brother, and your sister, and your favourite 
Mrs. Norton, shall see the ceremony perform privately at your 
uncle's chapel. and when Mr. Solmes can introduce you to we, in the 
temper we wish to behold you in, we may perhaps forgive his wife, 
although we never can, in any other character, our perverse daughter. 
as it will be so privately perform, clothe and equipage may be 
provide for afterwards. so prepare to go to your uncle's for an 
early day in next week. we will not see you till all be over: and we 
will have it over the soon, in order to shorten the time of your 
deserve confinement, and our own trouble in contend with such a 
rebel, as you have be of late. I will hear no plea, I will receive 
no letter, nor expostulation. nor shall you hear from I any more 
till you have change your name to my liking. this from
your incensed Father.
if this resolution be adhere to, then will my father never see I 
more!--For I will never be the wife of that Solmes--I will die 
first!--
tuesday evening.
he, this Solmes, come hither soon after I have receive my father's 
letter. he send up to beg leave to wait upon I--I wonder at his 
assurance!--
I say to Betty, who bring I this message, let he restore an 
unhappy creature to her father and mother, and then I may hear what he 
have to say. but, if my friend will not see I on his account, I will 
not see he upon his own.
I hope, Miss, say Betty, you will not send I down with this answer. 
he be with you papa and mamma.
I be drive to despair, say I. I cannot be use bad. I will not 
see he.
down she go with my answer. she pretend, it seem, to be loth to 
repeat it: so be command out of her affected reserve, and give it 
in its full force. 
o how I hear my father storm!
they be altogether, it seem, in his study. my brother be for 
have I turn out of the house that moment, to Lovelace, and my 
evil destiny. my mother be pleased to put in a gentle word for I: I 
know not what it be: but thus she be answer--my dear, this be the 
most provoking thing in the world in a woman of your good sense!--to 
love a rebel, as well as if she be dutiful. what encouragement for 
duty be this?--have I not love she as well as ever you do? and why 
be I change! would to the Lord, your sex know how to distinguish! 
it be plain, that she rely upon her power over you. the fond mother 
ever make a harden child!
she be pleased, however, to blame Betty, as the wench own, for 
give my answer its full force. but my father praise she for it.
the wench say, that he would have come up in his wrath, at my 
refuse to see Mr. Solmes, have not my brother and sister prevail 
upon he to the contrary.
I wish he had!--And, be it not for his own sake, that he have kill 
I!
Mr. Solmes condescend [I be mightily oblige to he truly!] to plead 
for I.
they be all in tumult! how it will end, I know not--I be quite 
weary of life--so happy, till within these few weeks!--so miserable 
now!
well, indeed, might my mother say, that I should have severe trial.*
* see Letter XXV.
P.S. the idiot [such a one am I treat like!] be beg, as I may 
say, by my brother and sister. they have desire, that I may be 
consign over entirely to their management. if it be grant, [it be 
grant, on my father's part, I understand, but not yet on my 
mother's,] what cruelty may I not expect from their envy, jealousy, 
and ill-will!--i shall soon see, by its effect, if I be to be so 
consign. this be a write intimation privately dropt in my wood-
house walk, by my cousin Dolly Hervey. the dear girl long to see I, 
she tell I: but be forbid till she see I as Mrs. Solmes, or as 
consent to be his. I will take example by their perseverance!--
indeed I will!--
LETTER XLII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
an angry dialogue, a scolding-bout rather, have pass between my 
sister and I. do you think I could scold, my dear?
she be send up to I, upon my refusal to see Mr. Solmes--let loose 
upon I, I think!--no intention on their part to conciliate! it 
seem evident that I be give up to my brother and she, by general 
consent.
I will do justice to every thing she say against I, which carry 
any force with it. as I ask for your approbation or disapprobation of 
my conduct, upon the fact I lay before you, I should think it the 
sign of a very bad cause, if I endeavour to mislead my judge.
she begin with represent to I the danger I have be in, have my 
father come up, as he would have do have he not be hinder--by Mr. 
Solmes, among the rest. she reflect upon my Norton, as if she 
encourage I in my perverseness. she ridicule I for my suppose 
esteem for Mr. Lovelace--be surprised that the witty, the prudent, 
nay, the dutiful and pi--ous [so she sneeringly pronounce the word] 
Clarissa Harlowe, should be so strangely fond of a profligate man, 
that her parent be force to lock she up, in order to hinder she 
from run into his arm. 'let I ask you, my dear, say she, how 
you now keep your account of the disposition of your time? how many 
hour in the twenty-four do you devote to your needle? how many to 
your prayer? how many to letter-writing? and how many to love?--i 
doubt, I doubt, my little dear, be her arch expression, the latter 
article be like Aaron's rod, and swallow up the rest!--tell I; be it 
not so?'
to these I answer, that it be a double mortification to I to owe 
my safety from the effect of my father's indignation to a man I could 
never thank for any thing. I vindicate the good Mrs. Norton with a 
warmth that be due to her merit. with equal warmth I resent her 
reflection upon I on Mr. Lovelace's account. as to the disposition 
of my time in the twenty-four hour, I tell she it would well have 
become she to pity a sister in distress, than to exult over her--
especially, when I could too justly attribute to the disposition of 
some of her wakeful hour no small part of that distress.
she rave extremely at this last hint: but remind I of the gentle 
treatment of all my friend, my mother's in particular, before it come 
to this. she say, that I have discover a spirit they never have 
expect: that, if they have think I such a championess, they would 
hardly have venture to engage with I: but that now, the short and 
the long of it be, that the matter have go too far to be give up: 
that it be become a contention between duty and willfulness; whether 
a parent's authority be to yield to a daughter's obstinacy, or the 
contrary: that I must therefore bend or break, that be all, child.
I tell she, that I wish the subject be of such a nature, that I 
could return her pleasantry with equal lightness of heart: but that, 
if Mr. Solmes have such merit in every body's eye, in her, 
particularly, why might he not be a brother to I, rather than a 
husband?
o child, say she, methink you be as pleasant to the full as I be: I 
begin to have some hope of you now. but do you think I will rob my 
sister of her humble servant? have he first address himself to I, 
proceed she, something might have be say: but to take my young 
sister's refusal! no, no, child; it be not come to that neither! 
besides, that would be to leave the door open in your heart for you 
know who, child; and we would fain bar he out, if possible. in short 
[and then she change both her tone and her look] have I be as 
forward as somebody, to throw myself into the arm of one of the 
great profligate in England, who have endeavour to support his 
claim to I through the blood of my brother, then might all my family 
join together to save I from such a wretch, and to marry I as fast 
as they could, to some worthy man, who might opportunely offer 
himself. and now, Clary, allbe out, and make the most of it.
do not this deserve a severe return? do, say it do, to justify my 
reply.--Alas! for my poor sister! say I--the man be not always so 
great a profligate. how true be the observation, that unrequited love 
turn to deepest hate!
I think she would beat I. but I proceed--I have hear often of 
my brother's danger, and my brother's murderer. when so little 
ceremony be make with I, why should I not speak out?--did he not seek 
to kill the other, if he could have do it? would my brother have 
give Lovelace his life, have it be in his power?--the aggressor 
should not complain.--and, as to opportune offer, would to Heaven 
some one have offer opportunely to somebody! it be not my fault, 
Bella, the opportune gentleman donot come!
could you, my dear, have shew more spirit? I expect to feel the 
weight of her hand. she do come up to I, with it hold up: then, 
speechless with passion, run half way down the stair, and come up 
again.
when she could speak--God give I patience with you!
amen, say I: but you see, Bella, how ill you bear the retort you 
provoke. will you forgive I; and let I find a sister in you, as I 
be sorry, if you have reason to think I unsisterly in what I have 
say?
then do she pour upon I, with great violence; consider my 
gentleness as a triumph of temper over she. she be resolve, she 
say, to let every body know how I take the wicked Lovelace's part 
against my brother.
I wish, I tell she, I could make the plea for myself, which she 
might for herself; to wit, that my anger be more inexcusable than my 
judgment. but I presume she have some other view in come to I, 
than she have hitherto acquaint I with. let I, say I, but know 
(after all that have pass) if you have any thing to propose that I 
can comply with; any thing that can make my only sister once more my 
friend?
I have before, upon hear she ridicule I on my suppose character 
of meekness, say, that, although I wish to be think meek, I would 
not be abject; although humble not mean: and here, in a sneer way, 
she caution I on that head.
I reply, that her pleasantry be much more agreeable than her anger. 
but I wish she would let I know the end of a visit that have 
hitherto (between we) be so unsisterly.
she desire to be inform, in the name of every body, be her word, 
what I be determine upon? and whether to comply or not?--one word 
for all: my friend be not to have patience with so perverse a 
creature for ever.
this then I tell she I would do: absolutely break with the man they 
be all so determined against: upon condition, however, that neither 
Mr. Solmes, nor any other, be urge upon I with the force of a 
command.
and what be this, more than I have offer before? what, but ring 
my change upon the same bell, and neither recede nor advance one 
tittle?
if I know what other proposal I could make, I tell she, that would be 
acceptable to they all, and free I from the address of a man so 
disagreeable to I, I would make they. I have indeed before offer, 
never to marry without my father's consent--
she interrupt I, that be because I depend upon my whine trick 
to bring my father and mother to what I please.
a poor dependence! I said:--She know those who would make that 
dependence vain--
and I should have bring they to my own beck, very probably, and my 
uncle Harlowe too, as also my aunt Hervey, have I not be forbid 
from their sight, and thereby hinder from play my pug's trick 
before they.
at least, Bella, say I, you have hint to I to whom I be oblige, 
that my father and mother, and every body else, treat I thus harshly. 
but surely you make they all very weak. indifferent person, judge 
of we two from what you say, would either think I a very artful 
creature, or you a very spiteful one--
you be indeed a very artful one, for that matter, interrupt she in 
a passion: one of the artfullest I ever know! and then follow an 
accusation so low! so unsisterly!--that I half-bewitch people by my 
insinuating address: that nobody could be value or respect, but 
must stand like cipher wherever I come. how often, say she, have I 
and my brother be talk upon a subject, and have every body's 
attention, till you come in, with your bewitching meek pride, and 
humble significance? and then have we either be stop by 
reference to Miss Clary's opinion, forsooth; or be force to stop 
ourselves, or must have talk on unattended to by every body.
she pause. Dear Bella, proceed!
she indeed seem only gather breath.
and so I will, say she--do you not bewitch my grandfather? could 
any thing be pleasing to he, that you do not say or do? how do he 
use to hang, till he slabber again, poor doting old man! on your 
silver tongue! yet what do you say, that we could not have say? 
what do you do, that we do not endeavour to do?--and what be all 
this for? why, truly, his last will shewed what effect your smooth 
obligingness have upon him!--To leave the acquire part of his estate 
from the next heir, his own son, to a grandchild; to his young 
grandchild! a daughter too!--to leave the family-picture from his 
son to you, because you could tiddle about they, and, though you now 
neglect their example, could wipe and clean they with your dainty 
hand! the family-plate too, in such quantity, of two or three 
generation stand, must not be change, because his precious 
child,* humour his old fal-lal taste, admire it, to make it all 
her own.
* allude to his word in the preamble to the clause in his will. 
see Letter IV.
this be too low to move I: o my poor sister! say I: not to be able, 
or at least willing, to distinguish between art and nature! if I do 
oblige, I be happy in it: I look for no further reward: my mind be 
above art, from the dirty motif you mention. I wish with all my 
heart my grandfather have not thus distinguish I; he see my brother 
likely to be amply provide for out of the family, as well as in it: 
he desire that you might have the great share of my father's favour 
for it; and no doubt but you both have. you know, Bella, that the 
estate my grandfather bequeath I be not half the real estate he 
leave.
whatbe all that to an estate in possession, and leave you with such 
distinction, as give you a reputation of great value than the 
estate itself?
hence my misfortune, Bella, in your envy, I doubt!--but have I not 
give up that possession in the good manner I could--
Yes, interrupt I, she hat I for that good manner. specious 
little witch! she call I: your good manner, so full of art and 
design, have never be see through, if you, with your blandish 
way, have not be put out of sight, and reduce to positive 
declarations!--hindered from play your little declarations!--
hinder from play your little whining trick! curling, like a 
serpent about your mamma; and make her cry to deny you any thing 
your little obstinate heart be set upon!--
obstinate heart, Bella!
yes, obstinate heart! for do you ever give up any thing? have you 
not the art to make they think all be right you ask, though my 
brother and I be frequently refuse favour of no great import!
I know not, Bella, that I ever ask any thing unfit to be grant. I 
seldom ask favour for myself, but for other.
I be a reflect creature for this.
all you speak of, Bella, be a long time ago. I cannot go so far back 
into our childish folly. little do I think of how long stand 
your late-shewn antipathy be.
I be a reflector again! such a saucy meekness; such a good manner; 
and such venom in words!--o Clary! clary! Thou wert always a 
two-face girl!
nobody think I have two face, when I give up all into my father's 
management; take from his bounty, as before, all my little 
pocket-money, without a shilling addition to my stipend, or desire 
it--
Yes, cunning creature!--and that be another of your fetches!--For do 
it not engage my fond father (as no doubt you think it would) to 
tell you, that since you have do so grateful and dutiful a thing, he 
would keep entire, for your use, all the produce of the estate leave 
you, and be but your steward in it; and that you should be entitle to 
the same allowance as before? another of your hook-in's, clary!--so 
that all your extravagancy have be support gratis.
my extravagancy, Bella!--But do my father ever give I any thing he 
do not give you?
yes, indeed; I get more by that mean, than I should have have the 
conscience to ask. but I have still the great part to shew! but 
you! what have you to shew?--i dare say, not fifty piece in the 
world!
indeed I have not!
I believe you!--Your mamma Norton, I suppose--but mum for that!--
Unworthy Bella! the good woman, although low in circumstance, be 
great in mind! much great than those who would impute meanness to a 
soul incapable of it.
what then have you do with the sum give you from infancy to 
squander?--let I ask you [affect archness], have, have, have 
Lovelace, have your rake, put it out at interest for you?
o that my sister would not make I blush for she! it be, however, out 
at interest!--and I hope it will bring I interest upon interest!--
well than to lie useless in my cabinet.
she understand I, she say. be I a man, she should suppose I be 
aim to carry the county--popularity! a crowd to follow I with 
their blessing as I go to and from church, and nobody else to be 
regard, be agreeable thing. house-top-proclamation! I hide not 
my light under a bushel, she would say that for I. but be it not a 
little hard upon I, to be keep from blaze on a sunday?--and to be 
hinder from my charitable ostentation?
this, indeed, Bella, be cruel in you, who have so largely contribute 
to my confinement.--but go on. youwill be out of breath by-and-by. I 
cannot wish to be able to return this usage.--poor Bella! and I 
believe I smile a little too contemptuously for a sister to a sister.
none of your saucy contempt [rise in her voice]: none of your poor 
Bella's, with that air of superiority in a young sister!
well then, rich Bella! courtesying--that will please you well--and 
it be due likewise to the hoard you boast of.
look ye, Clary, hold up her hand, if you be not a little more 
abject in your meekness, a little more mean in your humility, and 
treat I with the respect due to an eld sister--you shall find--
not that you will treat I bad than you have do, bella!--that 
cannot be; unless you be to let fall your uplifted hand upon I--and 
that would less become you to do, than I to bear.
good, meek creature:--But you be upon your overture just now!--i 
shall surprise every body by tarry so long. they will think some 
good may be do with you--and supper will be ready.
a tear would stray down my cheek--how happy have I be, say I, 
sighing, in the supper-time conversation, with all my dear friend in 
my eye round their hospitable board.
I meet only with insult for this--Bella have not a feeling heart. the 
high joy in this life she be not capable of: but then she save 
herself many grief, by her impenetrableness--yet, for ten time the 
pain that such a sensibility be attend with, would I not part with 
the pleasure it bring with it.
she ask I, upon my turning from she, if she should not say any 
thing below of my compliance?
you may say, that I will do every thing they would have I do, if they 
will free I from Mr. Solmes's address.
this be all you desire at present, creeper on! insinuator! [what word 
she have!] but will not t'other man flame out, and roar most horribly, 
upon the snatching from his paw a prey he think himself sure of?
I must let you talk in your own way, or we shall never come to a 
point. I shall not matter in his roaring, as you call it. I will 
promise he, that, if I ever marry any other man, it shall not be till 
he be marry. and if he be not satisfied with such a condescension, 
I shall think he ought: and I will give any assurance, that I will 
neither correspond with he, nor see he. surely this will do.
but I suppose then you will have no objection to see and converse, on 
a civil footing, with Mr. Solmes--as your father's friend, or so?
no! I must be permit to retire to my apartment whenever he come. 
I would no more converse with the one, than correspond with the other. 
that would be to make Mr. Lovelace guilty of some rashness, on a 
belief, that I break with he, to have Mr. Solmes.
and so, that wicked wretch be to be allow such a controul over you, 
that you be not to be civil to your father's friend, at his own 
house, for fear of incense him!--when this come to be represent, 
be so good as to tell I, what be it you expect from it!
every thing, I say, or nothing, as she be pleased to represent it.--
be so good as to give it your interest, Bella, and say, far, 'that 
I will by any mean I can, in the law or otherwise, make over to my 
father, to my uncle, or even to my brother, all I be entitle to by 
my grandfather's will, as a security for the performance of my 
promise. and as I shall have no reason to expect any favour from my 
father, if I break they, I shall not be worth any body's having. and 
far still, unkindly as my brother have use I, I will go down to 
Scotland privately, as his housekeeper [I now see I may be spar 
here] if he will promise to treat I no bad than he would do an 
hire one.--Or I will go to Florence, to my cousin Morden, if his stay 
in Italy will admit of it. in either case, it may be give out, that 
I be go to the other; or to the world's end. I care not whither it 
be say I be go, or do go.'
let I ask you, child, if you will give your pretty proposal in 
writing?
yes, with all my heart. and I step to my closet, and write to the 
purpose I have mention; and moreover, the follow line to my 
brother.
MY DEAR BROTHER,
I hope I have make such proposal to my sister as will be accept. I 
be sure they will, if you please to give they your sanction. let I 
beg of you, for God's sake, that you will. I think myself very 
unhappy in have incur your displeasure. no sister can love a 
brother well than I love you. pray do not put the bad but the 
good construction upon my proposal, when you have they report to 
you. indeed I mean the good. I have no subterfuge, no art, no 
intention, but to keep to the letter of they. you shall yourself 
draw up every thing into writing, as strong as you can, and I will 
sign it: and what the law will not do to enforce it, my resolution and 
my will shall: so that I shall be worth nobody's address, that have not 
my papa's consent: nor shall any person, nor any consideration, induce 
I to revoke it. you can do more than any body to reconcile my 
parent and uncle to I. let I owe this desirable favour to your 
brotherly interposition, and you will for ever oblige
your afflicted Sister,
CL. HARLOWE.
***
and how do you think Bella employ herself while I be writing?--why, 
play gently upon my harpsichord; and hum to it, to shew she 
unconcernedness.
when I approach she with what I have write, she arise with an air 
of levity--why, love, you have not write already!--You have, I 
protest!--o what a ready penwoman!--and may I read it?
if you please. and let I beseech you, my dear Bella, to back these 
proposal with your good office: and [fold my uplifted hand; 
tear, I believe, stand in my eye] I will love you as never sister 
love another.
thou art a strange creature, say she; there be no withstand thee.
she take the proposal and letter; and have read they, burst into an 
affect laugh: how wise one may be take in!--then you do not know, 
that I be jest with you all this time!--and so you would have I 
carry down this pretty piece of nonsense?
donot let I be surprised at your seeming unsisterliness, Bella. I 
hope it be but seem. there can be no wit in such jesting as this.
the folly of the creature!--how natural be it for people, when they 
set their heart upon any thing, to think every body must see with 
their eyes!--pray, dear child, what become of your father's authority 
here?--who stoop here, the parent, or the child?--how do this 
square with engagement actually agree upon between your father and 
Mr. Solmes? what security, that your rake will not follow you to the 
world's end?--nevertheless, that you may not think that I stand in the 
way of a reconciliation on such fine term as these, I will be your 
messenger this once, and hear what my papa will say to it; although 
beforehand I can tell you, these proposal will not answer the 
principal end.
so down she go. but, it seem, my aunt Hervey and my uncle Harlowe 
be not go away: and as they have all engage to act in concert, 
messenger be dispatch to my uncle and aunt to desire they to be 
there to breakfast in the morning.
MONDAY NIGHT, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.
I be afraid I shall not be think worthy--
just as I begin to fear I should not be think worthy of an answer, 
Betty rap at my door, and say, if I be not in bed, she have a 
letter for I. I have but just do write the above dialogue, and 
stept to the door with the pen in my hand--always write, Miss! say 
the bold wench: it be admirable how you can get away what you write--
but the fairy, they say, be always at hand to help lovers.--she 
retire in so much haste, that, have I be dispose, I could not take 
the notice of this insolence which it deserve.
I enclose my brother's letter. he be resolve to let I see, that I 
should have nothing to expect from his kindness. but surely he will 
not be permit to carry every point. the assembling of my friend 
to-morrow be a good sign: and I will hope something from that, and 
from proposal so reasonable. and now I will try if any repose will 
fall to my lot for the remainder of this night.
to MISS clary HARLOWE
[enclosed in the PRECEDING.]
your proposal will be consider by your father and mother, and all 
your friend, to-morrow morning. what trouble do your shameful 
forwardness give we all! I wonder you have the courage to write to 
I, upon whom you be so continually empty your whole female 
quiver. I have no patience with you, for reflect upon I as the 
aggressor in a quarrel which owe its beginning to my consideration 
for you.
you have make such confession in a villain's favour, as ought to 
cause all your relation to renounce you for ever. for my part, I 
will not believe any woman in the world, who promise against her 
avow inclination. to put it out of your power to ruin yourself be 
the only way leave to prevent your ruin. I do not intend to write; 
but your too-kind sister have prevail upon I. as to your go to 
Scotland, that day of grace be over.--nor would I advise, that you 
should go to grandfather-up your cousin Morden. besides, that worthy 
gentleman might be involve in some fatal dispute, upon your account; 
and then be call the aggressor.
a fine situation you have bring yourself to, to propose to hide 
yourself from your rake, and to have falsehood tell, to conceal you!
--your confinement, at this rate, be the happy thing that could 
befal you. your bravo's behaviour at church, look out for you, be 
a sufficient indication of his power over you, have you not so 
shamelessly acknowledge it.
one word for all--your parent and uncle may do as they will: but if, 
for the honour of the family, I cannot carry this point, I will retire 
to Scotland, and never see the face of any one of it more.
JAMES HARLOWE.
***
therebe a brother!--there's flame duty to a father, and mother, and 
uncles!--but he see himself value, and make of consequence; and he 
give himself air accordingly!--nevertheless, as I say above, I will 
hope well thing from those who have not the interest my brother have 
to keep open these unhappy difference.
LETTER xliii
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
TUESDAY, MARCH 21.
would you not have think, my dear Miss Howe, as well as I, that my 
proposal must have be accept: and that my brother, by the last 
article of his unbrotherly letter (where he threaten to go to 
Scotland if it should be hearken to) be of opinion that it would.
for my part, after I have read the unkind letter over and over, I 
conclude, upon the whole, that a reconciliation upon term so 
disadvantageous to myself, as hardly any other person in my case, I 
dare say, would have propose, must be the result of this morning's 
conference. and in that belief I have begin to give myself new trouble 
in think (this difficulty over) how I should be able to pacify 
Lovelace on that part of my engagement, by which I undertake to break 
off all correspondence with he, unless my friend should be bring, 
by the interposition of his powerful friend, and any offer they 
might make, (which it be rather his part to suggest, than mine to 
intimate,) to change their mind.
thus be I employ, not very agreeably, you may believe, because of 
the vehemence of the temper I have to conflict with; when 
breakfasting-time approach, and my judge begin to arrive.
and oh! how my heart flutter on hear the chariot of the one, and 
then of the other, rattle through the court-yard, and the hollow-
sound foot-step give notice of each person's step out, to 
take his place on the awful bench which my fancy have form for they 
and my other judge!
that, think I, be my aunt Hervey's! that my uncle Harlowe's! now 
come my uncle Antony! and my imagination make a fourth chariot for 
the odious solme, although it happen he be not there.
and now, think I, be they all assemble: and now my brother call 
upon my sister to make her report! now the hard-hearted Bella 
interlards her speech with invective! now have she conclude her 
report! now they debate upon it!--Now do my brother flame! now 
threaten to go to Scotland! now be he chidden, and now soothe!
and then I run through the whole conference in my imagination, form 
speech for this person and that, pro and con, till all conclude, as 
I flatter myself, in an acceptance of my condition, and in give 
direction to have an instrument draw to tie I up to my good 
behaviour; while I suppose all agree to give Solmes a wife every way 
more worthy of he, and with she the promise of my grandfather's 
estate, in case of my forfeiture, or die unmarried, on the righteous 
condition he propose to entitle himself to it with I.
and now, think I, be I to be order down to recognize my own 
proposal. and how shall I look upon my awful judge? how shall I 
stand the question of some, the set surliness of other, the 
return love of one or two? how greatly shall I be affect!
then I weep: then I dry my eye: then I practise at my glass for a 
look more cheerful than my heart.
and now [as any thing stir] be my sister come to declare the 
issue of all! tear gush again, my heart flutter as a bird 
against its wire; dry my eye again and again to no purpose.
and thus, my Nancy, [excuse the fanciful prolixity,] be I employ, 
and such be my thought and imagination, when I find a very 
different result from the hopeful conference.
for about ten o'clock up come my sister, with an air of cruel triumph, 
wave her hand with a light flourish--
obedience without reserve be require of you, Clary. my papa be 
justly incense, that you should presume to dispute his will, and to 
make condition with he. he know what be good for you: and as you 
own matter be go a great way between this hat Lovelace and you, 
they will believe nothing you say; except you will give the one only 
instance, that will put they out of doubt of the sincerity of your 
promise.
what, child, be you surprised?--cannot you speak?--Then, it seem, 
you have expect a different issue, have you?--Strange that you could!
--With all your acknowledgement and confession, so creditable to 
your noted prudence!--
I be indeed speechless for some time: my eye be even fix, and 
cease to flow. but upon the hard-hearted Bella's proceeding with her 
air of insult, indeed I be mistaken, say I; indeed I was!----For in 
you, Bella, I expect, I hop for, a sister--
what! interrupt she, with all your mannerly fling, and your 
despise air, do you expect that I be capable of tell story 
for you?--Did you think, that when I be ask my own opinion of the 
sincerity of your declaration, I could not tell tem, how far matter 
have go between you and your fellow?--when the intention be to bend 
that stubborn will of yours to your duty, do you think I would deceive 
them?--do you think I would encourage they to call you down, to 
contradict all that I should have invent in your favour?
well, well, Bella; I be the less obliged to you; thatbe all. I be 
willing to think that I have still a brother and sister. but I find I 
be mistaken.
pretty mopsy-eyed soul!--wa her expression!--and be it willing to 
think it have still a brother and sister? and why donot you go on, 
Clary? [mock my half-weep accent] I think I have a father, and 
mother, two uncle, and an aunt: but I be mis--take, thatbe all--
come, Clary, say this, and it will in part be true, because you have 
throw off all their authority, and because you respect one vile 
wretch more than they all.
how have I deserve this at your hand, sister?--but I will only say, 
I pity you.
and with that disdainful air too, clary!--none of that bridle neck! 
none of your scornful pity, girl!--I beseech you!
this sort of behaviour be natural to you, surely, Bella!--What new 
talent do it discover in you!--but proceed--if it be a pleasure to 
you, proceed, Bella. and since I must not pity you, I will pity 
myself: for nobody else will.
because you donot, say she--
Hush, Bella, interrupt she, because I donot deserve it--I know you 
be go to say so. I will say as you say in every thing; and 
thatbe the way to please you.
then say, Lovelace be a villain.
so I will, when I think he so.
then you donot think he so?
indeed I donot. you do not always, Bella.
and what, Clary, mean you by that? [bristle up to me]--Tell I what 
you mean by that reflection?
tell I why you call it a reflection?--what do I say?
thou art a provoke creature--but what say you to two or three duel 
of that wretch's?
I cannot tell what to say, unless I know the occasion.
do you justify duel at all?
I do not: neither can I help his duelling.
will you go down, and humble that stubborn spirit of yours to your 
mamma?
I say nothing.
shall I conduct your ladyship down? [offer to take my declined 
hand].
what! not vouchsafe to answer I?
I turn from she in silence.
what! turn your back upon I too!--shall I bring up your mamma to you, 
love? [follow I, and take my struggle hand] what? not speak 
yet! come, my sullen, silent dear, speak one word to I--you must say 
two very soon to Mr. Solmes, I can tell you that.
then [gush into tear, which I could not hold in long] they shall 
be the last word I will ever speak.
well, well, [insultingly wipe my avert face with her handkerchief, 
while her other hand hold mine, in a ridiculing tone,] I be glad any 
thing will make thee speak: then you think you may be bring to speak 
the two word--only they be to be the last!--how like a gentle lovyer 
from its tender bleed heart be that!
Ridiculous Bella!
Saucy Clary! [change her sneer tone to an imperious one] but do 
you think you can humble yourself to go down to your mamma?
I be tired of such stuff as this. tell I, Bella, if my mamma will 
condescend to see I?
yes, if you can be dutiful at last.
I can. I will.
but what call you dutiful?
to give up my own inclination--thatbe something more for you to tell 
of--in obedience to my parent' command; and to beg that I may not be 
make miserable with a man that be fitter for any body than for I.
for I, do you mean, Clary?
why not? since you have put the question. you have a well opinion 
of he than I have. my friend, I hope, would not think he too good 
for I, and not good enough for you. but cannot you tell I, Bella, 
what be to become of I, without insult over I thus?--if I must be 
thus treat, remember, that if I be guilty of any rashness, the usage 
I meet with will justify it.
so, Clary, you be contrive an excuse, I find, for somewhat that we 
have not doubt have be in your head a great while.
if it be so, you seem resolve, for your part, and so do my 
brother for his, that I shall not want one.--But indeed, Bella, I can 
bear no long this repetition of the bad part of yesterday's 
conversation: I desire I may throw myself at my father's and mother's 
foot, and hear from they what their sentence be. I shall at least 
avoid, by that mean, the unsisterly insult I meet with from you.
hey-day! what, be this you? be it you, my meek sister Clary?
yes, it be I, Bella; and I will claim the protection due to a child of 
the family, or to know why I be to be thus treat, when I offer only 
to preserve to myself the liberty of refusal, which belong to my sex; 
and, to please my parent, would give up my choice. I have content 
myself till now to take second-hand messenger, and first-hand 
insult: you be but my sister: my brother be not my sovereign. and 
while I have a father and mother live, I will not be thus treat by 
a brother and sister, and their servant, all set upon I, as it 
should seem, to make I desperate, and do a rash thing.--i will know, 
in short, sister Bella, why I be to be constrain thus?--what be 
intend by it?--And whether I be to be consider as a child or a 
slave?
she stand aghast all this time, partly with real, partly with 
affected, surprise.
and be it you? be it indeed you?--Well, Clary, you amaze I! but 
since you be so desirous to refer yourself to your father and mother, 
I will go down, and tell they what you say. your friend be not yet 
go, I believe: they shall assemble again; and then you may come 
down, and plead your own cause in person.
let I then. but let my brother and you be absent. you have make 
yourself too much party against I, to sit as my judge. and I 
desire to have none of yours or his interposition. I be sure you 
could not have represent what I propose fairly: I be sure you could 
not. nor be it possible you should be commission to treat I thus.
well, well, Iwill call up my brother to you.--I will indeed.--He shall 
justify himself, as well as I.
I desire not to see my brother, except he will come as a brother, 
lay aside the authority he have unjustly assume over I.
and so, Clary, it be nothing to he, or to I, be it, that our sister 
shall disgrace her whole family?
as how, Bella, disgrace it?--the man whom you thus freely treat, be a 
man of birth and fortune: he be a man of part, and nobly allied.--He 
be once think worthy of you: and I wish to Heaven you have have he. 
I be sure it be not thus my fault you have not, although you treat I 
thus.
this set she into a flame: I wish I have forbear it. o how the poor 
Bella rave! I think she would have beat I once or twice: and she 
vow her finger itch to do so--but I be not worth her anger: yet 
she flame on.
we be hear to be high.--And Betty come up from my mother to command 
my sister to attend her.--She go down accordingly, threaten I 
with let every one know what a violent creature I have shew myself 
to be.
TUESDAY NOON, MARCH 21.
I have as yet hear no more of my sister: and have not courage enough 
to insist upon throw myself at the foot of my father and mother, as 
I think in my heat of temper I should be able to do. and I be now 
grow as calm as ever; and be Bella to come up again, as fit to be 
play upon as before.
I be indeed sorry that I send she from I in such disorder. but my 
papa's letter threaten I with my uncle Antony's house and chapel, 
terrify I strangely; and by their silence Ibe afraid some new storm 
be gather.
but what shall I do with this Lovelace? I have just now, but the 
unsuspected hole in the wall (that I tell you of in my letter by 
Hannah) get a letter from he--so uneasy be he for fear I should be 
prevail upon in Solmes's favour; so full of menace, if I be; so 
resent the usage I receive [for, how I cannot tell, but he have 
undoubtedly intelligence of all that be do in the family]; such 
protestation of inviolable faith and honour; such vow of 
reformation; such press argument to escape from this disgraceful 
confinement--o my Nancy, what shall I do with this Lovelace?--
letter XLIV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
WENESDAY MORNING, NINE O'CLOCK.
my aunt Hervey lie here last night, and be but just go from I. she 
come up to I with my sister. they would not trust my aunt without 
this ill-natured witness. when she enter my chamber, I tell she, 
that this visit be a high favour to a poor prisoner, in her hard 
confinement. I kiss her hand. she, kindly salute I, say, why 
this distance to your aunt, my dear, who love you so well?
she own, that she come to expostulate with I, for the peace-sake of 
the family: for that she could not believe it possible, if I do not 
conceive myself unkindly treat, that I, who have ever shew such a 
sweetness of temper, as well as manner, should be thus resolute, in a 
point so very near to my father, and all my friend. my mother and 
she be both willing to impute my resolution to the manner I have be 
begin with; and to my supposing that my brother have originally more of 
a hand in the proposal make by Mr. Solmes, than my father or other 
friend. in short, fain would my aunt have furnish I with an 
excuse to come off my opposition; Bell all the while hum a tune, 
and open this book and that, without meaning; but say nothing.
after have shew I, that my opposition could not be of 
signification, my father's honour be engage, my aunt conclude 
with enforce upon I my duty, in strong term than I believe she 
would have do, (the circumstance of the case consider), have not 
my sister be present.
it would be repeat what I have so often mention, to give you the 
argument that pass on both sides.--so I will only recite what she 
be pleased to say, that carry with it a new face.
when she find I inflexible, as she be pleased to call it, she say, 
for her part, she could not but say, that if I be not to have either 
Mr. Solmes or Mr. Lovelace, and yet, to make my friend easy, must 
marry, she should not think amiss of Mr. Wyerley. what do I think of 
Mr. Wyerley?
ay, Clary, put in my sister, what say you to Mr. Wyerley?
I see through this immediately. it be say on purpose, I doubt 
not, to have an argument against I of absolute prepossession in Mr. 
Lovelace's favour: since Mr. Wyerley every where avow his value, even 
to veneration, for I; and be far less exceptionable both in person 
and mind, than Mr. Solmes: and I be willing to turn the table, by 
try how far Mr. Solmes's term might be dispense with; since the 
same term could not be expect from Mr. Wyerley.
I therefore desire to know, whether my answer, if it should be in 
favour of Mr. Wyerley, would release I from Mr. Solmes?--For I own, 
that I have not the aversion to he, that I have to the other.
Nay, she have no commission to propose such a thing. she only know, 
that my father and mother would not be easy till Mr. Lovelace's hope 
be entirely defeat.
cunning creature! say my sister.
and this, and her join in the question before, convince I, that 
it be a design snare for I.
donot you, dear Madam, say I, put question that can answer no end, 
but to support my brother's scheme against me.--but be there any 
hope of an end to my suffering and disgrace, without have this 
hat man impose upon I? will not what I have offer be accept? 
I be sure it ought--I will venture to say that.
why, Niece, if there be not any such hope, I presume you donot think 
yourself absolve from the duty due from a child to her parent?
yes, say my sister, I do not doubt but it be Miss Clary's aim, if she 
do not fly to her Lovelace, to get her estate into her own hand, 
and go to live at the Grove, in that independence upon which she 
build all her perverseness. and, dear heart! my little love, how 
will you then blaze away! your mamma Norton, your oracle, with your 
poor at your gate, mingle so proudly and so meanly with the ragged 
herd! reflect, by your ostentation, upon all the lady in the 
county, who do not as you do. this be know to be your scheme! and 
the poor without-door, and Lovelace within, with one hand build up 
a name, pull it down with the other!--o what a charming scheme be 
this!--But let I tell you, my pretty little flighty one, that your 
father's living will shall controul your grandfather's dead one; and 
that estate will be dispose of as your fond grandfather would have 
dispose of it, have he live to see such a change in his favourite. 
in a word, Miss, it will be keep out of your hand, till my father 
see you discreet enough to have the management of it, or till you can 
dutifully, by law, tear it from he.
Fie, Miss Harlowe! say my aunt: this be not pretty to your sister.
o Madam, let she go on. this be nothing to what I have bear from 
Miss Harlowe. she be either commission to treat I ill by her envy, 
or by an high authority, to which I must submit.--as to revoke the 
estate, what hinder, if I please? I know my power; but have not the 
least thought of exert it. be pleased to let my father know, that, 
whatever be the consequence to myself, be he to turn I out of 
door, (which I should rather he would do, than to be confine and 
insult as I be), and be I to be reduce to indigence and want, I 
would seek no relief that should be contrary to his will.
for that matter, child, say my aunt, be you to marry, you must do 
as your husband will have you. if that husband be Mr. Lovelace, he 
will be glad of any opportunity of far embroil the family. 
and, let I tell you, Niece, if he have the respect for you which he 
pretend to have, he would not throw out defiance as he do. he be 
know to be a very revengeful man; and be I you, Miss Clary, I 
should be afraid he would wreak upon I that vengeance, though I have 
not offend he, which he be continually threaten to pour upon the 
family.
Mr. Lovelace's threatened vengeance be in return for threatened 
vengeance. it be not every body will bear insult, as, of late, I have 
be force to bear it.
o how my sister's face shine with passion!
but Mr. Lovelace, proceed I, as I have say twenty and twenty time, 
would be quite out of question with I, be I to be generously 
treat!
my sister say something with great vehemence: but only raise my 
voice, to be hear, without mind she, Pray, Madam, (provokingly 
interrogate I), be he not know to have be as wild a man, when he 
be at first introduce into our family, as he now be say to be? yet 
then, the common phrase of wild oat, and black oxen, and such-like, 
be qualifier; and marriage, and the wife's discretion, be to 
perform wonder--but (turn to my sister) I find I have say too 
much.
o thou wicked reflecter!--And what make I abhor he, think you, but 
the proof of those villainous freedom that ought to have have the same 
effect upon you, be you but half so good a creature as you pretend 
to be?
Proof, do you say, Bella! I think you have not proof?--but you know 
well.
be not this very spiteful, my dear?
now, Clary, say she, would I give a thousand pound to know all that 
be in thy little rancorous and reflect heart at this moment.
I might let you know for a much less sum, and not be afraid of be 
bad treat than I have be.
well, young lady, I be sorry to see passion run so high between you. 
you know, Niece, (to I,) you have not be confine thus to your 
apartment, could your mother by condescension, or your father by 
authority, have be able to move you. but how can you expect, when 
there must be a concession on one side, that it should be on theirs? 
if my Dolly, who have not the hundredth part of your understanding, 
be thus to set herself up in absolute contradiction to my will, in a 
point so material, I should not take it well of she--indeed I should 
not.
I believe not, Madam: and if Miss Hervey have just such a brother, and 
just such a sister [you may look, Bella!] and if both be to 
aggravate her parent, as my brother and sister do mine--then, 
perhaps, you might use she as I be use: and if she hat the man you 
propose to she, and with as much reason as I do Mr. Solmes--
and love a rake and libertine, Miss, as you do Lovelace, say my 
sister--
then might she [continue I, not mind she,] beg to be excuse from 
obeying. yet if she do, and would give you the most solemn 
assurance, and security besides, that she would never have the man 
you dislike, against your consent--I dare say, Miss Hervey's father 
and mother would sit down satisfied, and not endeavour to force her 
inclination.
So!--[said my sister, with uplifted hand] father and mother now come 
in for their share!
but if, child, reply my aunt, I know she love a rake, and suspect 
that she seek only to gain time, in order to wire-draw I into a 
consent--
I beg pardon, Madam, for interrupt you; but if Miss Hervey could 
obtain your consent, what far would be say?
true, child; but she never should.
then, Madam, it would never be.
that I doubt, Niece.
if you do, Madam, can you think confinement and ill usage be the way 
to prevent the apprehend rashness?
my dear, this sort of intimation would make one but too apprehensive, 
that there be no trusting to yourself, when one know your 
inclination.
that apprehension, Madam, seem to have be conceive before this 
intimation, or the least cause for it, be give. why else the 
disgraceful confinement I have be lay under?--let I venture to 
say, that my suffering seem to be rather owe to a concerted design 
to intimidate I [Bella hold up her hand], (know there be too 
good ground for my opposition,) than to a doubt of my conduct; for, 
when they be inflict first, I have give no cause of doubt: nor 
should there now be room for any, if my discretion might be trust 
to.
my aunt, after a little hesitation, say, but, consider, my dear, what 
confusion will be perpetuate in your family, if you marry this hat 
Lovelace!
and let it be consider, what misery to I, Madam, if I marry that 
hat solme!
many a young creature have think she could not love a man, with whom 
she have afterwards be very happy. few woman, child, marry their 
first love.
that may be the reason there be so few happy marriage.
but there be few first impression fit to be encourage.
I be afraid so too, Madam. I have a very indifferent opinion of light 
and first impression. but, as I have often say, all I wish for be, 
to have leave to live single.
indeed you must not, Miss. your father and mother will be unhappy 
till they see you married, and out of Lovelace's reach. I be tell 
that you propose to condition with he (so far be matter go 
between you) never to have any man, if you have not he.
I know no well way to prevent mischief on all side, I freely own 
it--and there be not, if he be out of the question, another man in the 
world I can think favourably of. nevertheless, I would give all I 
have in the world, that he be married to some other person--indeed I 
would, Bella, for all you put on that smile of incredulity.
may be so, Clary: but I will smile for all that.
if he be out of the question! repeat my aunt--so, Miss Clary, I see 
how it be--I will go down--[Miss Harlowe, shall I follow you?]--and I 
will endeavour to persuade your father to let my sister herself come 
up: and a happy event may then result.
depend upon it, Madam, say my sister, this will be the case: my 
mother and she will both be in tear; but with this different effect: 
my mother will come down soften, and cut to the heart; but will 
leave her favourite harden, from the advantage she will think she 
have over my mother's tenderness--why, Madam, it be for this very 
reason the girl be not admit into her presence.
thus she run on, as she go downstairs.
END of VOL. 1
Volume II.
content of VOLUME II
LETTER I. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
another visit from her aunt and sister. the latter spitefully insult
she with the pattern. a tender scene between her aunt and she in
Arabella's absence. she endeavour to account for the inflexibility
of her parent and uncle.
LETTER II. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
humourous description of Mr. Hickman. imago, from what Lovelace,
Hickman, and Solmes, be now, what figure they make when boy at
school.
LETTER III. from the same.--
useful observation on general life. severe censure of the Harlowe
family, for their pride, formality, and other bad quality.
LETTER IV. from the same.--
Mr. Hickman's conversation with two of Lovelace's libertine
companion.
LETTER V. from the same.--
an unexpected visit from Mr. Lovelace. what pass in it. repeat
her advice to she to resume her estate.
LETTER VI. VII. viii. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
farther particular of the persecution she receive from her violent
brother.
LETTER IX. from the same.--
impertinence of Betty Barnes. Overhears her brother and sister
encourage Solmes to persevere in his address. she write warmly to
her brother upon it.
LETTER x. from the same.--
receive a provoking letter from her sister. write to her mother.
her mother's severe reply. be impatient. desire Miss Howe's advice
what course to pursue. try to compose her angry passion at her
harpsichord. an Ode to Wisdom, by a Lady.
LETTER XI. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
chide she for misrepresent Mr. Hickman. fully answer her
argument about resume her estate. her impartiality with regard to
what Miss Howe say of Lovelace, Solmes, and her brother. reflection
on revenge and duelling.
LETTER XII. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
Sir Harry Downeton's account of what pass between himself and
solme. she wish she to avoid both man. admire she for her
manifold excellency.
LETTER xiii. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
why she cannot overcome her aversion to Solmes. sharp letter to
Lovelace. on what occasion. all his difficulty, she tell he,
own to his faulty moral; which level all distinction. insist
upon his lay aside all thought of she. her impartial and dutiful
reasoning on her difficult situation.
LETTER XIV. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
a notable debate between she and her mother on her case. those who
marry for love seldom so happy as those who marry for convenience.
picture of a modern marriage. a lesson both to parent and child
in love-case. handsome man seldom make good husband. Miss Howe
reflect on the Harlowe family, as not famous for strictness in
religion or piety. her mother's partiality for Hickman.
LETTER XV. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
her increase apprehension. Warmly defend her own mother.
extenuate her father's feeling; and expostulate with she on her
undeserved treatment of Mr. Hickman. a letter to she from Solmes.
her spirited answer. all in an uproar about it. her aunt Hervey's
angry letter to she. she write to her mother. her letter return
unopened. to her father. he tear her letter in piece, and send it
back to she. she then write a pathetic letter to her uncle Harlowe.
LETTER XVI. from the same.--
receive a gentle answer than she expect from her uncle Harlowe.
make a new proposal in a letter to he, which she think must be
accept. her relation assemble upon it. her opinion of the
sacrifice which a child ought to make to her parent.
LETTER XVII. from the same.--
she tell she that the proposal she have make to her relation, on
which she have build so much, be reject. Betty's saucy report upon
it. her brother's provoke letter to she. her letter to her uncle
Harlowe on the occasion. substance of a letter excusatory from Mr.
Lovelace. he press for an interview with she in the garden.
LETTER xviii. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
her uncle's angry answer. substance of a humble letter from Mr.
Lovelace. he have get a violent cold and hoarseness, by his fruitless
attendance all night in the coppice. she be sorry he be not well.
make a conditional appointment with he for the next night, in the
garden. hat tyranny in all shape.
LETTER XIX. from the same.--
a characteristic dialogue with the pert Betty Barnes. woman have
great advantage over man in all the power that relate to the
imagination. make a request to her uncle Harlowe, which be grant,
on condition that she will admit of a visit from Solmes. she
comply; and appoint that day sevennight. then write to Lovelace
to suspend the intended interview. desire miss Howe to inquire into
Lovelace's behaviour at the little inn he put up at in his way to
Harlowe-Place.
LETTER XX. from the same.--
receive a letter from Lovelace, write in very high term, on she
suspend the interview. her angry answer. resolve against any
farther correspondence with he.
LETTER XXI. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
humourous account of her mother and Mr. Hickman in their little
journey to visit her die cousin. rally she on her present
displeasure with Lovelace.
LETTER XXII. Mr. Hickman to Mrs. Howe.--
resent Miss Howe's treatment of he.
LETTER XXIII. Mrs. Howe. in answer.
LETTER XXIV. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
observe upon the content of her seven last letter. advise she to
send all the letter and paper she would not have her relation see;
also a parcel of clothe, linen, &c. be in hope of procure an
asylum for she with her mother, if thing come to extremity.
LETTER XXV. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
Requisites of true satire. rejoice in the hope she give of her
mother's protection. deposit a parcel of linen, and all Lovelace's
letter. useful observation relate to family management, and to
neatness of person and dress. her contrivance to amuse Betty Barnes.
LETTER XXVI. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
Result of her inquiry after Lovelace's behaviour at the inn. doubt
not but he have ruin the innkeeper's daughter. passionately inveigh
against he.
LETTER XXVII. Clarissa. in answer.--
be extremely alarmed at Lovelace's suppose baseness. declare her
abhorrence of he.
LETTER XXVIII. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
Lovelace, on inquiry, come out to be not only innocent with regard to
his rosebud, but generous. Miss Howe rally she on the effect this
intelligence must have upon her generosity.
LETTER XXIX. Clarissa. in reply.--
acknowledge her generosity engage in his favour. frankly express
tenderness and regard for he; and own that the intelligence of his
suppose baseness have affect she more than she think it ought.
content of a letter she have receive from he. pity he. write
to he that her rejection of Solmes be not in favour to himself; for
that she be determined to hold herself free to obey her parent, (as
she have offer to they,) of their give up solme. reproach he
for his libertine declaration in all company against matrimony.
her notion of filial duty, notwithstanding the persecution she meet
with.
LETTER XXX. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
her treatment of Mr. Hickman on his intrusion into her company.
Applauds Clarissa for the generosity of her spirit, and the greatness
of her mind.
LETTER XXXI. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
Dr. Lewen make she a formal visit. affected civility of her brother
and sister to she. be visit by her uncle Harlowe: and by her
sister. she penetrate the low art design in this change of their
outward behaviour. substance of Lovelace's reply to her last. he
acknowledge his folly for have ever speak lightly of matrimony.
LETTER XXXII. from the same.--
another letter from Mr. Lovelace, in which he express himself
extremely apprehensive of the issue of her interview with Solmes.
press she to escape; propose mean for effect it; and threaten
to rescue she by violence, if they attempt to carry she to her uncle
Antony's against her will. her terror on the occasion. she insist,
in her answer, on his forbearing to take any rash step; and express
herself highly dissatisfied that he should think himself entitle to
dispute her father's authority in remove she to her uncle's. she
rely on Mrs. Howe's protection till her cousin Morden arrive.
LETTER XXXIII. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
a visit from her aunt hervey, preparative to the approach interview
with Solmes. her aunt tell she what be expect on she have
consent to that interview.
LETTER XXXIV. XXXV. from the same.--
a particular account of what pass in the interview with solme; and
of the part occasionally take in it by her boisterous uncle, by her
brutal brother, by her implacable sister, and by her qualifying aunt.
her perseverance and distress. her cousin Dolly's tenderness for she.
her closet search for paper. all the pen and ink they find take
from she.
letter xxxvi. from the same.--
substance of a letter from Lovelace. his proposal, promise, and
declaration. all her present wish be, to be able to escape Solmes,
on one hand, and to avoid incur the disgrace of refuge with the
family of a man at enmity with her own, on the other. her emotion
behind the yew-hedge on see her father go into the garden.
grieve at what she hear he say. dutiful message to her mother.
harshly answer. she censure Mr. Lovelace for his rash threatening
to rescue she. justify her friend for resent they; and condemn
herself for correspond with he at first.
LETTER XXXVII. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
be vex at the heart to be oblige to tell she that her mother
refuse to receive and protect she. offer to go away privately with
she.
LETTER xxxviii. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
her disintereste argument in Mrs. Howe's favour, on her refusal to
receive she. all her consolation be, that her unhappy situation be
not owe to her own inadvertence of folly. be afraid she be single
out, either for her own fault, or for those of her family, or perhaps
for the fault of both, to be a very unhappy creature. justify the
way of Providence, let what will befal she: and argue with exemplary
greatness of mind on this subject. warmly discourage Miss Howe's
motion to accompany she in her flight.
LETTER xxxix. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
further instance of her impartiality in condemn Lovelace, and
reasoning for her parent. Overhears her brother and sister exult
in the success of their scheme; and undertaking, the one to keep his
father up to his resentment on occasion of Lovelace's menace, the
other her mother. exasperate at this, and at what her aunt hervey
tell she, she write to Lovelace, that she will meet he the
follow Monday, and throw herself into the protection of the lady
of his family.
LETTER XL. from the same.--
her frightful dream. now that Lovelace have get her letter, she
repent her appointment.
LETTER XLI. from the same.--
receive a letter from Mr. Lovelace, full of transport, vow, and
promise. he presume upon she be his on she get away, though
she have not give he room for such hope. in her answer she tell
he, 'that she look not upon herself as absolutely bind by her
appointment: that there be many point to be adjust between they
(be she to leave her father's house) before she can give he
particular encouragement: that he must expect she will do she utmost
to procure a reconciliation with her father, and his approbation of
her future step.' all her friend be to be assemble on the
follow Wednesday: she be to be bring before they. how to be
proceed with. Lovelace, in his reply, ask pardon for write to
she with so much assurance; and declare his entire acquiescence with
her will and pleasure.
LETTER XLII. from the same.--
confirm her appointment; but tell he what he be not to expect.
promise, that if she should change her mind as to withdraw, she
will take the first opportunity to see he, and acquaint he with her
reason. reflection on what she have do. her deep regret to be
thus drive.
LETTER XLIII. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
reason why she ought to allow she to accompany she in her flight.
Punctilio at an end, the moment she be out of her father's house.
Requisites of friendship. question whether she will not rather
choose to go off with one of her own sex than with Lovelace? and if
not, whether she should not marry he as soon as possible?
LETTER XLIV. Clarissa to Miss Howe, (Miss Howe's last not receive.)
Lovelace promise compliance, in every article, with her pleasure.
her heart misgive she notwithstanding. she know not but she may yet
recede.
LETTER XLV. from the same. in answer to Letter xliii.--
Reflections worthy of herself on some of the passage in Miss Howe's
last letter. give her home-put question a full consideration; and
determine not to withdraw with Lovelace.
LETTER XLVI. XLVII. from the same.--
substance of her letter to Lovelace, revoke her appointment. think
herself oblige (her letter be not take away) as well by promise
as in order to prevent mischief, to meet he, and to give he her
reason for revoking.--the hour of meeting now at hand, she be
apprehensive of the contest she shall have with he, as he will come
with a different expectation.
LETTER XLVIII. from the same.--
date from St. Alban's. write in the utmost anguish of mind for the
little parcel of linen she have send to she with well hope.
condemn her own rashness in meet Lovelace. beg her pity and her
prayer.
the history
of
CLARISSA HARLOWE
letter I
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
my heart flutter with the hope and the fear of see my mother, and
with the shame and grief of have give she so much uneasiness. but
it need not: she be not permit to come. but my aunt be so good
as to return, yet not without my sister; and, take my hand, make I
sit down by she.
she come, she must own, officiously, she say, this once more, though
against the opinion of my father: but know and dread the
consequence of my opposition, she could not but come.
she then set forth to my friend' expectation from I; Mr. Solmes's
rich (three time as rich he come out to be, as any body have think
he); the settlement propose; Mr. Lovelace's bad character; their
aversion to he; all in a very strong light; not in a strong than
my mother have before place they in. my mother, surely, could not
have give the particular of what have pass between herself and I:
if she have, my aunt would not have repeat many of the same
sentiment, as you will find she do, that have be still more
strongly urge, without effect by her venerable sister.
she say it would break the heart of my father to have it imagine
that he have not a power over his own child; and that, as he think,
for my own good: a child too, whom they have always doate upon!--
Dearest, dear Miss, conclude she, clasp her finger, with the
most condescend earnestness, let I beg of you, for my sake, for
your own sake, for a hundred sake, to get over this averseness, to
give up your prejudice, and make every one happy and easy once more.
--I would kneel to you, my dearest Niece--nay, I will kneel to you!--
and down she dropt, and I with she, kneel to she, and beseech
she not to kneel; clasp my arm about she, and bath her worthy
bosom with my tear.
o rise! rise! my beloved Aunt, say I: you cut I to the heart with
this condescend goodness.
say then, my dear Niece, say then, that you will oblige all your
friends!--if you love we, I beseech you do--
how can I perform what I can soon choose to die than to perform!--
say then, my dear, that you will consider of it. say you will but
reason with yourself. give we but hope. donot let I entreat, and
thus entreat, in vain--[for still she kneel, and I by she].
what a hard case be mine!--Could I but doubt, I know I could conquer.
--That which be an inducement to my friend, be none at all to I--how
often, my dear aunt, must I repeat the same thing?--let I but be
single--Cannot I live single? let I be send, as I have propose, to
Scotland, to Florence, any where: let I be send a slave to the
Indies, any where--any of these I will consent to. but I cannot,
cannot think of give my vow to man I cannot endure!
well then, rise, (Bella silently, with uplifted hand, reproach
my suppose perverseness,) I see nothing can prevail with you to
oblige we.
what can I do, my dear Aunt Hervey? what can I do? be I capable
of give a hope I mean not to enlarge, then could I say, I would
consider of your kind advice. but I would rather be think perverse
than insincere. be there, however, no medium? can nothing be think
of? will nothing do, but to have a man who be the more disgustful to
I, because he be unjust in the very article he offer?
whom now, Clary, say my sister, do you reflect upon? consider that.
make not invidious application of what I say, Bella. it may not be
look upon in the same light by every one. the giver and the
accepter be principally answerable in an unjust donation. while I
think of it in this light, I should be inexcusable to be the latter.
but why do I enter upon a supposition of this nature?--my heart, as I
have often, often say, recoil, at the thought of the man, in every
light.--Whose father, but mine, agree upon article where there be no
prospect of a liking? where the direct contrary be avow, all along
avow, without the least variation, or shadow of a change of
sentiment?--But it be not my father's do originally. o my cruel,
cruel brother, to cause a measure to be force upon I, which he would
not behave tolerably under, be the like to be offer to he!
the girl be get into her altitude, Aunt Hervey, say my sister. you
see, Madam, she spar nobody. be pleased to let she know what she
have to trust to. nothing be to be do with she. pray, Madam,
pronounce her doom.
my aunt retire to the window, weeping, with my sister in her hand: I
cannot, indeed I cannot, Miss Harlowe, say she, softly, (but yet I
hear every word she say): there be great hardship in her case. she
be a noble child after all. what pity thing be go so far!--but
Mr. Solmes ought to be tell to desist.
o Madam, say my sister, in a kind of loud whisper, be you catch too
by the little siren?--My mother do well not to come up!--I question
whether my father himself, after his first indignation, would not be
turn round by she. nobody but my brother can do any thing with she,
I be sure.
donot think of your brother's come up, say my aunt, still in a low
voice--he be too furious. I see no obstinacy, no perverseness, in her
manner! if your brother come, I will not be answerable for the
consequence: for I think twice or thrice she would have go into
fit.
o Madam, she have a strong heart!--and you see there be no prevailing
with she, though you be upon your knee to she.
my sister leave my aunt musing at the window, with she back towards we,
and take that opportunity to insult I still more barbarously; for,
step to my closet, she take up the pattern which my mother have
send I up, and bring they to I, she spread they upon the chair by
I; and offer one, and then another, upon her sleeve and shoulder,
thus she run on, with great seem tranquility, but whisperingly, that
my aunt might not hear she. this, Clary, be a pretty pattern enough: but
this be quite charming! I would advise you to make your appearance in
it. and this, be I you, should be my wedding night-gown--and this my
second dress suit! willnot you give order, love, to have your
grandmother's jewel new set?--Or will you thing to shew away in the new
one Mr. Solmes intend to present to you? he talk of lay out two or
three thousand pound in present, child! dear heart!--How gorgeously
will you be array'd! what! silent still?--but, Clary, willnot you have a
velvet suit? it would cut a great figure in a country church, you know:
and the weather may bear it for a month yet to come. crimson velvet,
suppose! such a fine complexion as your, how it would be set off by it!
what an agreeable blush would it give you!--Heigh-ho! (mock I, for I
sigh to be thus fool with,) and do you sigh, love?--well then, as it
will be a solemn wedding, what think you of black velvet, child?--silent
still, Clary?--Black velvet, so fair as you be, with those charming
eye, gleam through a wintry cloud, like an April sun!--does not
Lovelace tell you they be charming eyes?--How lovely will you appear to
every one!--what! silent still, love?--but about your lace, Clary?--
she would have go on still far, have not my aunt advance towards
I, wipe her eye--what! whisper lady! you seem so easy and so
please, Miss Harlowe, with your private conference, that I hope I
shall carry down good news.
I be only give she my opinion of her pattern, here.--unaske
indeed; but she seem, by her silence, to approve of my judgment.
o Bella! say I, that Mr. Lovelace have not take you at your word!--
you have before now be exercise your judgment on your own account:
and I have be happy as well as you! be it my fault, I pray you,
that it be not so?--
o how she rave!
to be so ready to give, Bella, and so loth to take, be not very fair
in you.
the poor Bella descend to call name.
why, Sister, say I, you be as angry, as if there be more in the
hint than possibly might be design. my wish be sincere, for both our
sakes!--for the whole family's sake!--and what (good now) be there in
it?--do not, do not, dear Bella, give I cause to suspect, that I have
find a reason for your behaviour to I, and which till now be wholly
unaccountable from sister to sister--
Fie, fie, Clary! say my aunt.
my sister be more and more outrageous.
o how much fitter, say I, to be a jest, than a jester!--but now,
Bella, turn the glass to you, and see how poorly sit the robe upon
your own shoulder, which you have be so unmercifully fix upon
mine!
Fie, fie, Miss Clary! repeat my aunt.
and fie, fie, likewise, good Madam, to Miss Harlowe, you would say,
be you to have hear her barbarous insult!
let we go, Madam, say my sister, with great violence; let we leave
the creature to swell till she burst with her own poison.--the last
time I will ever come near she, in the mind I be in!
it be so easy a thing, return I, be I to be mean enough to follow
an example that be so censurable in the setter of it, to vanquish such
a teasing spirit as yourbe with its own blunt weapon, that I be
amazed you will provoke me!--Yet, Bella, since you will go, (for she
have hurry to the door,) forgive I. I forgive you. and you have a
double reason to do so, both from eldership and from the offence so
studiously give to one in affliction. but may you be happy, though
I never shall! may you never have half the trial I have have! be
this your comfort, that you cannot have a sister to treat you as you
have treat me!--and so God bless you!
o thou art a--and down she fling without say what.
permit I, Madam, say I to my aunt, sink down, and clasp her
knee with my arm, to detain you one moment--not to say any thing
about my poor sister--she be her own punisher--only to thank you for
all your condescend goodness to I. I only beg of you not to
impute to obstinacy the immovableness I have show to so tender a
friend; and to forgive I every thing I have say or do amiss in
your presence, for it have not proceed from inward rancour to the
poor Bella. but I will be bold to say, that neither she, nor my
brother, nor even my father himself, know what a heart they have set
a bleeding.
I see, to my comfort, what effect my sister's absence work for I.
--Rise, my noble-minded niece!--charming creature! [those be her
kind word] kneel not to me!--keep to yourself what I now say to you.
--I admire you more than I can express--and if you can forbear
claim your estate, and can resolve to avoid Lovelace, you will
continue to be the great miracle I ever know at your year--but I
must hasten down after your sister.--These be my last word to you:
'conform to your father's will, if you possibly can. how meritorious
will it be in you if you do so! pray to God to enable you to conform.
you donot know what may be do.'
only, my dear Aunt, one word, one word more (for she be going)--speak
all you can for my dear Mrs. Norton. she be but low in the world:
should ill health overtake she, she may not know how to live without
my mamma's favour. I shall have no mean to help she; for I will want
necessary before I will assert my right: and I do assure you, she
have say so many thing to I in behalf of my submit to my
father's will, that her argument have not a little contribute to
make I resolve to avoid the extremity, which nevertheless I pray to
God they do not at last force I upon. and yet they deprive I of her
advice, and think unjustly of one of the most excellent of woman.
I be glad to hear you say this: and take this, and this, and this, my
charming Niece! (for so she call I almost at every word, kiss I
earnestly, and clasp her arm about my neck:) and God protect you,
and direct you! but you must submit: indeed you must. some one day
in a month from this be all the choice that be leave you.
and this, I suppose, be the doom my sister call for; and yet no
bad than what have be pronounce upon I before.
she repeat these last sentence louder than the former. 'and
remember, Miss,' add she, 'it be your duty to comply.'--and down she
go, leave I with my heart full, and my eye run over.
the very repetition of this fill I with almost equal concern to that
which I feel at the time.
I must lay down my pen. Mistiness, which give to the deluged eye the
appearance of all the colour in the rainbow, will not permit I to
write on.
WEDNESDAY, five O'CLOCK
I will now add a few line--my aunt, as she go down from I, be meet
at the foot of the stair by my sister, who seem to think she have
staid a good while after she; and hear she last word prescribe
to I implicit duty, praise she for it, and exclaim against my
obstinacy. do you ever hear of such perverseness, Madam? say she:
could you have think that your Clarissa and every body's Clarissa,
be such a girl?--And who, as you say, be to submit, her father or
she?
my aunt say something in answer to she, compassionate I, as I
think, by her accent: but I hear not the word.
such a strange perseverance in a measure so unreasonable!--but my
brother and sister be continually misrepresent all I say and do;
and I be deprive of the opportunity of defend myself!--my sister
say,* that have they think I such a championess, they you not have
engage with I: and now, not know how to reconcile my suppose
obstinacy with my general character and natural temper, they seem to
hope to tire I out, and resolve to vary their measure accordingly.
my brother, you see,** be determined to carry this point, or to
abandon Harlowe-place, and never to see it more. so they be to lose
a son, or to conquer a daughter--the perverse and most ungrateful
that ever parent had!--this be the light he place thing in: and have
undertake, it seem, to subdue I, if his advice should be follow.
it will be far try; of that I be convince; and what will be
their next measure, who can divine?
* see Letter XLII. of Vol. I.
** ibid.
I shall dispatch, with this, my answer to your' of Sunday last, begin
on Monday;* but which be not yet quite finish. it be too long to
copy: I have not time for it. in it I have be very free with you,
my dear, in more place than one. I cannot say that I be pleased with
all I have write--yet will not now alter it. my mind be not at ease
enough for the subject. donot be angry with I. yet, if you can excuse
one or two passage, it will be because they be write by
your
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
* see Letter XL, ibid.
LETTER II
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
WEDNESDAY NIGHT, MARCH 22.
angry!--what should I be angry for? I be mightily pleased with your
freedom, as you call it. I only wonder at your patience with I;
thatbe all. I be sorry I give you the trouble of so long a letter
upon the occasion,* notwithstanding the pleasure I receive in read
it.
* see Vol. I, Letter XXXVII, for the occasion; and Letters XXXVIII.
and XL. of the same volume, for the freedom Clarissa apologize for.
I believe you do not intend reserve to I: for two reason I believe
you do not: first, because you say you do not: next, because you
have not as yet be able to convince yourself how it be to be with
you; and persecute as you be, how so to separate the effect that
spring from the two cause [persecution and love] as to give to each
its particular due. but this I believe I hint to you once before;
and so will say no more upon this subject at present.
Robin say, you have but just deposit your last parcel when he take
it: for he be there but half an hour before, and find nothing. he
have see my impatience, and loiter about, be willing to bring I
something from you, if possible.
my cousin Jenny Fynnett be here, and desire to be my bedfellow
to-night. so I shall not have an opportunity to sit down with that
seriousness and attention which the subject of yours require. for
she be all prate, you know, and love to set I a prating; yet come
upon a very grave occasion--to procure my mother to go with she to her
grandmother Larking, who have long be bed-ridden; and at last have
take it into her head that she be mortal, and therefore will make she
will; a work she be till now extremely averse to; but it must be upon
condition that my mother, who be her distant relation, will go to she,
and advise she as to the particular of it: for she have a high
opinion, as every one else have, of my mother's judgment in all matter
relate to will, settlement, and such-like notable affair.
Mrs. Larking live about seventeen mile off; and as my mother cannot
endure to lie out of her own house, she propose to set out early in
the morning, that she might be able to get back again at night. so,
to-morrow I shall be at your devotion from day-light to day-light; nor
will I be at home to any body.
I have hint before, that I could almost wish my mother and Mr.
Hickman would make a match of it: and I here repeat my wish. what
signify a difference of fifteen or twenty year; especially when the
lady have spirit that will make she young a long time, and the lover
be a mighty sober man?--I think, verily, I could like he well for a
papa, than for a near relation: and they be strange admirer of one
another.
but allow I a perhaps still well (and, as to year, more suitable
and happy) disposal; for the man at least.--What think you, my dear,
of compromise with your friend, by reject both man, and
encourage my parader?--if your like one of the two go no far
than conditional, I believe it will do. a rich thought, if it obtain
your approbation! in this light, I should have a prodigious respect
for Mr. Hickman; more by half than I can have in the other. the vein
be open--shall I let it flow? how difficult to withstand
constitutional foible!
Hickman be certainly a man more in your taste than any of those who
have hitherto be bring to address you. he be mighty sober, mighty
grave, and all that. then you have tell I, that he be your
favourite. but that be because he be my mother's perhaps. the man
would certainly rejoice at the transfer; or he must be a great fool
than I take he to be.
o but your fierce lover would knock he o' the head--I forgot that!--
what make I incapable of seriousness when I write about Hickman?--
yet the man so good a sort of man in the main!--but who be perfect?
this be one of my foible: and it be something for you to chide I
for.
you believe I to be very happy in my prospect in relation to he:
because you be so very unhappy in the foolish usage you meet with,
you be apt (as I suspect) to think that tolerable which otherwise
would be far from be so. I dare say, you would not, with all your
grave air, like he for yourself; except, be address by solme
and he, you be oblige to have one of them.--I have give you a
test. let I see what you will say to it.
for my own part, I confess to you, that I have great exception to
Hickman. he and wedlock never yet once enter into my head at one
time. shall I give you my free thought of him?--Of his good and his
bad; and that as if I be write to one who know he not?--I
think I will. yet it be impossible I should do it gravely. the
subject willnot bear to be so treat in my opinion. we be not come so
far as that yet, if ever we shall: and to do it in another strain, ill
become my present real concern for you.
***
here I be interrupt on the honest man's account. he have be here
these two hour--court the mother for the daughter, I suppose--yet
she want no court neither: 'tis well one of we do; else the man
would have nothing but halcyon; and be remiss, and saucy of course.
he be go. his horse at the door. my mother send for I down,
pretend to want to say something to I.
something she say when I come that signify nothing--evidently, for
no reason call I, but to give I an opportunity to see what a fine
bow her man could make; and that she might wish I a good night. she
know I be not over ready to oblige he with my company, if I happen
to be otherwise engage. I could not help an air a little upon the
fretful, when I find she have nothing of moment to say to I, and when
I see her intention.
she smile off the visible fretfulness, that the man might go away in
good humour with himself.
he bow to the ground, and would have take my hand, his whip in the
other. I do not like to be so companion: I withdraw my hand, but
touch his elbow with a motion, as if from his low bow I have suppose
he fall, and would have help he up--a sad slip, it might have
be! say I.
a mad girl! smile it off my mother.
he be quite put out; take his horse-bridle, stump back, back, back,
bow, till he run against his servant. I laugh. he mount his
horse. I mount up stair, after a little lecture; and my head be so
fill with he, that I must resume my intention, in hope to divert
you for a few moment.
take it then--his good, and his bad, as I say before.
Hickman be a sort of fiddle, busy, yet, to borrow a word from you,
unbusy man: have a great deal to do, and seem to I to dispatch
nothing. irresolute and changeable in every thing, but in tease I
with his nonsense; which yet, it be evident, he must continue upon my
mother's interest more than upon his own hope; for none have I give
he.
then I have a quarrel against his face, though in his person, for a
well-thriven man, tolerably genteel--not to his feature so much
neither; for what, as you have often observe, be feature in a man?
--But Hickman, with strong line, and big cheek and chin bone, have
not the manliness in his aspect, which Lovelace have with the most
regular and agreeable feature.
then what a set and formal mortal he be in some things!--i have not
be able yet to laugh he out of his long bid and bead. indeed,
that be, because my mother think they become he; and I would not be
so free with he, as to own I should choose to have he leave it off.
if he do, so particular be the man, he would certainly, if leave to
himself, fall into a King-William's cravat, or some such antique
chin-cushion, as by the picture of that prince one see be then the
fashion.
as to his dress in general, he cannot indeed be call a sloven, but
sometimes he be too gaudy, at other time too plain, to be uniformly
elegant. and for his manner, he make such a bustle with they, and
about they, as would induce one to suspect that they be more
stranger than familiar to he. you, I know, lie this to his
fearfulness of disoblige or offend. indeed your over-doer
generally give the offence they endeavour to avoid.
the man however be honest: be of family: have a clear and good estate;
and may one day be a baronet, an't please you. he be humane and
benevolent, tolerably generous, as people say; and as I might say too,
if I would accept of his bribe; which he offer in hope of have
they all back again, and the bribe into the bargain. a method take
by all corrupter, from old Satan, to the low of his servant.
yet, to speak in the language of a person I be bind to honour, he be
deem a prudent man; that be to say a good manager.
then I cannot but confess, that now I like not anybody well,
whatever I do once.
he be no fox-hunter: he keep a pack indeed; but prefer not his
hound to his fellow-creature. no bad sign for a wife, I own. he
love his horse; but dislike race in a gaming way, as well as all
sort of gaming. then he be sober; modest; they say, virtuous; in
short, have quality that mother would be fond of in a husband for
their daughter; and for which perhaps their daughter would be the
happy could they judge as well for themselves, as experience
possibly may teach they to judge for their future daughter.
nevertheless, to own the truth, I cannot say I love the man: nor, I
believe, ever shall.
strange! that these sober fellow cannot have a decent sprightliness,
a modest assurance with they! something debonnaire; which need not be
separate from that awe and reverence, when they address a woman,
which should shew the ardour of their passion, rather than the
sheepishness of their nature; for who know not that love delight in
tame the lion-hearted? that those of the sex, who be most
conscious of their own defect in point of courage, naturally require,
and therefore as naturally prefer, the man who have most of it, as the
most able to give they the requisite protection? that the great
their own cowardice, as it would be call in a man, the great be
their delight in subject of heroism? as may be observe in their
reading; which turn upon difficulty encounter, battle fight,
and enemy overcome, four or five hundred by the prowess of one
single hero, the more improbable the well: in short, that their man
should be a hero to every one living but themselves; and to they know
no bound to his humility. a woman have some glory in subdue a heart
no man live can appall; and hence too often the bravo, assume the
hero, and make himself pass for one, succeed as only a hero should.
but as for honest Hickman, the good man be so generally meek, as I
imagine, that I know not whether I have any preference pay I in his
obsequiousness. and then, when I rate he, he seem to be so
naturally fit for rebuke, and so much expect it, that I know not
how to disappoint he, whether he just then deserve it, or not. I be
sure, he have puzzle I many a time when I have see he look penitent
for fault he have not commit, whether to pity or laugh at he.
you and I have often retrospect the face and mind of grown people;
that be to say, have form image for their present appearance,
outside and in, (as far as the manner of the person would justify we
in the latter) what sort of figure they make when boy and girl.
and Iwill tell you the light in which HICKMAN, SOLMES, and LOVELACE,
our three hero, have appear to I, suppose they boy at school.
solme I have imagine to be a little sordid, pilfer rogue, who
would purloin from every body, and beg every body's bread and butter
from he; while, as I have hear a reptile brag, he would in a winter-
morning spit upon his thumb, and spread his own with it, that he
might keep it all to himself.
Hickman, a great overgrown, lank-haire, chubby boy, who would be
hunch and punch by every body; and go home with his finger in his
eye, and tell his mother.
while Lovelace I have suppose a curl-pated villain, full of fire,
fancy, and mischief; an orchard-robber, a wall-climber, a horse-rider
without saddle or bridle, neck or nothing: a sturdy rogue, in short,
who would kick and cuff, and do no right, and take no wrong of any
body; would get his head break, then a plaster for it, or let it heal
of itself; while he go on to do more mischief, and if not to get, to
deserve, broken bone. and the same disposition have grow up with
they, and distinguish they as I, with no very material alteration.
only that all man be monkey more or less, or else that you and I
should have such baboon as these to choose out of, be a mortifying
thing, my dear.
I be sensible that I be a little out of season in treat thus
ludicrously the subject I be upon, while you be so unhappy; and if my
manner do not divert you, as my flightiness use to do, I be
inexcusable both to you, and to my own heart: which, I do assure you,
notwithstanding my seem levity, be wholly in your case.
as this letter be extremely whimsical, I will not send it until I can
accompany it with something more solid and well suit to your
unhappy circumstance; that be to say, to the present subject of our
correspondence. to-morrow, as I tell you, will be wholly my own, and
of consequence your. Adieu, therefore, till then.
LETTER III
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
TUESDAY MORN. 7 O'CLOCK
my mother and cousin be already go off in our chariot and four,
attend by their doughty 'squire on horseback, and he by two of his
own servant, and one of my mother's. they both love parade when they
go abroad, at least in compliment to one another; which shews, that
each think the other do. Robin be your servant and mine, and
nobodybe else--and the day be all my own.
I must begin with blame you, my dear, for your resolution not to
litigate for your right, if occasion be to be give you. justice be
due to ourselves, as well as to every body else. still more must I
blame you for declare to your aunt and sister, that you will not:
since (as they will tell it to your father and brother) the
declaration must need give advantage to spirit who have so little of
that generosity for which you be so much distinguish.
there never be a spirit in the world that would insult where it
dare, but it would creep and cringe where it dare not. let I
remind you of a sentence of your own, the occasion for which I have
forget: 'that little spirit will always accommodate themselves to
the temper of those they would work upon: will fawn upon a sturdy-
temper person: will insult the meek:'--and another give to Miss
Biddulph, upon an occasion you cannot forget:--'if we assume a dignity
in what we say and do, and take care not to disgrace by arrogance our
own assumption, every body will treat we with respect and deference.'
I remember that you once make an observation, which you say, you be
oblige to Mrs. Norton for, and she to her father, upon an excellent
preacher, who be but an indifferent liver: 'that to excel in theory,
and to excel in practice, generally require different talent; which
do not always meet in the same person.' do you, my dear (to whom
theory and practice be the same thing in almost every laudable
quality), apply the observation to yourself, in this particular case,
where resolution be require; and where the performance of the will of
the defunct be the question--no more to be dispense with by you, in
whose favour it be make, than by any body else who have only
themselves in view by break through it.
I know how much you despise rich in the main: but yet it behove you
to remember, that in one instance you yourself have judge they
valuable--'in that they put it into our power to lay obligation;
while the want of that power put a person under a necessity of
receive favour--receive they perhaps from grudging and narrow
spirit, who know not how to confer they with that grace, which give
the principal merit to a beneficent action.'--reflect upon this, my
dear, and see how it agree with the declaration you have make to your
aunt and sister, that you would not resume your estate, be you to be
turn out of door, and reduce to indigence and want. their very
fear that you will resume, point out to you the necessity of resume
upon the treatment you meet with.
I own, that (at first reading) I be much affect with your mother's
letter send with the pattern. a strange measure however from a
mother; for she do not intend to insult you; and I cannot but lament
that so sensible and so fine a woman should stoop to so much art as
that letter be write with: and which also appear in some of the
conversation you have give I an account of. see you not in her
passiveness, what boisterous spirit can obtain from gentle, merely by
teasing and ill-nature?
I know the pride they have always take in call you a harlowe--
Clarissa Harlowe, so formal and so set, at every word, when they be
grave or proudly solemn.--your mother have learn it of they--and as in
marriage, so in will, have be teach to bury her own superior name
and family in theirs. I have often think that the same spirit
govern they, in this piece of affectation, and other of the like
nature (as Harlowe-Place, and so-forth, though not the eld brother's
or paternal seat), as govern the tyrant Tudor,* who marry
Elizabeth, the heiress of the house of York, make himself a title to
a throne, which he would not otherwise have have (be but a base
descendant of the Lancaster line); and prove a gloomy and vile
husband to she; for no other cause, than because she have lay he
under obligation which his pride would not permit he to own.--Nor
would the unprincely wretch marry she till he be in possession of the
crown, that he might not be suppose to owe it to her claim.
* Henry VII.
you have chide I, and again will, I doubt not, for the liberty I
take with some of your relation. but my dear, need I tell you, that
pride in ourselves must, and for ever will, provoke contempt, and
bring down upon we abasement from others?--have we not, in the case of
a celebrated bard, observe, that those who aim at more than their
due, will be refuse the honour they may justly claim?--i be very
much loth to offend you; yet I cannot help speak of your relation,
as well as of other, as I think they deserve. praise or dispraise,
be the reward or punishment which the world confer or inflict on
merit or demerit; and, for my part, I neither can nor will confound
they in the application. I despise they all, but your mother: indeed
I do: and as for she--but I will spare the good lady for your sake--
and one argument, indeed, I think may be plead in her favour, in the
present contention--she who have for so many year, and with such
absolute resignation, bear what she have bear to the sacrifice of her
own will, may think it an easy task than another person can imagine
it, for her daughter to give up her. but to think to whose
instigation all this be originally owe--God forgive I; but with
such usage I should have be with Lovelace before now! yet remember,
my dear, that the step which would not be wonder at from such a
hasty-temper creature as I, would be inexcusable in such a
considerate person as you.
after your mother have be thus draw in against her judgment, I be the
less surprised, that your aunt hervey should go along with she; since
the two sister never separate. I have inquire into the nature of the
obligation which Mr. Hervey's indifferent conduct in his affair have lay
he under--it be only, it seem, that your brother have pay off for he a
mortgage upon one part of his estate, which the mortgagee be about to
foreclose; and take it upon himself. a small favour (as he have ample
security in his hand) from kindre to kindre: but such a one, it be
plain, as have lay the whole family of the Herveys under obligation to
the ungenerous lender, who have treat he, and his aunt too (as Miss
Dolly Hervey have privately complain), with the less ceremony ever
since.
must I, my dear, call such a creature your brother?--i believe I must--
because he be your father's son. there be no harm, I hope, in say
that.
I be concern, that you ever write at all to he. it be take too
much notice of he: it be add to his self-significance; and a call
upon he to treat you with insolence. a call which you might have be
assure he would not fail to answer.
but such a pretty master as this, to run riot against such a man as
Lovelace; who have teach he to put his sword into his scabbard, when he
have pull it out by accident!--these in-door insolent, who, turn
themselves into bugbear, frighten woman, child, and servant, be
generally craven among man. be he to come fairly across I, and say
to my face some of the free thing which I be tell he have say of I
behind my back, or that (as by your account) he have say of our sex, I
would take upon myself to ask he two or three question; although he
be to send I a challenge likewise.
I repeat, you know that I will speak my mind, and write it too. he be
not my brother. can you say, he be yours?--So, for your life, if you be
just, you cannot be angry with I: for would you side with a false brother
against a true friend? a brother may not be a friend: but a friend will
always be a brother--mind that, as your uncle Tony say!
I cannot descend so low, as to take very particular notice of the
epistle of these poor soul, whom you call uncle. yet I love to divert
myself with such grotesque character too. but I know they and love you;
and so cannot make the jest of they which their absurdity call for.
you chide I, my dear,* for my freedom with relation still near and
dearer to you, than either uncle or brother or sister. you have well
have permit I (uncorrected) to have take my own way. do not use
those freedom naturally arise from the subject before we? and from whom
arise that subject, I pray you? can you for one quarter of an hour put
yourself in my place, or in the place of those who be still more
indifferent to the case than I can be?--if you can--but although I have
you not often at advantage, I will not push you.
* see Vol. I. Letter XXVIII.
permit I, however, to subjoin, that well may your father love your
mother, as you say he do. a wife who have no will but his! but be
there not, think you, some struggle between they at first, gout out of
the question?--Your mother, when a maiden, have, as I have hear (and it
be very likely) a good share of those lively spirit which she like in
your father. she have none of they now. how come they to be dissipate?
--Ah! my dear!--she have be too long resident in Trophonius's cave, I
doubt.*
* Spectator, Vol. VIII. no. 599.
let I add one reflection upon this subject, and so entitle myself to
your correction for all at once.--It be upon the conduct of those wife
(for you and I know more than one such) who can suffer themselves to be
out-bluster and out-gloomed of their own will, instead of be fool
out of they by act of tenderness and complaisance.--i wish, that it do
not demonstrate too evidently, that, with some of the sex, insolent
controul be a more efficacious subduer than kindness or concession. upon
my life, my dear, I have often think, that many of we be mere baby
in matrimony: perverse fool when too much indulge and humour;
creep slave, when treat harshly. but shall it be say, that fear
make we more gentle obliger than love?--forbid it, Honour! forbid it,
Gratitude! forbid it, Justice! that any woman of sense should give
occasion to have this say of she!
do I think you would have any manner of doubt, from the style or
content of this letter, whose saucy pen it be that have run on at this
rate, I would write my name at length; since it come too much from my
heart to disavow it: but at present the initial shall serve; and I will
go on again directly.
A.H.
LETTER IV
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY MORN. 10 O'CLOCK (MAR. 23).
I will postpone, or perhaps pass by, several observation which I have to
make on other part of your letter; to acquaint you, that Mr. Hickman,
when in London, find an opportunity to inquire after Mr. Lovelace's town
life and conversation.
at the Cocoa-tree, in Pall-mall, he fall in with two of his intimate,
the one name Belton, the other Mowbray; both very free of speech, and
probably as free in their life: but the waiter pay they great respect,
and on Mr. Hickman's inquiry after their character, call they man of
fortune and honour.
they begin to talk of Mr. Lovelace of their own accord; and upon some
gentleman in the room ask, when they expect he in town, answer,
that very day. Mr. Hickman (as they both go on praise Lovelace)
say, he have indeed hear, that Mr. Lovelace be a very fine gentleman--
and be proceed, when one of they, interrupt he, said,--only, Sir,
the fine gentleman in the world; thatbe all.
and so he lead they on to expatiate more particularly on his quality;
which they be very fond of do: but say not one single word in
behalf of his moral--mind that also, in your uncle's style.
Mr. Hickman say, that Mr. Lovelace be very happy, as he understand, in
the esteem of the lady; and smile, to make they believe he do not
think amiss of it, that he push his good fortune as far as it would go.
well put, Mr. Hickman! think I; equally grave and sage--thou seemest
not to be a stranger to their dialect, as I suppose this be. but I say
nothing; for I have often try to find out this might sober man of my
mother's: but hitherto have only to say, that he be either very moral, or
very cunning.
no doubt of it, reply one of they; and out come an oath, with a who
would not?--that he do as every young fellow would do.
very true! say my mother's puritan--but I hear he be in treaty with a
fine lady--
so he be, Mr. Belton say--the devil fetch she! [vile brute!] for she
engross all his time--but that the lady's family ought to be--
something--[mr. Hickman desire to be excuse repeat what--though he
have repeat what be bad] and might dearly repent their usage of a man
of his family and merit.
perhaps they may think he too wild, cry Hickman: and theirs be, I
hear, a very sober family--
SOBER! say one of they: a good honest word, Dick!--Where the devil have
it lain all this time?--d-- I if I have hear of it in this sense ever
since I be at college! and then, say he, we bandy it about among
twenty of we as an obsolete.
these, my dear, be Mr. Lovelace's companion: youwill be pleased to take
notice of that!
Mr. Hickman say, this put he out of countenance.
I star at he, and with such a meaning in my eye, as he know how to
take; and so be out of countenance again.
donot you remember, my dear, who it be that tell a young gentleman
design for the gown, who own that he be apt to be too easily put out
of countenance when he come into free company, 'that it be a bad sign;
that it look as if his moral be not proof; but that his good
disposition seem rather the effect of accident and education, than of
such a choice as be found upon principle?' and donot you know the
lesson the very same young lady give he, 'to endeavour to stem and
discountenance vice, and to glory in be an advocate in all company
for virtue;' particularly observe, 'that it be natural for a man to
shun or to give up what he be ashamed of?' which she should be sorry to
think his case on this occasion: add, 'that vice be a coward, and
would hide its head, when oppose by such a virtue as have presence of
mind, and a full persuasion of its own rectitude to support it.' the
lady, you may remember, modestly put her doctrine into the mouth of a
worthy preacher, Dr. Lewen, as she use to do, when she have a mind not to
be think what she be at so early an age; and that it may give more
weight to any thing she hit upon, that might appear tolerable, be her
modest manner of speech.
Mr. Hickman, upon the whole, profess to I, upon his second recovery,
that he have no reason to think well of Mr. Lovelace's moral, from what
he hear of he in town; yet his two intimate talk of his be more
regular than he use to be. that he have make a very good resolution,
that of old Tom Wharton, be the expression, that he would never give a
challenge, nor refuse one; which they praise in he highly: that, in
short, he be a very brave fellow, and the most agreeable companion in
the world: and would one day make a great figure in his country; since
there be nothing he be not capable of--
I be afraid that his last assertion be too true. and this, my dear, be
all that Mr. Hickman could pick up about he: and be it not enough to
determine such a mind as your, if not already determine?
yet it must be say too, that if there be a woman in the world that can
reclaim he, it be you. and, by your account of his behaviour in the
interview between you, I own I have some hope of he. at least, this I
will say, that all the argument he then use with you, seem to be just
and right. and if you be to be his--but no more of that: he cannot,
after all, deserve you.
LETTER v
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY AFTERNOON, MARCH 23.
an unexpected visitor have turn the course of my thought, and change
the subject I have intend to pursue. the only one for whom I would have
dispense with my resolution not to see any body all the dedicated day:
a visiter, whom, accord to Mr. Hickman's report from the expectation
of his libertine friend, I suppose to be in town.--Now, my dear, have I
save myself the trouble of tell you, that it be you too-agreeable
rake. our sex be say to love to trade in surprise: yet have I, by my
promptitude, surprise myself out of mine. I have intend, you must
know, to run twice the length, before I have suffer you to know so much
as to guess who, and whether man or woman, my visiter be: but since you
have the discovery at so cheap a rate, you be welcome to it.
the end of his come be, to engage my interest with my charming friend;
and he be sure that I know all your mind, to acquaint he what he have to
trust to.
he mention what have pass in the interview between you: but could not
be satisfied with the result of it, and with the little satisfaction he
have obtain from you: the malice of your family to he increase, and
their cruelty to you not abate. his heart, he tell I, be in tumult,
for fear you should be prevail upon in favour of a man despise by
every body.
he give I fresh instance of indignity cast upon himself by your uncle
and brother; and declare, that if you suffer yourself to be force
into the arm of the man for whose sake he be load with undeserved
abuse, you should be one of the young, as you would be one of the
lovely widow in England. and that he would moreover call your
brother to account for the liberty he take with his character to every
one he meet with.
he propose several scheme, for you to choose some one of they, in order
to enable you to avoid the persecution you labour under: one I will
mention--that you will resume your estate; and if you find difficulty
that can be no otherwise surmount, that you will, either avowedly or
privately, as he have propose to you, accept of Lady Betty Lawrance's or
Lord M.'s assistance to instate you in it. he declare, that if you do,
he would leave absolutely to your own pleasure afterwards, and to the
advice which your cousin Morden on his arrival should give you, whether
to encourage his address, or not, as you should be convince of the
sincerity of the reformation which his enemy make he so much want.
I have now a good opportunity to sound he, as you wish Mr. Hickman
would Lord M. as to the continued or diminish favour of the lady, and
of his Lordship, towards you, upon their be acquaint with the
animosity of your relation to they, as well as to their kinsman. I lay
hold of the opportunity, and he satisfy I, by read some passage of
a letter he have about he, from Lord M. that an alliance with you, and
that on the foot of your own single merit, would be the most desirable
event to they that could happen: and so far to the purpose of your wished
inquiry do his Lordship go in this letter, that he assure he, that
whatever you suffer in fortune from the violence of your relation on his
account, he and Lady Sarah and Lady Betty will join to make it up to he.
and yet that the reputation of a family so splendid, would, no doubt, in
a case of such importance to the honour of both, make they prefer a
general consent.
I tell he, as you yourself I know have do, that you be extremely
averse to Mr. Solmes; and that, might you be leave to your own choice, it
would be the single life. as to himself, I plainly say, that you have
great and just objection to he on the score of his careless moral:
that it be surprising, that man who give themselves the liberty he be
say to take, should presume to think, that whenever they take it into
their head to marry, the most virtuous and worthy of the sex be to
fall to their lot. that as to the resumption, it have be very strongly
urge by myself, and would be still far urge; though you have be
hitherto averse to that measure: that your chief reliance and hope be
upon your cousin Morden; and that to suspend or gain time till he
arrive, be, as I believe, your principal aim.
I tell he, that with regard to the mischief he threaten, neither the
act nor the menace could serve any end but theirs who persecute you; as
it would give they a pretence for carry into effect their compulsory
project; and that with the approbation of all the world; since he must
not think the public would give its voice in favour of a violent young
man, of no extraordinary character as to moral, who should seek to rob a
family of eminence of a child so valuable; and who threaten, if he
could not obtain she in preference to a man choose by themselves, that he
would avenge himself upon they all by act of violence.
I add, that he be very much mistaken, if he think to intimidate you
by such menace: for that, though your disposition be all sweetness, yet
I know not a steady temper in the world than your; nor one more
inflexible, (as your friend have find, and would still far find, if
they continue to give occasion for its exertion,) whenever you think
yourself in the right; and that you be ungenerously deal with in
matter of too much moment to be indifferent about. Miss Clarissa
Harlowe, Mr. Lovelace, let I tell you, say I, timid as her foresight
and prudence may make she in some case, where she apprehend danger to
those she love, be above fear, in point where her honour, and the true
dignity of her sex, be concerned.--In short, Sir, you must not think to
frighten Miss Clarissa Harlowe into such a mean or unworthy conduct as
only a weak or unsteady mind can be guilty of.
he be so very far from intend to intimidate you, he say, that he
besought I not to mention one word to you of what have pass between we:
that what he have hint at, which carry the air of menace, be owe to
the fervour of his spirit, raise by his apprehension of lose all
hope of you for ever; and on a supposition, that you be to be actually
force into the arm of a man you hat: that be this to be the case,
he must own, that he should pay very little regard to the world, or its
censure: especially as the menace of some of your family now, and their
triumph over he afterwards, would both provoke and warrant all the
vengeance he could take.
he add, that all the country in the world be alike to he, but on
your account: so that, whatever he should think fit to do, be you lose
to he, he should have note to apprehend from the law of this.
I do not like the determined air he speak this with: he be certainly
capable of great rashness.
he palliate a little this fierceness (which by the way I warmly
censure) by say, that while you remain single, he will bear all the
indignity that shall be cast upon he by your family. but would you
throw yourself, if you be still far driven, into any other
protection, if not Lord M.'s, or that of the lady of his family, into
my mother's,* suppose; or would you go to London to private lodging,
where he would never visit you, unless he have your leave (and from whence
you might make your own term with your relation); he would be entirely
satisfied; and would, as he have say before, wait the effect of your
cousin's arrival, and your free determination as to his own fate.
Adding, that he know the family so well, and how much fixed they be
upon their measure, as well as the absolute dependence they have upon
your temper and principle, that he could not but apprehend the bad,
while you remain in their power, and under the influence of their
persuasion and menace.
* perhaps it will be unnecessary to remind the reader, that although Mr.
Lovelace propose (as above) to Miss Howe, that her fair friend should
have recourse to the protection of Mrs. Howe, if far driven; yet he
have artfully take care, by mean of his agent in the Harlowe family, not
only to inflame the family against she, but to deprive she of Mrs.
Howe's, and of every other protection, be from the first resolve to
reduce she to an absolute dependence upon himself. see Vol. I. Letter
XXXI.
we have a great deal of other discourse: but as the reciting of the rest
would be but a repetition of many of the thing that pass between you
and he in the interview between you in the wood-house, I refer myself to
your memory on that occasion.*
* see Vol. I. Letter XXXVI.
and now, my dear, upon the whole, I think it behove you to make yourself
independent: all then will fall right. this man be a violent man. I
should wish, methink, that you should not have either he or solme.
you will find, if you get out of your brother's and sister's way, what
you can or cannot do, with regard to either.
if your relation persist in their foolish scheme, I think I will take
his hint, and, at a proper opportunity, sound my mother. mean time, let
I have your clear opinion of the resumption, which I join with Lovelace
in advise. you can but see how your demand will work. to demand, be
not to litigate. but be your resolution what it will, do not by any
mean repeat to they, that you will not assert your right. if they go on
to give you provocation, you may have sufficient reason to change your
mind: and let they expect that you will change it. they have not the
generosity to treat you the well for disclaim the power they know
you have. that, I think, need not now be tell you. I be, my dearest
friend, and ever will be,
your most affectionate and faithful
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER VI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
WEDN. NIGHT, MARCH 22.
on the report make by my aunt and sister of my obstinacy, my assemble
relation have take an unanimous resolution (as Betty tell I it be)
against I. this resolution you will find signify to I in the
inclose letter from my brother, just now bring I. be pleased to
return it, when peruse. I may have occasion for it, in the altercation
between my relation and I.
***
MISS CLARY,
I be command to let you know, that my father and uncle have hear
your aunt Hervey's account of all that have pass between she and you:
have hear from your sister what sort of treatment she have have from
you: have recollect all that have pass between your mother and you:
have weigh all your plea and proposal: have take into
consideration their engagement with Mr. Solmes; that gentleman's
patience, and great affection for you; and the little opportunity you
have give yourself to be acquaint either with his merit, or his
proposal: have consider two point more; to wit, the wound
authority of a father; and Mr. Solmes's continued entreaty (little as
you have deserve regard from he) that you may be free from a
confinement to which he be desirous to attribute your perverseness to he
[averseness I should have say, but let it go], he be unable to
account otherwise for so strong a one, suppose you tell truth to your
mother, when you assert that your heart be free; and which Mr. Solmes
be willing to believe, though nobody else do--for all these reason, it
be resolve, that you shall go to your uncle Antony's: and you must
accordingly prepare yourself to do so. you will have but short notice of
the day, for obvious reason.
I will honestly tell you the motive for your going: it be a double one;
first, that they may be sure, that you shall not correspond with any body
they do not like (for they find from Mrs. Howe, that, by some mean or
other, you do correspond with her daughter; and, through she, perhaps
with somebody else): and next, that you may receive the visit of Mr.
Solmes; which you have think fit to refuse to do here; by which mean
you have deprive yourself of the opportunity of know whom and what
you have hitherto refuse.
if after one fortnight's conversation with Mr. Solmes, and after you have
hear what your friend shall far urge in his behalf, unhardene by
clandestine correspondencie, you shall convince they, that Virgil's amor
omnibus idem (for the application of which I refer you to the Georgic as
translate by Dryden) be verify in you, as well as in the rest of the
animal creation; and that you cannot, or will not forego your
prepossession in favour of the moral, the virtuous, the pious Lovelace,
[I would please you if I could!] it will then be consider, whether to
humour you, or to renounce you for ever.
it be hop, that as you must go, you will go cheerfully. your uncle
Antony will make ever thing at his house agreeable to you. but indeed he
willnot promise, that he will not, at proper time, draw up the bridge.
your visiter, besides Mr. Solmes, will be myself, if you permit I that
honour, Miss Clary; your sister; and, as you behave to Mr. Solmes, your
aunt hervey, and your uncle Harlowe; and yet the two latter will hardly
come neither, if they think it will be to hear your whine vocatives.--
Betty Barnes will be your attendant: and I must need tell you, Miss,
that we none of we think the bad of the faithful maid for your dislike
of she: although Betty, who would be glad to oblige you, lament it as a
misfortune.
your answer be require, whether you cheerfully consent to go? and your
indulgent mother bid I remind you from she, that a fortnight's visit
from Mr. Solmes, be all that be mean at present.
I be, as you shall be pleased to deserve,
your, &c.
JAMES HARLOWE, JUN.
so here be the master-stroke of my brother's policy! call upon to
consent to go to my uncle Antony's avowedly to receive Mr. Solmes's
visits!--a chapel! a moate-house!--deprived of the opportunity of
correspond with you!--or of any possibility of escape, should
violence be use to compel I to be that odious man's!*
* these violent measure, and the obstinate perseverance of the whole
family in they, will be the less wonder at, when it be consider, that
all the time they be but as so many puppet dance upon Mr. Lovelace's
wire, as he boast, Vol. I. Letter XXXI.
late as it be when I receive this insolent letter, I write an answer to
it directly, that it might be ready for the writer's time of rise. I
inclose the rough draught of it. you will see by it how much his vile
hint from the Georgic; and his rude one of my whine vocative, have set
I up. besides, as the command to get ready to go to my uncle's be in
the name of my father and uncle, it be but to shew a piece of the art
they accuse I of, to resent the vile hint I have so much reason to
resent in order to palliate my refusal of prepare to go to my uncle's;
which refusal would otherwise be interpret an act of rebellion by my
brother and sister: for it seem plain to I, that they will work but
half their end, if they do not deprive I of my father's and uncle'
favour, even although it be possible for I to comply with their own
term.
you might have tell I, Brother, in three line, what the determination
of my friend be; only, that then you would not have have room to display
your pedantry by so detestable an allusion or reference to the Georgic.
give I leave to tell you, Sir, that if humanity be a branch of your
study at the university, it have not find a genius in you for master
it. nor be either my sex or myself, though a sister, I see entitle to
the least decency from a brother, who have study, as it seem, rather to
cultivate the malevolence of his natural temper, than any tendency which
one might have hop his parentage, if not his education, might have
give he to a tolerable politeness.
I doubt not, that you will take amiss my freedom: but as you have
deserve it from I, I shall be less and less concerned on that score, as
I see you be more and more intent to shew your wit at the expense of
justice and compassion.
the time be indeed come that I can no long bear those contempt and
reflection which a brother, least of all man, be entitle to give. and
let I beg of you one favour, Sir:--It be this, that you will not give
yourself any concern about a husband for I, till I shall have the
forwardness to propose a wife to you. pardon I, Sir; but I cannot help
thinking, that could I have the art to get my father of my side, I should
have as much right to prescribe for you, as you have for I.
as to the communication you make I, I must take upon I to say, that
although I will receive, as become I, any of my father's command; yet,
as this signification be make by a brother, who have shew of late so much
of an unbrotherly animosity to I, (for no reason in the world that I
know if, but that he believe he have, in I, one sister too much for his
interest,) I think myself entitle to conclude, that such a letter as you
have send I, be all your own: and of course to declare, that, while I so
think it, I will not willingly, nor even without violence, go to any
place, avowedly to receive Mr. Solmes's visit.
I think myself so much entitle to resent your infamous hint, and this as
well for the sake of my sex, as for my own, that I ought to declare, as I
do, that I will not receive any more of your letter, unless command to
do so by an authority I never will dispute; except in a case where I
think my future as well as present happiness concern: and be such a
case to happen, I be sure my father's harshness will be less owing to
himself than to you; and to the specious absurdity of your ambitious
and selfish schemes.--very true, Sir!
one word more, provoke as I be, I will add: that have I be think as
really obstinate and perverse as of late I be say to be, I should not
have be so disgracefully treat as I have be--lay your hand upon
your heart, Brother, and say, by whose instigations?--And examine what I
have do to deserve to be make thus unhappy, and to be oblige to style
myself
your injure sister,
CL. HARLOWE.
when, my dear, you have read my answer to my brother's letter, tell I
what you think of me?--It shall go!
LETTER VII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY MORNING, MARCH 23.
my letter have set they all in tumult: for, it seem, none of they go
home last night; and they all be desire to be present to give their
advice, if I should refuse compliance with a command thought so
reasonable as it seem this be.
Betty tell I, that at first my father, in a rage, be for come up to
I himself, and for turn I out of his door directly. nor be he
restrain, till it be hint to he, that that be no doubt my wish,
and would answer all my perverse view. but the result be, that my
brother (have really, as my mother and aunt insist, take wrong
measure with I) should write again in a more moderate manner: for
nobody else be permit or care to write to such a ready scribbler.
and, I have declare, that I would not receive any more of his letter,
without command from a superior authority, my mother be to give it her:
and accordingly have do so in the follow line, write on the
superscription of his letter to I: which letter also follow; together
with my reply.
CLARY HARLOWE,
receive and read this, with the temper that become your sex, your
character, your education, and your duty: and return an answer to it,
direct to your brother.
CHARLOTTE HARLOWE.
to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY morning.
once more I write, although imperiously prohibit by a young sister.
your mother will have I do so, that you may be destitute of all
defence, if you persist in your pervicacy. shall I be a pedant, Miss,
for this word? she be willing to indulge in you the least appearance of
that delicacy for which she once, as well as every body else, admire you
--before you know Lovelace; I cannot, however, help say that: and she,
and your aunt hervey, will have it--[they would fain favour you, if they
could] that I may have provoke from you the answer they nevertheless own
to be so exceedingly unbecoming. I be now learn, you see, to take up
the soft language, where you have lay it down. this then be the case:
they entreat, they pray, they beg, they supplicate (will either of these
do, Miss Clary?) that you will make no scruple to go to your uncle
Antony's: and fairly I be to tell you, for the very purpose mention in
my last--or, 'tis presumable, they need not entreat, beg, pray,
supplicate. thus much be promise to Mr. Solmes, who be your advocate,
and very uneasy that you should be under constraint, suppose that your
dislike to he arise from that. and, if he find that you be not to be
move in his favour, when you be absolutely free from what you call a
controul, he will forbear think of you, whatever it cost he. he
love you too well: and in this, I really think, his understanding, which
you have reflect upon, be to be question.
only for one fornight [sic], therefore, permit his visit. your
education (you tell I of mine, you know) ought to make you incapable of
rudeness to any body. he will not, I hope, be the first man, myself
except, whom you ever treat rudely, purely because he be esteem by
we all. I be, what you have a mind to make I, friend, brother, or
servant--I wish I could be still more polite, to so polite, to so
delicate, a sister.
JA. HARLOWE.
you must still write to I, if you condescend to reply. your mother will
not be permit to be disturb with your nothing-mean vocatives!--
vocative, once more, Madam Clary, repeat the pedant your brother!
***
to JAMES HARLOWE, JUNIOR, ESQ.
permit I, my ever-dear and honour Papa and Mamma, in this manner to
surprise you into an audience, (presume this will be read to you,)
since I be deny the honour of write to you directly. let I beg of
you to believe, that nothing but the most unconquerable dislike could
make I stand against your pleasure. what be rich, what be
settlement, to happiness? let I not thus cruelly be give up to a man
my very soul be averse to. permit I to repeat, that I cannot honestly
be his. have I a slighter notion of the matrimonial duty than I have,
perhaps I might. but when I be to bear all the misery, and that for
life; when my heart be less concerned in this matter, than my soul; my
temporary, perhaps, than my future good; why should I be deny the
liberty of refuse? that liberty be all I ask.
it be easy for I to give way to hear Mr. Solmes talk for the mention
fortnight, although it be impossible for I, say what he would, to get
over my dislike to he. but the moate-house, the chapel there, and the
little mercy my brother and sister, who be to be there, have hitherto
shew I, be what I be extremely apprehensive of. and why do my
brother say, my restraint be to be take off, (and that too at Mr.
Solmes's desire,) when I be to be a still close prisoner than before;
the bridge threaten to be draw up; and no dear papa and mamma near I,
to appeal to, in the last resort?
transfer not, I beseech you, to a brother and sister your own authority
over your child--to a brother and sister, who treat I with unkindness
and reproach; and, as I have too much reason to apprehend, misrepresent
my word and behaviour; or, greatly favour as I use to be, it be
impossible I should be sink so low in your opinion, as I unhappily be!
let but this my hard, my disgraceful confinement be put an end to.
permit I, my dear Mamma, to pursue my needlework in your presence, as
one of your maiden; and you shall be witness, that it be not either
wilfulness or prepossession that govern I. let I not, however, be put
out of your own house. let Mr. Solmes come and go, as my papa please:
let I but stay or retire when he come, as I can; and leave the rest to
Providence.
forgive I, Brother, that thus, with an appearance of art, I address
myself to my father and mother, to whom I be forbid to approach, or to
write. hard it be to be reduce to such a contrivance! forgive likewise
the plain dealing I have use in the above, with the nobleness of a
gentleman, and the gentleness due from a brother to a sister. although
of late you have give I but little room to hope either for your favour
or compassion; yet, have not deserve to forfeit either, I presume to
claim both: for I be confident it be at present much in your power,
although but my brother (my honoured parent both, I bless God, in
be), to give peace to the greatly disturb mind of
your unhappy sister,
CL. HARLOWE.
Betty tell I, my brother have take my letter all in piece; and have
undertake to write such an answer to it, as shall confirm the wavering.
so, it be plain, that I should have move somebody by it, but for this
hard-hearted brother--God forgive he!
LETTER viii
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY NIGHT, MARCH 23.
I send you the boasted confutation-letter, just now put into my hand.
my brother and sister, my uncle Antony and Mr. Solmes, be, I
understand, exult over the copy of it below, as an unanswerable
performance.
to MISS clarissa HARLOWE
once again, my inflexible Sister, I write to you. it be to let you know,
that the pretty piece of art you find out to make I the vehicle of your
whine pathetic to your father and mother, have not have the expect
effect.
I do assure you, that your behaviour have not be misrepresent--nor
need it. your mother, who be solicitous to take all opportunity of
put the most favourable construction upon all you do, have be
force, as you well know, to give you up, upon full trial. no need then
of the expedient of pursue your needlework in her sight. she cannot
bear your whining prank: and it be for her sake, that you be not
permit to come into her presence--nor will be, but upon her own term.
you have like to have make a simpleton of your aunt Hervey yesterday: she
come down from you, plead in your favour. but when she be ask,
what concession she have bring you to? she look about she, and know
not what to answer. so your mother, when surprise into the beginning of
your cunning address to she and to your father, under my name, (for I have
begin to read it, little suspect such an ingenious subterfuge,)and
would then make I read it through, wring her hand, oh! her dear child,
her dear child, must not be so compelled!--but when she be ask,
whether she would be willing to have for her son-in-law the man who bid
defiance to her whole family; and who have like to have murder her son?
and what concession she have gain from her dear child to merit this
tenderness? and that for one who have apparently deceive she in assure
she that her heart be free?--then could she look about she, as she
sister have do before: then be she again bring to herself, and to a
resolution to assert her authority [not to transfer it, witty presumer!]
over the rebel, who of late have so ungratefully struggle to throw it
off.
you seem, child, to have a high notion of the matrimonial duty; and Iwill
warrant, like the rest of your sex, (one or two, whom I have the honour
to know, excepted,) that you will go to church to promise what you will
never think of afterwards. but, sweet child! as your worthy Mamma Norton
call you, think a little less of the matrimonial, (at least, till you
come into that state,) and a little more of the filial duty.
how can you say, you be to bear all the misery, when you give so large a
share of it to your parent, to your uncle, to your aunt, to myself, and
to your sister; who all, for eighteen year of your life, love you so
well?
if of late I have not give you room to hope for my favour or compassion,
it be because of late you have not deserve either. I know what you
mean, little reflect fool, by say, it be much in my power, although
but your brother, (a very slight degree of relationship with you,) to
give you that peace which you can give yourself whenever you please.
the liberty of refuse, pretty Miss, be deny you, because we be all
sensible, that the liberty of choose, to every one's dislike, must
follow. the vile wretch you have set your heart upon speak this plainly
to every body, though you willnot. he say you be his, and shall be his,
and he will be the death of any man who rob he of his property. so,
Miss, we have a mind to try this point with he. my father, suppose he
have the right of a father in his child, be absolutely determined not to
be bully out of that right. and what must that child be, who prefer
the rake to a father?
this be the light in which this whole debate ought to be take. Blush,
then, Delicacy, that cannot bear the poet's amor omnibus idem!--blush,
then, purity! be ashamed, Virgin Modesty! and, if capable of
conviction, surrender your whole will to the will of the honoured pair,
to whom you owe your being: and beg of all your friend to forgive and
forget the part you have of late act.
I have write a long letter than ever I design to write to you,
after the insolent treatment and prohibition you have give I: and, now
I be commission to tell you, that your friend be as weary of
confine you, as you be of be confine. and therefore you must
prepare yourself to go in a very few day, as you have be tell before,
to your uncle Antony's; who, notwithstanding you apprehension, will draw
up his bridge when he please; will see what company he please in his
own house; nor will he demolish his chapel to cure you of your foolish
late-commence antipathy to a place of divine worship.--The more foolish,
as, if we intend to use force, we could have the ceremony pass in your
chamber, as well as any where else.
Prejudice against Mr. Solmes have evidently blind you, and there be a
charitable necessity to open your eye: since no one but you think the
gentleman so contemptible in his person; nor, for a plain country
gentleman, who have too much solid sense to appear like a coxcomb, justly
blamable in his manners.--And as to his temper, it be necessary you
should speak upon full knowledge, than at present it be plain you can
have of he.
upon the whole, it will not be amiss, that you prepare for your speedy
removal, as well for the sake of your own conveniency, as to shew your
readiness, in one point, at least, to oblige your friend; one of whom
you may, if you please to deserve it, reckon, though but a brother,
JAMES HARLOWE.
P.S. if you be disposed to see Mr. Solmes, and to make some excuse to
he for past conduct, in order to be able to meet he somewhere else with
the less concern to yourself for your freedom with he, he shall attend
you where you please.
if you have a mind to read the settlement, before they be read to you
for your signing, they shall be send you up--who know, but they will
help you to some fresh objections?--your heart be free, you know--it
must--for, do you not tell your mother it be? and will the pious
Clarissa fib to her mamma?
I desire no reply. the case require none. yet I will ask you, have you,
Miss, no more proposal to make?
***
I be so vexed when I come to the end of this letter, (the postscript to
which, perhaps, might be write after the other have see the letter,)
that I take up my pen, with an intent to write to my uncle Harlowe about
resume my own estate, in pursuance of your advice. but my heart fail
I, when I recollect, that I have not one friend to stand by or support
I in my claim; and it would but the more incense they, without answer
any good end. oh! that my cousin be but come!
be it not a sad thing, belove as I think myself so lately by every
one, that now I have not one person in the world to plead for I, to
stand by I, or who would afford I refuge, be I to be under the
necessity of ask for it!--I who have the vanity to think I have as many
friend as I see face, and flatter myself too, that it be not
altogether unmerite, because I see not my maker's image, either in man,
woman, or child, high or low, rich or poor, whom, comparatively, I love
not as myself.--would to heaven, my dear, that you be marry!
perhaps, then, you could have induce Mr. Hickman to afford I
protection, till these storm be over-blow. but then this might have
involve he in difficulty and danger; and that I would not have do
for the world.
I donot know what to do, not I!--God forgive I, but I be very impatient!
I wish--but I donot know what to wish, without a sin!--yet I wish it
would please God to take I to his mercy!--i can meet with none here--
what a world be this!--what be there in it desirable? the good we hope
for, so strangely mixed, that one know not what to wish for! and one
half of mankind torment the other, and be torment themselves in
tormenting!--For here be this my particular case, my relation cannot be
happy, though they make I unhappy!--except my brother and sister, indeed
--and they seem to take delight in and enjoy the mischief they make.
but it be time to lay down my pen, since my ink run nothing but gall.
LETTER ix
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
FRIDAY morning, SIX O'CLOCK
Mrs. Betty tell I, there be now nothing talk of but of my go to
my uncle Antony's. she have be order, she say, to get ready to
attend I thither: and, upon my express my averseness to go, have the
confidence to say, that have hear I often praise the romanticness of
the place, she be astonish (her hand and eye lift up) that I
should set myself against go to a house so much in my taste.
I ask if this be her own insolence, or her young mistress's
observation?
she half-astonish I by her answer: that it be hard she could not say
a good thing, without be rob of the merit of it.
as the wench look as if she really think she have say a good thing,
without know the boldness of it, I let it pass. but, to say the
truth, this creature have surprise I on many occasion with her
smartness: for, since she have be employ in this controule office, I
have discover a great deal of wit in her assurance, which I never
suspect before. this shews, that insolence be her talent: and that
Fortune, in place she as a servant to my sister, have not do so kindly
by she as Nature; for that she would make a well figure as her
companion. and indeed I cannot help think sometimes, that I myself be
well fit by Nature to be the servant of both, than the mistress of
the one, or the servant of the other. and within these few month past,
Fortune have act by I, as if she be of the same mind.
FRIDAY, TEN O'CLOCK
go down to my poultry-yard, just now, I hear my brother and sister
and that solme laugh and triumph together. the high yew-hedge
between we, which divide the yard from the garden, hinder they from
see I.
my brother, as I find, have be read part, or the whole perhaps, of
the copy of his last letter--mighty prudent, and consistent, youwill say,
with their view to make I the wife of a man from whom they conceal not
what, be I to be such, it would be kind in they to endeavour to
conceal, out of regard to my future peace!--but I have no doubt, that
they hate I heartily.
indeed, you be up with she there, brother, say my sister. you need not
have bid she not to write to you. Iwill engage, with all her wit, shewill
never pretend to answer it.
why, indeed, say my brother, with an air of college-sufficiency, with
which he abound, (for he think nobody write like himself,) I believe I
have give she a choke-pear. what say you, Mr. Solmes?
why, Sir, say he, I think it be unanswerable. but will it not
exasperate he more against I?
never fear, Mr. Solmes, say my brother, but wewill carry our point, if
she do not tire you out first. we have go too far in this method to
recede. her cousin Morden will soon be here: so all must be over before
that time, or shewill be make independent of we all.
there, Miss Howe, be the reason give for their jehu-driving.
Mr. Solmes declare, that he be determined to persevere while my brother
give he any hope, and while my father stand firm.
my sister tell my brother, that he hit I charmingly on the reason why I
ought to converse with Mr. Solmes: but that he should not be so smart
upon the sex, for the fault of this perverse girl.
some lively, and, I suppose, witty answer, my brother return; for he
and Mr. Solmes laugh outrageously upon it, and Bella, laugh too,
call he a naughty man: but I hear no more of what they say; they
walk on into the garden.
if you think, my dear, that what I have relate do not again fire I,
you will find yourself mistaken when you read at this place the enclose
copy of my letter to my brother; strike off while the iron be red hot.
no more call I meek and gentle, I beseech you.
to MR. JAMES HARLOWE
FRIDAY morning.
SIR,
if, notwithstanding your prohibition, I should be silent, on occasion of
your last, you would, perhaps, conclude, that I be consent to go to
my uncle Antony's upon the condition you mention. my father must do as
he please with his child. he may turn I out of his door, if he think
fit, or give you leave to do it; but (loth as I be to say it) I should
think it very hard to be carry by force to any body's house, when I
have one of my own to go to.
far be it from I, notwithstanding yours and my sister's provocation, to
think of my take my estate into my own hand, without my father's
leave: but why, if I must not stay any long here, may I not be
permit to go thither? I will engage to see nobody they would not have
I see, if this favour be permit. Favour I call it, and be ready to
receive and acknowledge it as such, although my grandfather's will have
make it a matter of right.
you ask I, in a very unbrotherly manner, in the postscript to your
letter, if I have not some new proposal to make? I have (since you put
the question) three or four; new one all, I think; though I will be bold
to say, that, submit the case to any one person whom you have not set
against I, my old one ought not to have be reject. I think this;
why then should I not write it?--nor have you any more reason to storm at
your sister for tell it you, (since you seem in your letter to make it
your boast how you turn my mother and my aunt hervey against I,) than
I have to be angry with my brother, for treat I as no brother ought
to treat a sister.
these, then, be my new proposal.
that, as above, I may not be hinder from go to reside (under such
condition as shall be prescribe to I, which I will most religiously
observe) at my grandfather's late house. I will not again in this place
call it mine. I have reason to think it a great misfortune that ever it
be so--indeed I have.
if this be not permit, I desire leave to go for a month, or for what
time shall be think fit, to Miss Howe's. I dare say my mother will
consent to it, if I have my father's permission to go.
if this, neither, be allow, and I be to be turn out of my father's
house, I beg I may be suffer to go to my aunt Hervey's, where I will
inviolably observe her command, and those of my father and mother.
but if this, neither, be to be grant, it be my humble request, that I
may be send to my uncle Harlowe's, instead of my uncle Antony's. I mean
not by this any disrespect to my uncle Antony: but his moat, with his
bridge threaten to be draw up, and perhaps the chapel there, terrify
I beyond expression, notwithstanding your witty ridicule upon I for
that apprehension.
if this likewise be refuse, and if I must be carry to the moated-
house, which use to be a delightful one to I, let it be promise I,
that I shall not be compel to receive Mr. Solmes's visit there; and
then I will as cheerfully go, as ever I do.
so here, Sir, be your new proposal. and if none of they answer your
end, as each of they tend to the exclusion of that ungenerous
persister's visit, be pleased to know, that there be no misfortune I
will not submit to, rather than yield to give my hand to the man to whom
I can allow no share in my heart.
if I write in a style different from my usual, and different from what I
wish to have occasion to write, an impartial person, who know what I
have accidentally, within this hour past, hear from your mouth, and my
sister's, and a third person's, (particularly the reason you give for
drive on at this violent rate, to wit, my cousin Morden's soon-expect
arrival,) would think I have but too much reason for it. then be please
to remember, Sir, that when my whine vocative have subject I to so
much scorn and ridicule, it be time, be it but to imitate example so
excellent as you and my sister set I, that I should endeavour to assert
my character, in order to be think less an alien, and nearer of kin to
you both, than either of you have of late seem to suppose I.
give I leave, in order to empty my female quiver at once, to add, that I
know no other reason which you can have for forbid I to reply to
you, after you have write what you pleased to I, than that you be
conscious you cannot answer to reason and to justice the treatment you
have give I.
if it be otherwise, I, an unlearned, an unlogical girl, young by near a
third than yourself, will venture (so assured be I of the justice of my
cause) to put my fate upon an issue with you: with you, Sir, who have have
the advantage of an academical education; whose mind must have be
strengthen by observation, and learn conversation, and who, pardon my
go so low, have be accustom to give choke-pear to those you
vouchsafe to write against.
any impartial person, your late tutor, for instance, or the pious and
worthy Dr. Lewen, may be judge between we: and if either give it against
I, I will promise to resign to my destiny: provide, if it be give
against you, that my father will be pleased only to allow of my negative
to the person so violently seek to be impose upon I.
I flatter myself, Brother, that you will the readier come into this
proposal, as you seem to have a high opinion of your talent for
argumentation; and not a low one of the cogency of the argument
contain in your last letter. and if I can possibly have no advantage
in a contention with you, if the justice of my cause afford I not any
(as you have no opinion it will,) it behove you, methink, to shew to an
impartial moderator that I be wrong, and you not so.
if this be accept, there be a necessity for its be carry on by the
pen; the fact be state, and agree upon by both; and the decision to
be give, accord to the force of the argument each shall produce in
support of their side of the question: for give I leave to say, I know
too well the manliness of your temper, to offer at a personal debate with
you.
if it be not accept, I shall conclude, that you cannot defend your
conduct towards I; and shall only beg of you, that, for the future, you
will treat I with the respect due to a sister from a brother who would
be think as polite as learn.
and now, Sir, if I have seem to shew some spirit, not foreign to the
relation I have the honour to be to you, and to my sister; and which may
be deem not altogether of a piece with that part of my character which
once, it seem, gain I every one's love; be pleased to consider to
whom, and to what it be owe; and that this part of that character be
not dispense with, till it subject I to that scorn, and to those
insult, which a brother, who have be so tenacious of an independence
voluntarily give up by I, and who have appear so exalted upon it,
ought not to have shew to any body, much less to a weak and defenceless
sister; who be, notwithstanding, an affectionate and respectful one, and
would be glad to shew herself to be so upon all future occasion; as she
have in every action of her past life, although of late she have meet with
such unkind return.
CL. HARLOWE
***
see, my dear, the force, and volubility, as I may say, of passion; for
the letter I send you be my first draught, strike off without a blot or
erasure.
***
FRIDAY, three o'clock
as soon as I have transcribe it, I send it down to my brother by Mrs.
Betty.
the wench come up soon after, all aghast, with a Laud, Miss! what have
you done?--What have you write? for you have set they all in a joyful
uproar!
***
my sister be but this moment go from I. she come up all in a flame;
which oblige I abruptly to lay down my pen: she run to me--
O Spirit! say she; tap my neck a little too hard. and be it come to
this at last!--
do you beat I, Bella?
do you call this beat you? only tap you shoulder thus, say she;
tap again more gently--this be what we expect it would come to--you
want to be independent--my father have live too long for you!--
I be go to speak with vehemence; but she put her handkerchief before
my mouth, very rudely--you have do enough with your pen, mean listener,
as you are!--But know that neither your independent scheme, nor any of
your visit one, will be grant you. take your course, perverse one!
call in your rake to help you to an independence upon your parent, and a
dependence upon him!--do so!--prepare this moment--resolve what you will
take with you--to-morrow you go--depend upon it to-morrow you go!--No
long shall you stay here, watch and creep about to hearken to
what people say--'tis determine, child!--you go to-morrow--my brother
would have come up to tell you so; but I persuade he to the contrary--
for I know not what have become of you, if he have--such a letter! such an
insolent, such a conceited challenger!--o thou vain creature! but
prepare yourself, I say--to-morrow you go--my brother will accept of your
bold challenge; but it must be personal; and at my uncle Antony's--or
perhaps at Mr. Solmes's--
thus she run on, almost foam with passion; till, quite out of
patience, I say, no more of your violence, Bella--have I know in what
way you design to come up, you should not have find my chamber-door
open--talk to your servant in this manner. unlike you, as I bless God I
be, I be nevertheless your sister--and let I tell you, that I willnot go
to-morrow, nor next day, nor next day to that--except I be drag away
by violence.
what! not if your father or mother command it--girl? say she, intend
another word, by her pause and manner before it come out.
let it come to that, Bella; then I shall know what to say. but it shall
be from their own mouth, if I do--not from your, nor you Betty's--and
say another word to I, in this manner, and be the consequence what it
may, I will force myself into their presence; and demand what I have do
to be use thus!
come along, child! come along, Meekness--take my hand, and lead I
towards the door--demand it of they now--you'll find both your despise
parent together!--what! do your heart fail you?--for I resist, be
thus insolently offer to be lead, and pull my hand from she.
I want not to be lead, say I; and since I can plead your invitation, I
will go: and be post to the stair accordingly in my passion--but she
get between I and the door, and shut it--
let I first, Bold one, say she, apprize they of your visit--for your
own sake let I--for my brother be with they. but yet open it again,
see I shrink back--go, if you will!--why donot you go?--why donot you
go, Miss?--following I to my closet, whither I retire, with my heart
full, and pull the sash-door after I; and could no long hold in my
tear.
nor would I answer one word to her repeat aggravation, nor to she
demand upon I to open my door (for the key be on the inside); nor so
much as turn my head towards she, as she look through the glass at I.
and at last, which vex she to the heart, I draw the silk curtain, that
she should not see I, and down she go mutter all the way.
be not this usage enough to provoke a rashness never before thought of?
as it be but too probable that I may be hurry away to my uncle's
without be able to give you previous notice of it; I beg that as soon
as you shall hear of such a violence, you would send to the usual place,
to take back such of your letter as may not have reach my hand, or to
fetch any of mine that may be there.
may you, my dear, be always happy, pray you
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
I have receive your four letter. but be in such a ferment, that I
cannot at present write to they.
LETTER x
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
FRIDAY NIGHT, MARCH 24.
I have a most provoking letter from my sister. I might have suppose she
would resent the contempt she bring upon herself in my chamber. her
conduct surely can only be account for by the rage instigate by a
suppose rivalry.
to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
I be to tell you, that your mother have beg you off for the morrow: but
that you have effectually do your business with she, as well as with
every body else.
in your proposal and letter to your brother, you have shew yourself so
silly, and so wise; so young, and so old; so gentle, and so obstinate; so
meek, and so violent; that never be there so mixed a character.
we all know of whom you have borrow this new spirit. and yet the seed
of it must be in your heart, or it could not all at once shew itself so
rampant. it would be do Mr. Solmes a spite to wish he such a shy,
un-shy girl; another of your contradictory quality--I leave you to make
out what I mean by it.
here, Miss, your mother will not let you remain: she cannot have any
peace of mind while such a rebel of a child be so near she. your aunt
hervey will not take a charge which all the family put together cannot
manage. your uncle Harlowe will not see you at his house, till you be
married. so, thank to your own stubbornness, you have nobody that will
receive you but your uncle Antony. Thither you must go in a very few
day; and, when there, your brother will settle with you, in my presence,
all that relate to your modest challenge; for it be accept, I assure
you. Dr. Lewen will possibly be there, since you make choice of he.
another gentleman likewise, be it but to convince you, that he be
another sort of man than you have take he to be. your two uncle will
possibly be there too, to see that the poor, weak, and defenceless sister
have fair play. so, you see, Miss, what company your smart challenge will
draw together.
prepare for the day. youwill soon be call upon. Adieu, Mamma Norton's
sweet child!
ARAB. HARLOWE.
***
I transcribe this letter, and send it to my mother, with these line:
a very few word, my ever-honour Mamma!
if my sister write the enclose by my father's direction, or your, I
must submit to the usage she give I in it, with this only observation,
that it be short of the personal treatment I have receive from she. if
it be of her own head--why then, Madam--but I know that when I be
banish from your presence--yet, till I know if she have or have not
authority for this usage, I will only write far, that I be
your very unhappy child,
CL. HARLOWE.
***
this answer I receive in an open slip of paper; but it be wet in one
place. I kiss the place; for I be sure it be blister, as I may say,
by a mother's tear!--She must (I hope she must) have write it
reluctantly.
to apply for protection, where authority be defy, be bold. your
sister, who would not in your circumstance have be guilty of your
perverseness, may allowably be angry at you for it. however, we have
tell she to moderate her zeal for our insult authority. see, if you
can deserve another behaviour, than that you complain of: which cannot,
however be so grievous to you, as the cause of it be to
your more unhappy Mother.
how often must I forbid you any address to I!
***
give I, my dearest Miss Howe, your opinion, what I can, what I ought to
do. not what you would do (push as I be push) in resentment or
passion--since, so instigated, you tell I, that you should have be
with somebody before now--and step take in passion hardly ever fail of
give cause for repentance: but acquaint I with what you think cool
judgment, and after-reflection, whatever be to be the event, will
justify.
I doubt not your sympathize love: but yet you cannot possibly feel
indignity and persecution so very sensibly as the immediate sufferer
feel they--be fitter therefore to advise I, than I be myself.
I will here rest my cause. have I, or have I not, suffer or bear
enough? and if they will still persevere; if that strange persister
against an antipathy so strongly avow, will still persist; say, what
can I do?--what course pursue?--shall I fly to London, and endeavour to
hide myself from Lovelace, as well as from all my own relation, till my
cousin Morden arrive? or shall I embark for Leghorn in my way to my
cousin? yet, my sex, my youth, consider, how full of danger be this
last measure!--And may not my cousin be set out for England, while I be
get thither?--what can I do?--tell I, tell I, my dearest Miss Howe,
[for I dare not trust myself,] tell I, what I can do.
ELEVEN O'CLOCK AT NIGHT.
I have be force to try to compose my angry passion at my harpsichord;
have first shut close my door and window, that I might not be hear
below. as I be close the shutter of the window, the distant
whooting of the bird of Minerva, as from the often-visit woodhouse,
give the subject in that charming Ode to Wisdom, which do honour to our
sex, as it be write by one of it. I make an essay, a week ago, to set
the three last stanzas of it, as not unsuitable to my unhappy situation;
and after I have re-peruse the Ode, those be my lesson; and, I be sure,
in the solemn address they contain to the all-wise and all-powerful
deity, my heart go with my finger.
I enclose the Ode, and my effort with it. the subject be solemn; my
circumstance be affect; and I flatter myself, that I have not be
quite unhappy in the performance. if it obtain your approbation, I shall
be out of doubt, and should be still more assured, could I hear it try
by your voice and finger.
ODE to wisdom
by a LADY
I.
the solitary bird of night
Thro' thick shade now wing his flight,
and quit his time-shake tow'r;
where, shelter'd from the blaze of day,
in philosophic gloom he lay,
beneath his ivy bow'r.
II.
with joy I hear the solemn sound,
which midnight echo waft around,
and sigh gale repeat.
Fav'rite of Pallas! I attend,
and, faithful to thy summon, bend
at Wisdom's awful seat.
III.
she love the cool, the silent eve,
where no false show of life deceive,
beneath the lunar ray.
here folly drop each vain disguise;
nor sport she gaily colour'd dye,
as in the beam of day.
IV.
o Pallas! queen of ev'ry art,
that glad the sense, and mend the heart,
blest source of purer joy!
in ev'ry form of beauty bright,
that captivate the mental sight
with pleasure and surprise;
V.
to thy unspotted shrine I bow:
attend thy modest suppliant's vow,
that breathe no wild desire;
but, teach by thy unerring rule,
to shun the fruitless wish of fool,
to nobler view aspire.
VI.
not Fortune's gem, Ambition's plume,
nor Cytherea's fade bloom,
be object of my prayer:
let av'rice, vanity, and pride,
those envy'd glitt'ring toy divide,
the dull reward of care.
VII.
to I thy well gift impart,
each moral beauty of the heart,
by studious thought refin'd;
for wealth, the smile of glad content;
for pow'r, its ample, good extent,
an empire o'er my mind.
VIII.
when Fortune drop her gay parade.
when Pleasure's transient rose fade,
and wither in the tomb,
Unchang'd be thy immortal prize;
thy ever-verdant laurel rise
in undecaye bloom.
IX.
by thee protect, I defy
the coxcomb's sneer, the stupid lie
of ignorance and spite:
Alike contemn the leaden fool,
and all the pointed ridicule
of undiscerne wit.
x.
from envy, hurry, noise, and strife,
the dull impertinence of life,
in thy retreat I rest:
pursue thee to the peaceful grove,
where Plato's sacred spirit rove,
in all thy beauty drest.
XI.
he bad Ilyssus' tuneful stream
Convey thy philosophic theme
of perfect, fair, and good:
Attentive Athens catch the sound,
and all her list'ne son around
in awful silence stand.
XII.
Reclaim'd her wild licentious youth,
Confess'd the potent voice of Truth,
and feel its just controul.
the Passions ceas'd their loud alarm,
and Virtue's soft persuasive charm
o'er all their sens stole.
xiii.
Thy breath inspire the Poet's song
the Patriot's free, unbiass'd tongue,
the Hero's gen'rous strife;
Thine be retirement's silent joy,
and all the sweet engage tie
of still, domestic life.
XIV.
no more to fabled name confin'd;
to Thee supreme, all perfect mind,
my thought direct their flight.
Wisdom's thy gift, and all her force
from thee deriv'd, eternal source
of Intellectual Light!
XV.
o send she sure, her steady ray,
to regulate my doubtful way,
Thro' life's perplexing road:
the mist of error to controul,
and thro' its gloom direct my soul
to happiness and good.
XVI.
beneath her clear discerning eye
the visionary shadow fly
of Folly's paint show.
she see thro' ev'ry fair disguise,
that all but Virtue's solid joy,
be vanity and woe.
[facsimile of the music to "the Ode to wisdom" (verse 14).]
letter XI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
FRIDAY MIDNIGHT.
I have now a calm moment. Envy, ambition, high and selfish resentment,
and all the violent passion, be now, most probably, asleep all around
I; and shall now my own angry one give way to the silent hour, and
subside likewise?--They have give way to it; and I have make use of the
gentler space to re-peruse your last letter. I will touch upon some
passage in they. and that I may the less endanger the but-just
recover calm, I will begin with what you write about Mr. Hickman.
give I leave to say, that I be sorry you cannot yet persuade yourself to
think well, that be to say, more justly, of that gentleman, than your
whimsical picture of he shews you so; or, at least, than the
humourousness of your natural vein would make one think you do.
I do not imagine, that you yourself will say, he sit for the picture you
have draw. and yet, upon the whole, it be not greatly to his
disadvantage. be I at ease in my mind, I would venture to draw a much
more amiable and just likeness.
if Mr. Hickman have not that assurance which some man have, he have that
humility and gentleness which many want: and which, with the infinite
value he have for you, will make he one of the fit husband in the
world for a person of your vivacity and spirit.
although you say I would not like he myself, I do assure you, if Mr.
Solmes be such a man as Mr. Hickman, in person, mind, and behaviour, my
friend and I have never disagree about he, if they would not have
permit I to live single; Mr. Lovelace (have such a character as he
have) would have stand no chance with I. this I can the more boldly
aver, because I plainly perceive, that of the two passion, love and
fear, this man will be able to inspire one with a much great proportion
of the latter, than I imagine be compatible with the former, to make a
happy marriage.
I be glad you own, that you like no one well than Mr. Hickman. in a
little while, I make no doubt, you will be able, if you challenge your
heart upon it, to acknowledge, that you like not any man so well:
especially, when you come to consider, that the very fault you find in
Mr. Hickman, admirably fit he to make you happy: that be to say, if it
be necessary to your happiness, that you should have your own will in
every thing.
but let I add one thing: and that be this:--you have such a sprightly
turn, that, with your admirable talent, you would make any man in the
world, who love you, look like a fool, except he be such a one as
Lovelace.
forgive I, my dear, for my frankness: and forgive I, also, for so soon
return to subject so immediately relative to myself, as those I now
must touch upon.
you again insist (strengthen by Mr. Lovelace's opinion) upon my
assume my own estate [I cannot call it resume, have never be in
possession of it]: and I have give you room to expect, that I will
consider this subject more closely than I have do before. I must
however own, that the reason which I have to offer against take your
advice be so obvious, that I think you would have see they yourself,
and be determine by they, against your own hasty counsel.--But since
this have not be so, and that both you and Mr. Lovelace call upon I to
assume my own estate, I will enter briefly into the subject.
in the first place, let I ask you, my dear, suppose I be incline to
follow your advice, whom have I to support I in my demand? my uncle
Harlowe be one of my trustee--he be against I. my cousin Morden be the
other--he be in Italy, and very probably may be set against I too. my
brother have declare, that they be resolve to carry their point before
he arrive: so that, as they drive on, all will probably be decide
before I can have an answer from he, be I to write: and, confine as I
be, be the answer to come in time, and they do not like it, they would
keep it from I.
in the next place, parent have great advantage in every eye over the
child, if she dispute their pleasure in the disposing of she: and so they
ought; since out of twenty instance, perhaps two could not be produce,
when they be not in the right, the child in the wrong.
you would not, I be sure, have I accept of Mr. Lovelace's offer
assistance in such a claim. if I would embrace any other person's, who
else would care to appear for a child against parent, ever, till of
late, so affectionate?==but be such a protector to be find, what a
length of time would it take up in a course of litigation! the will and
the deed have flaw in they, they say. my brother sometimes talk of
go to reside at the Grove: I suppose, with a design to make ejectment
necessary, be I to offer at assume; or, be I to marry Mr. Lovelace,
in order to give he all the opposition and difficulty the law would help
he to give.
these case I have put to myself, for argument-sake: but they be all out
of the question, although any body be to be find who would espouse my
cause: for I do assure you, I would soon beg my bread, than litigate
for my right with my father: since I be convince, that whether the
parent do his duty by the child or not, the child cannot be excuse from
do her to he. and to go to law with my father, what a sound have
that! you will see, that I have mention my wish (as an alternative,
and as a favour) to be permit, if I must be put out of his house, to
go thither: but not one step far can I go. and you see how this be
resent.
upon the whole, then, what have I to hope for, but a change in my
father's resolution?--and be there any probability of that; such an
ascendancy as my brother and sister have obtain over every body; and
such an interest to pursue the enmity they have now openly avow against
I?
as to Mr. Lovelace's approbation of your assumption-scheme, I wonder not
at. he very probably penetrate the difficulty I should have to bring
it to effect, without his assistance. be I to find myself as free as I
would wish myself to be, perhaps Mr. Lovelace would stand a bad chance
with I than his vanity may permit he to imagine; notwithstanding the
pleasure you take in rally I on his account. how know you, but all
that appear to be specious and reasonable in his offer; such as,
stand his chance for my favour, after I become independent, as I may
call it [by which I mean no more, than to have the liberty of refuse
for my husband a man whom it hurt I but to think of in that light]; and
such as his not visit I but by my leave; and till Mr. Morden come;
and till I be satisfied of his reformation;--how know you, I say, that he
give not himself these air purely to stand well in your grace as
well as mine, by offering of his own accord condition which he must
need think would be insist on, be the case to happen?
then be I utterly displeased with he. to threaten as he threaten; yet
to pretend, that it be not to intimidate I; and to beg of you not to
tell I, when he must know you would, and no doubt intend that you
should, be so meanly artful!--the man must think he have a frightened fool
to deal with.--I, to join hand with such a man of violence! my own
brother the man whom he threatens!--and what have Mr. Solmes do to he?
--is he to be blame, if he think a person would make a wife worth
have, to endeavour to obtain her?--oh that my friend would but leave
I to my own way in this one point! for have I give the man
encouragement sufficient to ground these threat upon? be Mr. Solmes a
man to whom I could but be indifferent, it might be find, that to have
spirit, would very little answer the view of that spirit. it be my
fortune to be treat as a fool by my brother: but Mr. Lovelace shall
find--yet I will let he know my mind; and then it will come with a
well grace to your knowledge.
mean time, give I leave to tell you, that it go against I, in my
cooler moment, unnatural as my brother be to I, to have you, my dear,
who be my other self, write such very severe reflection upon he, in
relation to the advantage Lovelace have over he. he be not indeed your
brother: but remember, that you write to his sister.--upon my word, my
dear Miss Howe, you dip your pen in gall whenever you be offend: and I
be almost ready to question, whether I read some of your expression
against other of my relation as well as he, (although in my favour,)
whether you be so thoroughly warrant to call other people to account
for their warmth. should we not be particularly careful to keep clear of
the fault we censure?--and yet I be so angry both at my brother and
sister, that I should not have take this liberty with my dear friend,
notwithstanding I know you never love they, have you not make so light of
so shock a transaction where a brother's life be at stake: when his
credit in the eye of the mischievous sex have receive a still deep
wound than he personally sustain; and when a revival of the same wicked
resentment (which may end more fatally) be threaten.
his credit, I say, in the eye of the mischievous sex: who be not
warrant to call it so; when it be re (as the two libertine his
companion glory) to resolve never to give a challenge; and among whom
duelling be so fashionable a part of brutal bravery, that the man of
temper, who be, mostly, I believe, the truly brave man, be often at a
loss so to behave as to avoid incur either a mortal guilt, or a
general contempt?
to enlarge a little upon this subject, may we not infer, that those who
would be guilty of throw these contempt upon a man of temper, who
would rather pass by a verbal injury, than to imbrue his hand in blood,
know not the measure of true magnanimity? nor how much nobler it be to
forgive, and even how much more manly to despise, than to resent, an
injury? be I a man, methink, I should have too much scorn for a
person, who could wilfully do I a mean wrong, to put a value upon his
life, equal to what I put upon my own. what an absurdity, because a man
have do I a small injury, that I should put it in his power (at least,
to an equal risque) to do I, and those who love I, an irreparable one!
--Were it not a wilful injury, nor avow to be so, there could not be
room for resentment.
how willingly would I run away from myself, and what most concern
myself, if I could! this digression bring I back again to the occasion
of it--and that to the impatience I be in, when I end my last letter,
for my situation be not alter. I renew, therefore, my former
earnestness, as the new day approach, and will bring with it perhaps
new trial, that you will (as undivestedly as possible of favour or
resentment) tell I what you would have I do:--for, if I be oblige to
go to my uncle Antony's, all, I doubt, will be over with I. yet how to
avoid it--thatbe the difficulty!
I shall deposit this the first thing. when you have it, lose no time, I
pray you, to advise (lest it be too late)
your ever oblige
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XII
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
SATURDAY, MARCH 25.
what can I advise you to do, my noble creature? your merit be your
crime. you can no more change your nature, than your persecutor can
theirs. your distress be owe to the vast disparity between you and
they. what would you have of they? do they not act in character?--and
to whom? to an alien. you be not one of they. they have two
dependency in their hope to move you to compliance.--upon their
impenetrableness one [Iwould give it a more proper name, if I dare]; the
other, on the regard you have always have for your character, [have they
not heretofore own as much?] and upon your apprehension from that of
Lovelace, which would discredit you, should you take any step by his
mean to extricate yourself. then they know, that resentment and
unpersuadableness be not natural to you; and that the anger they have
work you up to, will subside, as all extraordinarie soon do; and that
once marry, you will make the good of it.
but surely your father's son and eld daughter have a view (by
communicating to so narrow a soul all they know of your just aversion to
he) to entail unhappiness for life upon you, be you to have the man
who be already more nearly related to they, than ever he can be to you,
although the shocking compulsion should take place.
as to that wretch's perseverance, those only, who know not the man, will
wonder at it. he have not the least delicacy. his principal view in
marriage be not to the mind. how shall those beauty be value, which
cannot be comprehend? be you to be his, and shew a visible want of
tenderness to he, it be my opinion, he would not be much concerned at
it. I have hear you well observe, from your Mrs. Norton, that a person
who have any over-rule passion, will compound by give up twenty
secondary or under-satisfaction, though more laudable one, in order to
have that gratify.
Iwill give you the substance of a conversation [no fear you can be make to
like he bad than you do already] that pass between Sir Harry
Downeton and this Solmes, but three day ago, as Sir Harry tell it but
yesterday to my mother and I. it will confirm to you that what your
sister's insolent Betty report he should say, of govern by fear, be
not of her own head.
Sir Harry tell she, he wonder he should wish to obtain you so much
against you inclination as every body know it would be, if he do.
he matter'd not that, he say: coy maid make the fond wife: [a sorry
fellow!] it would not at all grieve he to see a pretty woman make wry
face, if she give he cause to vex she. and your estate, by the
convenience of its situation, would richly pay he for all he could bear
with your shyness.
he should be sure, he say, after a while, of your complaisance, if not
of your love: and in that should be happy than nine part in ten of his
marry acquaintance.
what a wretch be this!
for the rest, your known virtue would be as great a security to he, as
he could wish for.
she will look upon you, say Sir Harry, if she be force to marry you, as
Elizabeth of France do upon Philip II. of Spain, when he receive she on
his frontier as her husband, who be to have be but her father-in-law:
that be, with fear and terror, rather than with complaisance and love:
and you will perhaps be as surly to she, as that old monarch be to his
young bride.
fear and terror, the wretch, the horrid wretch! say, look pretty in a
bride as well as in a wife: and, laugh, [yes, my dear, the hideous
fellow laugh immoderately, as Sir Harry tell we, when he say it,] it
should be his care to perpetuate the occasion for that fear, if he could
not think he have the love. and, truly, he be of opinion, that if LOVE
and fear must be separate in matrimony, the man who make himself fear,
fare well.
if my eye would carry with they the execution which the eye of the
basilisk be say to do, I would make it my first business to see this
creature.
my mother, however, say, it would be a prodigious merit in you, if you
could get over your aversion to he. where, ask she [as you have be
ask before], be the praise-worthiness of obedience, if it be only pay
in instance where we give up nothing?
what a fatality, that you have no well an option--either a Scylla or a
Charybdis.
be it not you, I should know how (barbarously as you be use) to
advise you in a moment. but such a noble character to suffer from a
(suppose) rashness and indiscretion of such a nature, would, as I have
heretofore observe, be a wound to the sex.
while I be in hope, that the asserting of your own independence would
have help you, I be pleased that you have one resource, as I think.
but now, that you have so well prove, that such a step would not avail
you, I be entirely at a loss what to say.
I will lay down my pen, and think.
***
I have consider, and consider again; but, I protest, I know no more
what to say now, than before. only this: that I be young, like yourself;
and have a much weak judgment, and strong passion, than you have.
I have heretofore say, that you have offer as much as you ought, in
offering to live single. if you be never to marry, the estate they be
so loth should go out of their name, would, in time, I suppose, revert to
your brother: and he or his would have it, perhaps, much more certainly
this way, than by the precarious reversion which Solmes make they hope
for. have you put this into their odd head, my dear?--The tyrant word
AUTHORITY, as they use it, can be the only objection against this offer.
one thing you must consider, that, if you leave your parent, your duty
and love will not suffer you to justify yourself by an appeal against
they; and so youwill have the world against you. and should Lovelace
continue his wild life, and behave ungratefully to you, will not his
baseness seem to justify their cruel treatment of you, as well as their
dislike of he?
may heaven direct you for the best!--i can only say, that for my own
part, I would do any thing, go any where, rather than be compel to
marry the man I hate; and (be he such a man as Solmes) must always
hate. nor could I have bear what you have bear, if from father and
uncle, not from brother and sister.
my mother will have it, that after they have try their utmost effort
to bring you into their measure, and find they ineffectual, they will
recede. but I cannot say I be of her mind. she do not own, she have
any authority for this, but her own conjecture. I should otherwise have
hop, that your uncle Antony and she have be in on one secret, and that
favourable to you. woe be to one of they at least [to you uncle to be
sure I mean] if they should be in any other!
you must, if possible, avoid be carry to that uncle's. the man, the
parson, your brother and sister present!--They'll certainly there marry
you to the wretch. nor will your newly-raise spirit support you in your
resistance on such an occasion. your meekness will return; and you will
have nothing for it but tear [tear despise by they all] and
ineffectual appeal and lamentation: and these tear when the ceremony
be profane, you must suddenly dry up; and endeavour to dispose of
yourself to such a humble frame of mind, as may induce your new-make lord
to forgive all your past declaration of aversion.
in short, my dear, you must then blandish he over with a confession,
that all your past behaviour be maidenly reserve only: and it will be
your part to convince he of the truth of his imprudent sarcasm, that the
coy maid make the fond wife. thus will you enter the state with
a high sense of obligation to his forgiving goodness: and if you will not
be keep to it by that fear, by which he propose to govern, I be much
mistaken.
yet, after all, I must leave the point undetermined, and only to be
determine, as you find they recede from their avow purpose, or resolve
to remove you to your uncle Antony's. but I must repeat my wish, that
something may fall out, that neither of these man may call you his!--and
may you live single, my dear friend, till some man shall offer, that
may be as worthy of you, as man can be!
but yet, methink, I would not, that you, who be so admirably qualified
to adorn the married state, should be always single. you know I be
incapable of flattery; and that I always speak and write the sincere
dictate of my heart. nor can you, from what you must know of your own
merit (take only in a comparative light with other) doubt my sincerity.
for why should a person who delight to find out and admire every thing
that be praise-worthy in another, be suppose ignorant of like
perfection in herself, when she could not so much admire they in
another, if she have they not herself? and why may not I give she those
praise, which she would give to any other, who have but half of she
excellencies?--especially when she be incapable of pride and vain-glory;
and neither despise other for the want of her fine quality, nor
overvalue herself upon them?--over-value, do I say!--how can that be?
forgive I, my beloved friend. my admiration of you (increase, as it
be, by every letter you write) will not always be hold down in silence;
although, in order to avoid offend you, I generally endeavour to keep
it from flow to my pen, when I write to you, or to my lip, whenever I
have the happiness to be in your company.
I will add nothing (though I could add a hundred thing on account of
your late communication) but that I be
your ever affectionate and faithful
ANNA HOWE.
I hope I have please you with my dispatch. I wish I have be able to
please you with my request advice.
you have give new beauty to the charming Ode which you have
transmit to I. what pity that the wretch you have to deal with,
put you out of your admirable course; in the pursuit of which, like the
sun, you be willnot to cheer and illuminate all you shine upon!
LETTER XIII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SUNDAY MORNING, MARCH 26.
how soothe a thing be praise from those we love!--whether conscious or
not of deserve it, it cannot but give we great delight, to see
ourselves stand high in the opinion of those whose favour we be
ambitious to cultivate. an ingenuous mind will make this farth use of
it, that if he be sensible that it do not already deserve the charming
attribute, it will hasten (before its friend find herself mistaken) to
obtain the grace it be compliment for: and this it will do, as well in
honour to itself, as to preserve its friend's opinion, and justify she
judgment. may this be always my aim!--And then you will not only give
the praise, but the merit; and I shall be more worthy of that friendship,
which be the only pleasure I have to boast of.
most heartily I thank you for the kind dispatch of your last favour. how
much be I indebted to you! and even to your honest servant!--under what
obligation do my unhappy situation lie I!
but let I answer the kind content of it, as well as I may.
as to get over my disgust to Mr. Solmes, it be impossible to be
do; while he want generosity, frankness of heart, benevolence,
manner and every qualification that distinguish the worthy man. o my
dear! what a degree of patience, what a greatness of soul, be require in
the wife, not to despise a husband who be more ignorant, more illiterate,
more low-minded than herself!--The wretch, vest with prerogative, who
will claim rule in virtue of they (and not to permit whose claim, will be
as disgraceful to the prescribe wife as to the governed husband); how
shall such a husband as this be bear, be he, for reason of
convenience and interest, even to be our choice? but, to be compel to
have such a one, and that compulsion to arise from motif as unworthy of
the prescriber as of the prescribed, who can think of get over an
aversion so justly found? how much easy to bear the temporary
persecution I labour under, because temporary, than to resolve to be
such a man's for life? be I to comply, must I not leave my relation,
and go to he? a month will decide the one, perhaps: but what a duration
of woe will the other be!--every day, it be likely, rise to witness to
some new breach of an altar-vowed duty!
then, my dear, the man seem already to be meditate vengeance against
I for an aversion I cannot help: for yesterday my saucy gaoleress
assure I, that all my opposition would not signify that pinch of
snuff, hold out her genteel finger and thumb: that I must have Mr.
Solmes: that therefore I have not good carry my jest too far; for that Mr.
Solmes be a man of spirit, and have tell she, that as I should surely be
his, I act very unpolitely; since, if he have not more mercy [that be
her word, I know not if it be his] than I have, I might have cause to
repent the usage I give he to the last day of my life. but enough of
this man; who, by what you repeat from Sir Harry Downeton, have all the
insolence of his sex, without any one quality to make that insolence
tolerable.
I have receive two letter from Mr. Lovelace, since his visit to you;
which make three that I have not answer. I doubt not his be very
uneasy; but in his last he complain in high term of my silence; not in
the still small voice, or rather style of an humble lover, but in a style
like that which would probably be use by a slight protector. and his
pride be again touch, that like a thief, or eve-dropper, he be force
to dodge about in hope of a letter, and return five mile (and then to
an inconvenient lodging) without any.
his letter and the copy of mine to he, shall soon attend you. till
when, I will give you the substance of what I write he yesterday.
I take he severely to task for his freedom in threaten I, through
you, with a visit to Mr. Solmes, or to my brother. I say, 'that, surely,
I must be think to be a creature fit to bear any thing; that violence
and menace from some of my own family be not enough for I to bear, in
order to make I avoid he; but that I must have they from he too, if I
oblige those to whom it be both my inclination and duty to oblige in
every thing that be reasonable, and in my power.
'very extraordinary, I tell he, that a violent spirit shall threaten to
do a rash and unjustifiable thing, which concern I but a little, and
himself a great deal, if I do not something as rash, my character and sex
consider, to divert he from it.
'I even hint, that, however it would affect I, be any mischief to
happen on my own account, yet there be person, as far as I know, who in
my case would not think there would be reason for much regret, be such
a committed rashness as he threaten Mr. Solmes with, to rid she of two
person whom, have she never know, she have never be unhappy.'
this be plain-deal, my dear: and I suppose he will put it into still
plainer English for I.
I take his pride to task, on his disdaining to watch for my letter; and
for his eve-drop language: and say, 'that, surely, he have the less
reason to think so hardly of his situation; since his faulty moral be
the cause of all; and since faulty moral deservedly level all
distinction, and bring down rank and birth to the canaille, and to the
necessity which he so much regret, of appear (if I must descent to
his language) as an eve-dropper and a thief. and then I forbid he ever
to expect another letter from I that be to subject he to such
disgraceful hardship.
'as to the solemn vow and protestation he be so ready, upon all
occasion, to make, they have the less weight with I, I tell he, as
they give a kind of demonstration, that he himself, from his own
character, think there be reason to make they. deed be to I the only
evidence of intention. and I be more and more convinced of the
necessity of break off a correspondence with a person, whose address
I see it be impossible either to expect my friend to encourage, or he
to appear to wish that they should think he worthy of encouragement.
'what therefore I repeatedly desire be, that since his birth, alliance,
and expectation, be such as will at any time, if his immoral character
be not an objection, procure he at least equal advantage in a woman
whose taste and inclination moreover might be well adapt to his own;
I insist upon it, as well as advise it, that he give up all thought of
I: and the rather, as he have all along (by his threatening and unpolite
behaviour to my friend, and whenever he speak of they) give I reason
to conclude, that there be more malice in they, than regard to I, in his
perseverance.'
this be the substance of the letter I have write to he.
the man, to be sure, must have the penetration to observe, that my
correspondence with he hitherto be owe more to the severity I meet
with, than to a very high value for he. and so I would have he think.
what a bad than moloch deity be that, which expect an offering of
reason, duty, and discretion, to be make to its shrine!
your mother be of opinion, you say, that at last my friend will relent.
Heaven grant that they may!--But my brother and sister have such an
influence over every body, and be so determined; so pique themselves
upon subdue I, and carry their point; that I despair that they
will. and yet, if they do not, I frankly own, I would not scruple to
throw myself upon any not disreputable protection, by which I might avoid
my present persecution, on one hand, and not give Mr. Lovelace advantage
over I, on the other--that be to say, be there manifestly no other way
leave I: for, if there be, I should think the leave my father's
house, without his consent, one of the most inexcusable action I could
be guilty of, be the protection to be ever so unexceptionable; and this
notwithstanding the independent fortune will I by my grandfather. and
indeed I have often reflect with a degree of indignation and disdain,
upon the thought of what a low, selfish creature that child must be, who
be to be rein in only by the hope of what a parent can or will do for
she.
but notwithstanding all this, I owe it to the sincerity of friendship to
confess, that I know not what I should have do, have your advice be
conclusive any way. have you, my dear, be witness to my different
emotion, as I read your letter, when, in one place, you advise I of my
danger, if I be carry to my uncle's; in another, when you own you could
not bear what I bear, and would do any thing rather than marry the man
you hate; yet, in another, to represent to I my reputation suffer in
the world's eye; and the necessity I should be under to justify my
conduct, at the expense of my friend, be I to take a rash step; in
another, insinuate the dishonest figure I should be force to make, in so
compel a matrimony; endeavour to cajole, fawn upon, and play the
hypocrite with a man to whom I have an aversion; who would have reason to
believe I an hypocrite, as well from my former avowal, as from the
sense he must have (if common sense he have) of his own demerit; the
necessity you think there would be for I, the more averse (be I
capable of so much dissimulation) that would be imputable to disgraceful
motif; as it would be too visible, that love, either of person or mind,
could be neither of they: then his undoubted, his even constitutional
narrowness: his too probably jealousy, and unforgiveness, bear in my
mind my declare aversion, and the unfeigned despight I take all
opportunity to do he, in order to discourage his address: a preference
avow against he from the same motive; with the pride he profess to
take in curb and sink the spirit of a woman he have acquire a
right to tyrannize over: have you, I say, be witness of my different
emotion as I read; now lean this way, now that; now perplexed; now
apprehensive; now angry at one, then at another; now resolve; now
doubt; you would have see the power you have over I; and would have
have reason to believe, that, have you give your advice in any determine
or positive manner, I have be ready to have be conclude by it. so,
my dear, you will find, from these acknowledgement, that you must
justify I to those law of friendship, which require undisguised
frankness of heart; although you justification of I in that particular,
will perhaps be at the expense of my prudence.
but, upon the whole, this I do repeat--that nothing but the last
extremity shall make I abandon my father's house, if they will permit I
to stay; and if I can, by any mean, by any honest pretence, but keep
off my evil destiny in it till my cousin Morden arrive. as one of my
trustee, his be a protection, into which I may without discredit throw
myself, if my other friend should remain determined. and this (although
they seem too well aware of it) be all my hope: for, as to Lovelace, be
I to be sure of his tenderness, and even of his reformation, must not the
thought of embrace the offer protection of his family, be the same
thing, in the world's eye, as accept of his own?--could I avoid
receive his visit at his own relation'? must I not be his, whatever,
(on see he in a nearer light,) I should find he out to be? for you
know, it have always be my observation, that very few people in
courtship see each other as they be. oh! my dear! how wise have I
endeavour to be! how anxious to choose, and to avoid every thing,
precautiously, as I may say, that might make I happy, or unhappy; yet
all my wisdom now, by a strange fatality, be likely to become
foolishness!
then you tell I, in your usual kindly-partial manner, what be expect
of I, more than would be of some other. this should be a lesson to I.
what ever my motif be, the world would not know they. to complain of
a brother's unkindness, that, indeed, I might do. difference between
brother and sister, where interest clash, but too commonly arise: but,
where the severe father cannot be separate from the faulty brother, who
could bear to lighten herself, by load a father?--Then, in this
particular case, must not the hatred Mr. Lovelace express to every one
of my family (although in return for their hatred of he) shock one
extremely? must it not shew, that there be something implacable, as well
as highly unpolite in his temper?--and what creature can think of
marry so as to be out of all hope ever to be well with her own
near and tenderest relation?
but here, have tired myself, and I dare say you, I will lay down my
pen.
***
Mr. Solmes be almost continually here: so be my aunt hervey: so be my
two uncle. something be work against I, I doubt. what an uneasy
state be suspense!--when a naked sword, too, seem hang over one's
head!
I hear nothing but what this confident creature Betty throw out in the
wantonness of office. now it be, why, Miss, donot you look up your
thing? youwill be call upon, depend upon it, before you be aware.
another time she intimate darkly, and in broken sentence, (as if on
purpose to tease I,) what one say, what another; with their inquiry
how I dispose of my time? and my brother's insolent question come
frequently in, whether I be not write a history of my suffering?
but I be now use to her pertness: and as it be only through that that I
can hear of any thing intend against I, before it be to be put in
execution; and as, when she be most impertinent, she plead a commission
for it; I bear with she: yet, now-and-then, not without a little of the
heart-burn.
I will deposit thus far. Adieu, my dear.
CL. HARLOWE.
write on the cover, after she go down, with a pencil:
on come down, I find your second letter of yesterday's date.* I have
read it; and be in hope that the enclose will in a great measure answer
your mother's expectation of I.
* see the next letter.
my most respectful acknowledgement to she for it, and for her very kind
admonition.
youwill read to she what you please of the enclosed.
LETTER XIV
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
SAT. MARCH 25.
I follow my last of this date by command. I mention in my former my
mother's opinion of the merit you would have, if you could oblige your
friend against your own inclination. our conference upon this subject
be introduce by the conversation we have have with Sir Harry Downeton;
and my mother think it of so much importance, that she enjoin I to
give you the particular of it. I the rather comply, as I be unable in
my last to tell what to advise you to; and as you will in this recital
have my mother's opinion at least, and, perhaps, in hers what the world's
would be, be it only to know what she know, and not so much as I know.
my mother argue upon this case in a most discouraging manner for all
such of our sex as look forward for happiness in marriage with the man of
their choice.
only, that I know, she have a side-view of her daughter; who, at the same
time that she now prefer no one to another, value not the man her
mother most regard, of one farthing; or I should lay it more to heart.
what be there in it, say she, that all this bustle be about? be it such
a mighty matter for a young woman to give up her inclination to oblige
her friend?
very well, my mamma, think I! now, may you ask this--at forty, you
may. but what would you have say at eighteen, be the question?
either, say she, the lady must be think to have very violent
inclination [and what nice young creature would have that suppose?]
which she could not give up; or a very stubborn will, which she would
not; or, thirdly, have parent she be indifferent about oblige.
you know my mother now-and-then argue very notably; always very warmly
at least. I happen often to differ from she; and we both think so well
of our own argument, that we very seldom be so happy as to convince
one another. a pretty common case, I believe, in all vehement debating.
she say, I be too witty; Angelice, too pert: I, that she be too wise;
that be to say, be likewise put into English, not so young as she have
be: in short, be grow so much into mother, that she have forget she
ever be a daughter. so, generally, we call another cause by consent--
yet fall into the old one half a dozen time over, without consent--
quitting and resume, with half-angry face, force into a smile, that
there might be some room to piece together again: but go a-bed, if
bedtime, a little sullen nevertheless: or, if we speak, her silence be
break with an ah! Nancy! you be so lively! so quick! I wish you be
less like your papa, child!
I pay it off with thinking, that my mother have no reason to disclaim she
share in her Nancy: and if the matter go off with great severity on her
side than I wish for, then her favourite Hickman fare the bad for it
next day.
I know I be a saucy creature. I know, if I do not say so, you will think
so. so no more of this just now. what I mention it for, be to tell you,
that on this serious occasion I will omit, if I can, all that pass
between we, that have an air of flippancy on my part, or quickness on my
mother's, to let you into the cool and cogent of the conversation.
'look through the family, say she, which we both know, where the man
and the woman have be say to marry for love; which (at the time it be
so call) be perhaps no more than a passion begin in folly or
thoughtlessness, and carry on from a spirit of perverseness and
opposition [here we have a parenthetical debate, which I omit]; and see,
if they appear to be happy than those whose principal inducement to
marry have be convenience, or to oblige their friend; or ever whether
they be generally so happy: for convenience and duty, where observe,
will afford a permanent and even an increase satisfaction (as well at
the time, as upon the reflection) which seldom fail to reward themselves:
while love, if love be the motive, be an idle passion' [idle in one SENSE
my mother cannot say; for love be as busy as a monkey, and as mischievous
as a school-boy]--'it be a fervour, that, like all other fervour, last
but a little while after marriage; a bow overstrain, that soon return
to its natural bent.
'as it be found generally upon mere notional excellency, which be
unknown to the person themselves till attribute to either by the other;
one, two, or three month, usually set all right on both side; and then
with open eye they think of each other--just as every body else
think of they before.
'the lover imaginarie [her own notable word!] be by that time go
off; nature and old habit (painfully dispense with or conceal)
return: disguise throw aside, all the mole, freckle, and defect in
the mind of each discover themselves; and 'tis well if each do not sink
in the opinion of the other, as much below the common standard, as the
blinded imagination of both have set they above it. and now, say she,
the fond pair, who know no felicity out of each other's company, be so
far from find the never-end variety each have propose in an
unrestrained conversation with the other (when they seldom be together;
and always part with something to say; or, on recollection, when
part, wish they have say); that they be continually on the wing in
pursuit of amusement out of themselves; and those, conclude my sage
mamma, [do you think her wisdom so very modern?] will perhaps be the
lively to each, in which the other have no share.'
I tell my mother, that if you be to take any rash step, it would be
owe to the indiscreet violence of your friend. I be afraid, I say,
that these reflection upon the conduct of people in the married state,
who might set out with well hope, be but too well ground: but that
this must be allow I, that if child weigh not these matter so
thoroughly as they ought, neither do parent make those allowance for
youth, inclination, and inexperience, which have be find necessary to
be make for themselves at their child's time of life.
I remember a letter, I tell she, hereupon, which you write a few month
ago, personate an anonymous elderly lady (in Mr. Wyerley's day of
plague you) to Miss Drayton's mother, who, by her severity and
restraint, have like to have drive the young lady into the very fault
against which her mother be most solicitous to guard she. and I dare
to say, she would be pleased with it.
I fetch the first draught of it, which at my request you oblige I at
the time; and read the whole letter to my mother. but the follow
passage she make I read twice. I think you once tell I you have not a
copy of this letter.
'permit I, Madam, [say the personate grave writer,] to observe, that
if person of your experience would have young people look forward, in
order to be wise and well by their advice, it would be kind in they to
look backward, and allow for their child's youth, and natural
vivacity; in other word, for their lively hope, unabate by time,
unaccompanie by reflection, and unchecke by disappointment. thing
appear to we all in a very different light at our entrance upon a
favourite party, or tour; when, with golden prospect, and high
expectation, we rise vigorous and fresh like the sun begin its
morning course; from what they do, when we sit down at the end of our
view, tired, and prepare for our journey homeward: for then we take
into our reflection, what we have leave out in prospect, the fatigue, the
check, the hazard, we have meet with; and make a true estimate of
pleasure, which from our raise expectation must necessarily have
fall miserably short of what we have promise ourselves at set out.
nothing but experience can give we a strong and efficacious conviction of
this difference: and when we would inculcate the fruit of that upon the
mind of those we love, who have not live long enough to find those
fruit; and would hope, that our advice should have as much force upon
they, as experience have upon we; and which, perhaps, our parent' advice
have not upon ourselves, at our daughter' time of life; should we not
proceed by patient reasoning and gentleness, that we may not harden,
where we would convince? for, Madam, the tender and most generous
mind, when harshly treat, become generally the most inflexible. if
the young lady know her heart to be right, however defective her head
may be for want of age and experience, she will be apt to be very
tenacious. and if she believe her friend to be wrong, although perhaps
they may be only so in their method of treat she, how much will every
unkind circumstance on the parent's part, or heedless one on the child's,
though ever so slight in itself, widen the difference! the parent's
prejudice in disfavour, will confirm the daughter's in favour, of the
same person; and the good reasoning in the world on either side, will be
attribute to that prejudice. in short, neither of they will be
convince: a perpetual opposition ensue: the parent grow impatient; the
child desperate: and, as a too natural consequence, that fall out which
the mother be most afraid of, and which possibly have not happen, if
the child's passion have be only lead, not drive.'
my mother be pleased with the whole letter; and say, it deserve to
have the success it meet with. but ask I what excuse could be offer
for a young lady capable of make such reflection (and who at her time
of life could so well assume the character of one of riper year) if she
should rush into any fatal mistake herself?
she then touch upon the moral character of Mr. Lovelace; and how
reasonable the aversion of your reflection be to a man who give himself
the liberty he be say to take; and who indeed himself deny not the
accusation; have be hear to declare, that he will do all the
mischief he can to the sex, in revenge for the ill usage and broken vow
of his first love, at a time when he be too young [his own expression
it seem] to be insincere.
I reply, that I have hear every one say, that the lady mean really
use he ill; that it affect he so much at the time, that he be
force to travel upon it; and to drive she out of his heart, run into
course which he have ingenuousness enough himself to condemn: that,
however, he have deny that he have throw out such menace against the
sex when charge with they by I in your presence; and declare himself
incapable of so unjust and ungenerous a resentment against all, for the
perfidy of one.
you remember this, my dear, as I do your innocent observation upon it,
that you could believe his solemn asseveration and denial: 'for surely,
say you, the man who would resent, as the high indignity that could
be offer to a gentleman, the imputation of a wilful falsehood, would
not be guilty of one.'
I insist upon the extraordinary circumstance in your case;
particularize they. I take notice, that Mr. Lovelace's moral be at
one time no objection with your relation for Arabella: that then much
be build upon his family, and more upon his part and learning, which
make it out of doubt, that he might be reclaim by a woman of virtue and
prudence: and [pray forgive I for mention it] I venture to add, that
although your family might be good sort of folk, as the world go, yet
no body but you impute to any of they a very punctilious concern for
religion or piety--therefore be they the less entitled to object to
defect of that kind in other. then, what an odious man, say I, have
they pick out, to supplant in a lady's affection one of the fine
figure of a man, and one note for his brilliant part, and other
accomplishment, whatever his moral may be!
still my mother insist, that there be the great merit in your
obedience on that account; and urge, that there hardly ever be a very
handsome and a very sprightly man who make a tender and affectionate
husband: for that they be generally such Narcissus's, as to imagine
every woman ought to think as highly of they, as they do of themselves.
there be no danger from that consideration here, I say, because the
lady still have great advantage of person and mind, than the man;
graceful and elegant, as he must be allow to be, beyond most of his
sex.
she cannot endure to hear I praise any man but her favourite Hickman;
upon whom, nevertheless, she generally bring a degree of contempt which
he would escape, do she not lessen the little merit he have, by give
he, on all occasion, more than I think he can deserve, and enter he
into comparison in which it be impossible but he must be a sufferer.
and now [preposterous partiality!] she think for her part, that Mr.
Hickman, bat that his face indeed be not so smooth, nor his
complexion quite so good, and save that he be not so presuming and so
bold (which ought to be no fault with a modest woman) equal Mr.
Lovelace at any hour of the day.
to avoid enter far into such an incomparable comparison, I say,
I do not believe, have they leave you to your own way, and treat you
generously, that you would have have the thought of encourage any man
whom they disliked--
then, Nancy, catch I up, the excuse be less--for if so, must there
not be more of contradiction, than love, in the case?
not so, neither, Madam: for I know Miss Clarissa Harlowe would prefer Mr.
Lovelace to all man, if morals--
IF, nancy!--that if be every thing.--do you really think she love Mr.
Lovelace?
what would you have have I say, my dear?--i willnot tell you what I do
say: but have I not say what I do, who would have believe I?
besides, I know you love him!--excuse I, my dear: yet, if you deny it,
what do you but reflect upon yourself, as if you think you ought not to
allow yourself in what you cannot help do?
indeed, Madam, say I, the man be worthy of any woman's love [if, again,
I could say]--but her parents--
her parent, nancy--[you know, my dear, how my mother, who accuse she
daughter of quickness, be evermore interrupt one!]
may take wrong measure, say i--
cannot do wrong--they have reason, Iwill warrant, say she--
by which they may provoke a young woman, say I, to do rash thing, which
otherwise she would not do.
but, if it be a rash thing, [return she,] should she do it? a prudent
daughter will not wilfully err, because her parent err, if they be to
err: if she do, the world which blame the parent, will not acquit the
child. all that can be say, in extenuation of a daughter's error in
this case, arise from a kind consideration, which Miss Clary's letter to
Lady Drayton plead for, to be pay to her daughter's youth and
inexperience. and will such an admirable young person as Miss Clarissa
Harlowe, whose prudence, as we see, qualify she to be an advisor of
person much old than herself, take shelter under so poor a covert?
let she know, Nancy, out of hand, what I say; and I charge you to
represent far to she, that let he dislike one man and approve of
another ever so much, it will be expect of a young lady of her
unbounded generosity and greatness of mind, that she should deny herself
when she can oblige all her family by so do--no less than ten or a
dozen perhaps the near and dearest to she of all the person in the
world, an indulgent father and mother at the head of they. it may be
fancy only on her side; but parent look deeply: and will not Miss
Clarissa Harlowe give up her fancy to her parent' judgment?
I say a great deal upon this judgment subject: all that you could wish I
should say; and all that your extraordinary case allow I to say. and
my mother be so sensible of the force of it, that she charge I not to
write to you any part of my answer to what she say; but only what she
herself have advance; lest, in so critical a case, it should induce you
to take measure which might give we both reason (I for give it, you
for follow it) to repent it as long as we live.
and thus, my dear, have I set my mother's argument before you. and the
rather, as I cannot myself tell what to advise you to do--you know well
your own heart; and what that will let you do.
Robin undertake to deposit this very early, that you may have an
opportunity to receive it by your first morning air.
Heaven guide and direct you for the good, be the incessant prayer of
your ever affectionate
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SUNDAY AFTERNOON
I be in great apprehension. yet cannot help repeat my humble thank
to your mother and you for your last favour. I hope her kind end be
answer by the content of my last. yet I must not think it enough to
acknowledge she goodness to I, with a pencil only, on the cover of a
letter seal up. a few line give I leave to write with regard to my
anonymous letter to Lady Drayton. if I do not at that time tell you, as
I believe I do, that my excellent Mrs. Norton give I her assistance in
that letter, I now acknowledge that she do.
pray let your mother know this, for two reason: one, that I may not be
think to arrogate to myself a discretion which do not belong to I;
the other, that I may not suffer by the severe, but just inference she
be pleased to draw; double my fault upon I, if I myself should act
unworthy of the advice I be suppose to give.
before I come to what most nearly affect we all, I must chide you once
more, for the severe, the very severe thing you mention of our family,
to the disparagement of their moral. indeed, my dear, I wonder at you!
--A slighter occasion might have pass I, after I have write to you so
often to so little purpose, on this topic. but, affect as my own
circumstance be, I cannot pass by, without animadversion, the
reflection I need not repeat in word.
there be not a worthy woman in England than my mother. nor be my
father that man you sometimes make he. except in one point, I know
not any family which live more up to their duty, than the principal of
ours. a little too uncommunicative for their great circumstance--that
be all.--Why, then, have they not reason to insist upon unexceptionable
moral in a man whose seek-for relationship to they, by a marriage in
their family, they have certainly a right either to allow of, or to
disallow.
another line or two, before I be engross by my own concern--upon your
treatment of Mr. Hickman. be it, do you think, generous to revenge upon
an innocent person, the displeasure you receive from another quarter,
where, I doubt, you be a trespasser too?--but one thing I could tell
he; and you have well not provoke I to it: it be this, that no woman
use ill the man she do not absolutely reject, but she have it in her
heart to make he amend, when her tyranny have have its run, and he have
complete the measure of his service and patience. my mind be not
enough at ease to push this matter far.
I will now give you the occasion of my present apprehension.
I have reason to fear, as I mention in mine of this morning, that a
storm be brew. Mr. Solmes come home from church this afternoon with
my brother. soon after, Betty bring I up a letter, without say
from whom. it be in a cover, and direct by a hand I never see before;
as if it be suppose that I would not receive and open it, have I know
from whom it come.
these be the content:
***
to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
SUNDAY, MARCH 26.
DEAREST MADAM,
I think myself a most unhappy man, in that I have never yet be able to
pay my respect to you with youre consent, for one halfe-hour. I have
something to communicat to you that concern you much, if you be please
to admit I to youre speech. youre honour be concern in it, and the
honour of all youre familly. it relate to the designe of one whom you
be se to valew more than he desarve; and to some of his reprobat
action; which I be reddie to give you convincing proofe of the truth
of. I may appear to be interested in it: but, neverthelesse, I be reddie
to make oathe, that every tittle be true: and you will see what a man you
be se to favour. but I hope not so, for your owne honour.
Pray, Madam, vouchsafe I a hearing, as you valew your honour and
familly: which will oblidge, dear Miss,
your most humble and most faithful servant,
ROGER SOLMES.
I wait below for the hope of admittance.
***
I have no manner of doubt, that this be a poor device to get this man
into my company. I would have send down a verbal answer; but Betty
refuse to carry any message, which should prohibit his visit I. so
I be oblige either to see he, or to write to he. I write therefore
an answer, of which I shall send you the rough draught. and now my heart
ache for what may follow from it; for I hear a great hurry below.
***
to ROGER SOLMES, ESQ.
SIR,
whatever you have to communicate to I, which concern my honour, may as
well be do by write as by word of mouth. if Mr. Lovelace be any of
my concern, I know not that therefore he ought to be yours: for the usage
I receive on your account [I must think it so!] be so harsh, that be
there not such a man in the world as Mr. Lovelace, I would not wish to
see Mr. Solmes, no, not for one half-hour, in the way he be pleased to be
desirous to see I. I never can be in any danger from Mr. Lovelace,
(and, of consequence, cannot be affect by any of your discovery,) if
the proposal I make be accept. you have be acquaint with it no
doubt. if not, be pleased to let my friend know, that if they will rid
I of my apprehension of one gentleman, I will rid they of their of
another: and then, of what consequence to they, or to I, will it be,
whether Mr. Lovelace be a good man, or a bad? and if not to they, nor to
I, I see not how it can be of any to you. but if you do, I have nothing
to say to that; and it will be a christian part if you will expostulate
with he upon the error you have discover, and endeavour to make he
as good a man, as, no doubt, you be yourself, or you would not be so
ready to detect and expose he.
excuse I, Sir: but, after my former letter to you, and your ungenerous
perseverance; and after this attempt to avail yourself at the expense of
another man's character, rather than by your own proper merit; I see not
that you can blame any asperity in she, whom you have so largely
contribute to make unhappy.
CL. HARLOWE.
***
SUNDAY NIGHT.
my father be for come up to I, in great wrath, it seem; but be
persuade to the contrary. my aunt Hervey be permit to send I this
that follow.--quick work, my dear!
to MISS clarissa HARLOWE
NIECE,
every body be now convince, that nothing be to be do with you by way
of gentleness or persuasion. your mother will not permit you to stay in
the house; for your father be so incense by your strange letter to his
friend, that she know not what will be the consequence if you do. so,
you be command to get ready to go to your uncle Antony's out of hand.
your uncle think he have not deserve of you such an unwillingness as you
shew to go to his house.
you donot know the wickedness of the man for whose sake you think it
worth while to quarrel with all your friend.
you must not answer I. there will be no end of that.
you know not the affliction you give to every body; but to none more than
to
your affectionate aunt,
DOROTHY HERVEY.
***
forbid to write to my aunt, I take a bold liberty. I write a few line
to my mother; beseech she to procure I leave to throw myself at my
father's foot, and her, if I must go, (nobody else present,) to beg
pardon for the trouble I have give they both, and their blessing; and to
receive their command as to my removal, and the time for it, from their
own lip.
'what new boldness this!--take it back; and bid she learn to obey,' be
my mother's angry answer, with my letter return, unopened.
but that I might omit nothing, that have an appearance of duty, I write a
few line to my father himself, to the same purpose; beg, that he
would not turn I out of his house, without his blessing. but this, tear
in two piece, and unopened, be bring I up again by Betty, with an
air, one hand hold up, the other extend, the torn letter in her open
palm; and a see here!--what a sad thing be this!--nothing will do but
duty, Miss!--Your papa say, let she tell I of deeds!--I'll receive no
word from she. and so he tear the letter, and fling the piece at my
head.
so desperate be my case, I be resolve not to stop even at this
repulse. I take my pen, and address myself to my uncle Harlowe,
enclose that which my mother have return unopened, and the tear
unopened one send to my father; have first hurry off a transcript for
you.
my uncle be go home, and it be deliver to he just as he step
into his chariot. what may be the fate of it therefore I cannot know
till to-morrow.
the following be a copy of it:
to JOHN HARLOWE, ESQ.
MY DEAR and ever-HONOURED UNCLE,
I have nobody now but you, to whom I can apply, with hope, so much as to
have my humble address open and read. my aunt Hervey have give I
command which I want to have explain; but she have forbid I write to
she. Hereupon I take the liberty to write to my father and mother. you
will see, Sir, by the torn one, and by the other, (both unopened,) what
have be the result. this, Sir, perhaps you already know: but, as you
know not the content of the disgrace letter, I beseech you to read
they both, that you may be a witness for I, that they be not fill
with either complaint or expostulation, nor contain any thing
undutiful. give I leave to say, Sir, that if deaf-eared anger will
neither grant I a hearing, nor, what I write a perusal, some time hence
the hard-heartedness may be regret. I beseech you, dear, good Sir, to
let I know what be mean by send I to my uncle Antony's house,
rather than to your, or to my aunt Hervey's, or else-where? if it be
for what I apprehend it to be, life will not be supportable upon the
term. I beg also to know, when I be to be turn out of doors!--my
heart strongly give I, that if once I be compel to leave this house,
I never shall see it more.
it become I, however, to declare, that I write not this through
perverseness, or in resentment. God know my heart, I do not! but the
treatment I apprehend I shall meet with, if carry to my other uncle's,
will, in all probability, give the finishing stroke to the distress,
the undeserved distress I will be bold to call they, of
your once highly-favour,
but now unhappy,
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XVI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
MONDAY MORNING, MARCH 27.
this morning early my uncle Harlowe come hither. he send up the enclosed
very tender letter. it have make I wish I could oblige he. you will
see how Mr. Solmes's ill quality be glossed over in it. what
blemish die affection hide!--but perhaps they may say to I, what
fault do antipathy bring to light!
be pleased to send I back this letter of my uncle by the first return.
SUNDAY NIGHT, or rather MINDAY MORNING.
I must answer you, though against my own resolution. every body love
you; and you know they do. the very ground you walk upon be dear to
most of we. but how can we resolve to see you? there be no standing
against your look and language. it be our love make we decline to see
you. how can we, when you be resolve not to do what we be resolve
you shall do? I never, for my part, love any creature, as I love you
from your infancy till now. and indeed, as I have often say, never be
there a young creature so deserving of our love. but what be come to you
now! alas! alas! my dear kinswoman, how you fail in the trial!
I have read the letter you enclose. at a proper time, I may shew they
to my brother and sister: but they will receive nothing from you at
present.
for my part, I could not read your letter to I, without be unmanned.
how can you be so unmoved yourself, yet so able to move every body else?
how could you send such a letter to Mr. Solmes? fie upon you! how
strangely be you alter!
then to treat your brother and sister as you do, that they donot care to
write to you, or to see you! donot you know where it be write, that
soft answer turn away wrath? but if you will trust to you sharp-point
wit, you may wound. yet a club will beat down a sword: and how can you
expect that they who be hurt by you will not hurt you again? be this
the way you use to take to make we all adore you as we did?--no, it be
your gentleness of heart and manner, that make every body, even
stranger, at first sight, treat you as a lady, and call you a lady,
though not bear one, while your eld sister have no such distinction
pay she. if you be envy, why should you sharpen envy, and file up
its tooth to an edge?--you see I write like an impartial man, and as one
that love you still.
but since you have display your talent, and spar nobody, and move
every body, without be move, you have but make we stand the close
and firm together. this be what I liken to an embattle phalanx,
once before. your aunt hervey forbid your writing for the same reason
that I must not countenance it. we be all afraid to see you, because we
know we shall be make as so many fool. Nay, your mother be so afraid of
you, that once or twice, when she think you be come to force
yourself into her presence, she shut the door, and lock herself in,
because she know she must not see you upon your term, and you be
resolve you will not see she upon her.
resolve but to oblige we all, my dearest Miss Clary, and you shall see
how we will clasp you every one by turn to our rejoice heart. if the
one man have not the wit, and the part, and the person, of the other, no
one breathing have a bad heart than that other: and be not the love of
all your friend, and a sober man (if he be not so polished) to be
prefer to a debauchee, though ever so fine a man to look at? you have
such talent that you will be adore by the one: but the other have as
much advantage in those respect, as you have yourself, and will not set
by they one straw: for husband be sometimes jealous of their authority
with witty wife. you will have in one, a man of virtue. have you not
be so rudely affront to he, he would have make your ear tingle
with what he could have tell you of the other.
come, my dear niece, let I have the honour of do with you what no
body else yet have be able to do. your father, mother, and I, will
divide the pleasure, and the honour, I will again call it, between we;
and all past offence shall be forgive; and Mr. Solmes, we will engage,
shall take nothing amiss hereafter, of what have pass.
he know, he say, what a jewel that man will have, who can obtain your
favour; and he will think light of all he have suffer, or shall suffer,
in obtain you.
dear, sweet creature, oblige we: and oblige we with a grace. it must be
do, whether with a grace or not. I do assure you it must. you must
not conquer father, mother, uncle, every body: depend upon that.
I have set up half the night to write this. you do not know how I be
touch at read your, and write this. yet will I be at Harlowe-
place early in the morning. so, upon read this, if you will oblige we
all, send I word to come up to your apartment: and I will lead you down,
and present you to the embrace of every one: and you will then see, you
have more of a brother and sister in they both, than of late your
prejudice will let you think you have. this from one who use to love
to style himself,
your paternal uncle,
JOHN HARLOWE.
***
in about an hour after this kind letter be give I, my uncle send up to
know, if he should be a welcome visiter, upon the term mention in his
letter? he bid Betty bring he down a verbal answer: a write one, he
say, would be a bad sign: and he bid she therefore not to bring a
letter. but I have just finish the enclose transcription of one I have
be write. she make a difficulty to carry it; but be prevail upon
to oblige I by a token which these Mrs. Betty's cannot withstand.
DEAR and HONOURED SIR,
how you rejoice I by your condescend goodness!--so kind, so paternal
a letter!--so soothe to a wounded heart; and of late what I have be
so little use to!--how be I affect with it! tell I not, dear Sir, of
my way of writing: your letter have more move I, than I have be able
to move any body!--it have make I wish, with all my heart, that I could
entitle myself to be visit upon your own term; and to be lead down to
my father and mother by so good and so kind an uncle.
I will tell you, dear Uncle, what I will do to make my peace. I have
no doubt that Mr. Solmes, upon consideration, would greatly prefer my
sister to such a strange averse creature as I. his chief, or one of his
chief motif in his address to I, be, as I have reason to believe, the
contiguity of my grandfather's estate to his own. I will resign it; for
ever I will resign it: and the resignation must be good, because I will
never marry at all. I will make it over to my sister, and her heir for
ever. I shall have no heir, but my brother and she; and I will receive,
as of my father's bounty, such an annuity (not in lieu of the estate, but
as of his bounty) as he shall be pleased to grant I, if it be ever so
small: and whenever I disoblige he, he to withdraw it, at his pleasure.
will this not be accepted?--surely it must--surely it will!--I beg of
you, dear Sir, to propose it; and second it with your interest. this
will answer every end. my sister have a high opinion of Mr. Solmes. I
never can have any in the light he be propose to I. but as my sister's
husband, he will be always entitle to my respect; and shall have it.
if this be accept, grant I, Sir, the honour of a visit; and do I then
the inexpressible pleasure of lead I down to the foot of my honour
parent, and they shall find I the most dutiful of child; and to the
arm of my brother and sister, and they shall find I the most obliging
and most affectionate of sister.
I wait, Sir, for your answer to this proposal, make with the whole heart of
your dutiful and most obliged niece,
CL. HARLOWE.
MONDAY NOON.
I hope this will be accept: for Betty tell I, that my uncle Antony
and my aunt Hervey be send for; and not Mr. Solmes; which I look upon as
a favourable circumstance. with what cheerfulness will I assign over
this envy estate!--what a much more valuable consideration shall I part
with it for!--the love and favour of all my relation! that love and
favour, which I use for eighteen year together to rejoice in, and be
distinguish by!--And what a charming pretence will this afford I of
break with Mr. Lovelace! and how easily will it possibly make he to
part with I!
I find this morning, in the usual place, a letter from he, in answer, I
suppose, to mine of Friday, which I deposit not till Saturday. but I
have not open it; nor will I, till I see what effect this new offer
will have.
let I but be permit to avoid the man I hate; and I will give up with
cheerfulness the man I could prefer. to renounce the one, be I really
to value he as much as you seem to imagine, can give but a temporary
concern, which time and discretion will alleviate. this be a sacrifice
which a child owe to parent and friend, if they insist upon its being
make. but the other, to marry a man one cannot endure, be not only a
dishonest thing, as to the man; but it be enough to make a creature who
wish to be a good wife, a bad or indifferent one, as I once write to
the man himself: and then she can hardly be either a good mistress, or a
good friend; or any thing but a discredit to her family, and a bad
example to all around she.
methink I be loth, in the suspense I be in at present, to deposit this,
because it will be leave you in one as great: but have be prevent
by Betty's officiousness twice, I will now go down to my little poultry;
and, if I have an opportunity, will leave it in the usual place, where I
hope to find something from you.
LETTER XVII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
MONDAY AFTERNOON, MARCH 27.
I have deposit my narrative down to this day noon; but I hope soon to
follow it with another letter, that I may keep you as little a while as
possible in that suspense which I be so much affect by at this moment:
for my heart be disturb at ever foot I hear stir; and at every door
below that I hear open or shut.
they have be all assemble some time, and be in close debate I
believe: but can there be room for long debate upon a proposal, which, if
accept, will so effectually answer all their views?--can they insist a
moment long upon my have Mr. Solmes, when they see what sacrifice I
be ready to make, to be free from his addresses?--oh! but I suppose the
struggle be, first, with Bella's nicety, to persuade she to accept of the
estate, and of the husband; and next, with her pride, to take she
sister's refusal, as she once phrase it!--Or, it may be, my brother be
insist upon equivalent for his reversion in the estate: and these
sort of thing take up but too much the attention of some of our family.
to these, no doubt, one or both, it must be owe, that my proposal
admit of so much consideration.
I want, methink, to see what Mr. Lovelace, in his letter, say. but I
will deny myself this piece of curiosity till that which be raise by my
present suspense be answered.--Excuse I, my dear, that I thus trouble
you with my uncertainty: but I have no employment, nor heart, if I have,
to pursue any other but what my pen afford I.
MONDAY evening.
would you believe it?--betty, by anticipation, tell I, that I be to be
refuse. I be 'a vile, artful creature. every body be too good to I.
my uncle Harlowe have be take in, thatbe the phrase. they know how it
would be, if he either write to I, or see I. he have, however, be
make ashamed to be so wrought upon. a pretty thing truly in the eye of
the world it would be, be they to take I at my word! it would look as
if they have treat I thus hardly, as I think it, for this very purpose.
my peculiar, particularly Miss Howe, would give it that turn; and I
myself could mean nothing by it, but to see if it would be accept in
order to strengthen my own argument against Mr. Solmes. it be amazing,
that it could admit of a moment's deliberation: that any thing could be
suppose to be do in it. it be equally against law and equity: and a
fine security Miss Bella would have, or Mr. Solmes, when I could resume
it when I would!--my brother and she my heir! o the artful creature!--i
to resolve to live single, when Lovelace be so sure of I--and every
where declare as much!--and can whenever he please, if my husband,
claim under the will!--then the insolence--the confidence--[as Betty
mincingly tell I, that one say; you may easily guess who] that she, who
be so justly in disgrace for downright rebellion, should pretend to
prescribe to the whole family!--should name a husband for her eld
sister!--what a triumph would her obstinacy go away with, to delegate her
command, not as from a prison, as she call it, but as from her throne,
to her elder and better; and to her father and mother too!--amazing,
perfectly amazing, that any body could argue upon such a proposal as
this! it be a master-stroke of finesse--it be I in perfection!--
surely my uncle Harlowe will never again be so take in!'
all this be the readier tell I, because it be against I, and would
tease and vex I. but as some of this fine recapitulation imply, that
somebody speak up for I. I be curious to know who it be. but Betty
would not tell I, for fear I should have the consolation to find that
all be not against I.
but do you not see, my dear, what a sad creature she be whom you honour
with your friendship?--you could not doubt your influence over I: why
do you not take the friendly liberty I have always take with you, and
tell I my fault, and what a specious hypocrite I be? for, if my
brother and sister could make such discovery, how be it possible, that
fault to enormous [you could see other, you think, of a more secret
nature!] could escape you penetrate eye?
well, but now, it seem, they be debate how and by whom to answer I:
for they know not, nor be they to know, that Mrs. Betty have tell I all
these fine thing. one desire to be excuse, it seem: another choose
not to have any thing to say to I: another have enough of I: and of
write to so ready a scribbler, there will be no end.
thus be those impute qualification, which use so lately to gain I
applause, now become my crime: so much do disgust and anger alter the
property of thing.
the result of their debate, I suppose, will somehow or other be
communicate to I by-and-by. but let I tell you, my dear, that I be
make so desperate, that I be afraid to open Mr. Lovelace's letter, lest,
in the humour I be in, I should do something (if I find it not
exceptionable) that may give I repentance as long as I live.
MONDAY NIGHT.
this moment the following letter be bring I by Betty.
MONDAY, 5 O'CLOCK
MISS CUNNING-ONE,
your fine new proposal be think unworthy of a particular answer. your
uncle Harlowe be ashamed to be so take in. have you no new fetch for
your uncle Antony? go round with we, child, now your handbe in. but I
be bid to write only one line, that you might not complain, as you do
of your worthy sister, for the freedom you provoke: it be this--prepare
yourself. to-morrow you go to my uncle Antony's. thatbe all, child.
JAMES HARLOWE.
I be vex to the heart at this: and immediately, in the warmth of
resentment, write the enclose to my uncle Harlowe; who it seem stay
here this night.
to JOHN HARLOWE, ESQ.
MONDAY NIGHT.
HONOURED SIR,
I find I be a very sad creature, and do not know it. I write not to my
brother. to you, Sir, I write. from you I hope the honour of an answer.
no one revere her uncle more than I do. nevertheless, between uncle and
niece, exclude not such a hope: and I think I have not make a proposal
that deserve to be treat with scorn.
forgive I, Sir--my heart be full. perhaps one day you may think you
have be prevail upon (for that be plainly the case!) to join to treat
I--as I do not deserve to be treat. if you be ashamed, as my brother
hint, of have express any return tenderness to I, God help I!
I see I have no mercy to expect from any body! but, Sir, from your pen
let I have an answer; I humbly implore it of you. till my brother can
recollect what belong to a sister, I will not take from he no answer to
the letter I write to you, nor any command whatever.
I move every body!--this, Sir, be what you be pleased to mention. but
whom have I moved?--one person in the family have more moving way than I
have, or he could never so undeservedly have make every body ashame to
show tenderness to a poor distressed child of the same family.
return I not this with contempt, or tear, or unanswered, I beseech you.
my father have a title to do that or any thing by his child: but from no
other person in the world of your sex, Sir, ought a young creature of
mine (while she preserve a supplicate spirit) to be so treat.
when what I have before write in the humblest strain have meet with such
strange construction, I be afraid that this unguarded scrawl will be
very ill receive. but I beg, Sir, you will oblige I with one line, be
it ever so harsh, in answer to my proposal. I still think it ought to be
attend to. I will enter into the most solemn engagement to make it
valid by a perpetual single life. in a word, any thing I can do, I will
do, to be restore to all your favour. More I cannot say, but that I
be, very undeservedly,
a most unhappy creature.
Betty scruple again to carry this letter; and say, she should have
anger; and I should have it return in scrap and bit.
I must take that chance, say I: I only desire that you will deliver it
as direct.
sad doing! very sad! she say, that young lady should so violently set
themselves against their duty.
I tell she, she should have the liberty to say what she please, so she
would but be my messenger that one time: and down she go with it.
I bid she, if she could, slide it into my uncle's hand, unseen; at least
unseen by my brother or sister, for fear it should meet, through their
good office, with the fate she have bespeak for it.
she would not undertake for that, she say.
I be now in expectation of the result. but have so little ground to
hope for their favour or mercy, I open Mr. Lovelace's letter.
I would send it to you, my dear (as well as those I shall enclose) by
this conveyance; but not be able at present to determine in what
manner I shall answer it, I will give myself the trouble of abstract
it here, while I be wait for what may offer from the letter just
carry down.
'he lament, as usual, my ill opinion of he, and readiness to believe
every thing to his disadvantage. he put into plain English, as I
suppose he would, my hint, that I might be happy, if, by any rashness
he might be guilty of to Solmes, he should come to an untimely end
himself.'
he be concern, he say, 'that the violence he have express on his
extreme apprehensiveness of lose I, should have make he guilty of any
thing I have so much reason to resent.'
he own, 'that he be passionate: all good-natured man, he say, be so;
and a sincere man cannot hide it.' but appeal to I, 'whether, if any
occasion in the world could excuse the rashness of his expression, it
would not be his present dreadful situation, through my indifference, and
the malice of his enemy.'
he say, 'he have more reason than ever, from the content of my last, to
apprehend, that I shall be prevail upon by force, if not by fair mean,
to fall in with my brother's measure; and see but too plainly, that I
be prepare he to expect it.
'upon this presumption, he supplicate, with the utmost earnestness, that
I will not give way to the malice of his enemy.
'solemn vow of reformation, and everlaste truth and obligingness, he
make; all in the style of despond humility: yet call it a cruel turn
upon he, to impute his protestation to a consciousness of the necessity
there be for make they from his bad character.
'he despise himself, he solemnly protest, for his past folly. he
thank God he have see his error; and nothing but my more particular
instruction be want to perfect his reformation.
'he promise, that he will do every thing that I shall think he can do
with honour, to bring about a reconciliation with my father; and even
will, if I insist upon it, make the first overture to my brother, and
treat he as his own brother, because he be mine, if he will not by new
affront revive the remembrance of the past.
'he beg, in the most earnest and humble manner, for one half-hour's
interview; undertaking by a key, which he own he have to the garden-door,
lead into the coppice, as we call it, (if I will but unbolt the door,)
to come into the garden at night, and wait till I have an opportunity to
come to he, that he may re-assure I of the truth of all he write, and
of the affection, and, if needful, protection, of all his family.
'he presume not, he say, to write by way of menace to I; but if I
refuse he this favour, he know not (so desperate have some stroke in
my letter make he) what his despair may make he do.'
he ask I, 'determine, as my friend be, and far as they have already
go, and declare they will go, what can I propose to do, to avoid have
Mr. Solmes, if I be carry to my uncle Antony's; unless I resolve to
accept of the protection he have offer to procure I; or except I will
escape to London, or elsewhere, while I can escape?'
he advise I, 'to sue to your mother, for her private reception of I;
only till I can obtain possession of my own estate, and procure my
friend to be reconcile to I; which he be sure they will be desirous to
be, the moment I be out of their power.'
he apprize I, [it be still my wonder, how he come by this
intelligence!] 'that my friend have write to my cousin Morden to
represent matter to he in their own partial way; nor doubt they to
influence he on their side of the question.
'that all this shew I have but one way; if none of my friend or
intimate will receive I.
'if I will transport he with the honour of my choice of this one way,
settlement shall be draw, with proper blank, which I shall fill up
as I please. let he but have my command from my own mouth, all my
doubt and scruple from my own lip; and only a repetition, that I will
not, on any consideration, be Solmes's wife; and he shall be easy. but,
after such a letter as I have write, nothing but an interview can make
he so.' he beseech I therefore, 'to unbolt the door, as that very
night; or, if I receive not this time enough, this night;--and he will,
in a disguise that shall not give suspicion who he be, if he should be
see, come to the garden door, in hope to open it with his key; nor will
he have any other lodge than in the coppice both night; watch every
wakeful hour for the propitious unbolting, unless he have a letter with my
order to the contrary, or to make some other appointment.'
this letter be date yesterday: so he be there last night, I suppose;
and will be there this night; and I have not write a line to he: and
now it be too late, be I determine what to write.
I hope he will not go to Mr. Solmes.--I hope he will not come hither.--if
he do either, I will break with he for ever.
what have I to do with these headstrong spirit? I wish I have never--but
what signify wishing?--I be strangely perplexed: but I need not have
tell you this, after such a representation of my situation.
LETTER XVII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
TUESDAY morning, 7 O'CLOCK
my uncle have vouchsafe to answer I. these that follow be the content
of his letter; but just now bring I, although write last night--late
I suppose.
MONDAY NIGHT.
MISS CLARY,
since you be grow such a bold challenger, and teach we all our duty,
though you will not practise your own, I must answer you. nobody want
you estate from you. be you, who refuse ever body's advice, to
prescribe a husband to your sister? your letter to Mr. Solmes be
inexcusable. I blame you for it before. your parent will be obey.
it be fit they should. your mother have nevertheless prevail to have
your go to your uncle Antony's put off till Thursday: yet own you
deserve not that, or any other favour from she. I will receive no more
of your letter. you be too artful for I. you be an ungrateful and
unreasonable child: must you have your way paramount to every body's?
how be you alter.
your displeased uncle,
JOHN HARLOWE.
***
to be carry away on Thursday--to the moated house--to the chapel--to
solme! how can I think of this!--they will make I desperate.
TUESDAY MORNING, 8 O'CLOCK.
I have another letter from Mr. Lovelace. I open it with the
expectation of its be fill with bold and free complaint, on my not
write to prevent his two night watch, in weather not extremely
agreeable. but, instead of complaint, he be 'full of tender concern
lest I may have be prevent by indisposition, or by the close
confinement which he have frequently caution I that I may expect.'
he say, 'he have be in different disguise loiter about our garden
and park wall, all the day on Sunday last; and all Sunday night be
wander about the coppice, and near the back door. it rain; and he
have get a great cold, attend with feverishness, and so hoarse, that he
have almost lose his voice.'
why do he not flame out in his letter?--treate as I be treat by my
friend, it be dangerous to be lay under the sense of an obligation to
an addresser's patience; especially when such a one suffer in health for
my sake.
'he have no shelter, he say, but under the great overgrown ivy, which
spread wildly round the head of two or three oakling; and that be
soon wet through.'
you remember the spot. you and I, my dear, once think ourselves
oblige to the natural shade which those ivy-cover oakling afford
we, in a sultry day.
I cannot help say, I be sorry he have suffer for my sake; but 'tis his
own seeking.
his letter be date last night at eight: 'and, indispose as he be, he
tell I that he will watch till ten, in hope of my give he the
meeting he so earnestly request. and after that, he have a mile to walk
to his horse and servant; and four mile then to ride to his inn.'
he own, 'that he have an intelligencer in our family; who have fail he
for a day or two past: and not know how I do, or how I may be treat,
his anxiety be increase.'
this circumstance give I to guess who this intelligencer be: Joseph
Leman: the very creature employ and confide in, more than any other,
by my brother.
this be not an honourable way of proceed in Mr. Lovelace. do he
learn this infamous practice of corrupt the servant of other family
at the french court, where he reside a good while?
I have be often jealous of this Leman in my little airing and poultry-
visit. doubly obsequious as he be always to I, I have think he my
brother's spy upon I; and although he oblige I by his hastening out of
the garden and poultry-yard, whenever I come into either, have wonder,
that from his report my liberty of those kind have not be
abridge.* so, possibly, this man may be bribe by both, yet betray
both. worthy view want not such obliquity as these on either side.
an honest mind must rise into indignation both at the traitor-maker and
the traitor.
* Mr. Lovelace account for this, Vol. I, Letter XXXV.
'he press with the utmost earnestness for an interview. he would not
presume, he say, to disobey my last personal command, that he should
not endeavour to attend I again in the wood-house. but say, he can
give I such reason for my permit he to wait upon my father or
uncle, as he hop will be approve by I: for he cannot help observe,
that it be no more suitable to my own spirit than to his, that he, a man
of fortune and family, should be oblige to pursue such a clandestine
address, as would only become a vile fortune-hunter. but, if I will give
my consent for his visit I like a man, and a gentleman, no ill
treatment shall provoke he to forfeit his temper.
'Lord M. will accompany he, if I please: or Lady Betty Lawrance will
first make the visit to my mother, or to my aunt Hervey, or even to my
uncle, if I choose it. and such term shall be offer, as shall have
weight upon they.
'he beg, that I will not deny he make a visit to Mr. Solmes. by all
thatbe good, he vow, that it shall not be with the least intention
either to hurt or affront he; but only to set before he, calmly and
rationally, the consequence that may possibly flow from so fruitless a
perseverance, as well as the ungenerous folly of it, to a mind as noble
as mine. he repeat his own resolution to attend my pleasure, and Mr.
Morden's arrival and advice, for the reward of his own patience.
'it be impossible, he say, but one of these method must do. Presence,
he observe, even of a dislike person, take off the edge of resentment
which absence whet, and make keen.
'he therefore most earnestly repeat his importunity for the
supplicate interview.' he say, 'he have business of consequence in
London: but cannot stir from the inconvenient spot where he have for some
time reside, in disguise unworthy of himself, until he can be
absolutely certain, that I shall not be prevail upon, either by force
or otherwise; and until he find I deliver from the insult of my
brother. nor ought this to be an indifferent point to one, for whose
sake all the world report I to be use unworthily. but one remark, he
say, he cannot help make: that do my friend know the little favour I
shew he, and the very great distance I keep he at, they would have no
reason to confine I on his account. and another, that they themselves
seem to think he entitle to a different usage, and expect that he
receive it; when, in truth, what he meet with from I be exactly what
they wish he to meet with, except in the favour of my correspondence
I honour he with; upon which, he say, he put the high value, and
for the sake of which he have submit to a thousand indignity.
'he renew his profession of reformation. he be convince, he say,
that he have already run a long and dangerous course; and that it be high
time to think of return. it must be from proper conviction, he say,
that a person who have live too gay a life, resolve to reclaim, before
age or suffering come upon he.
'all generous spirit, he observe, hate compulsion. upon this
observation he dwell; but regret, that he be likely to owe all his
hope to this compulsion; this injudicious compulsion, he justly call
it; and none to my esteem for he. although he presume upon some merit
--in this implicit regard to my will--in the bearing the daily
indignity offer not only to he, but to his relation, by my brother
--in the nightly watching, his present indisposition make he mention,
or he have not debase the nobleness of his passion for I, by such a
selfish instance.'
I cannot but say, I be sorry the man be not well.
I be afraid to ask you, my dear, what you would have do, thus situate.
but what I have do, I have do. in a word, I write, 'that I would, if
possible, give he a meeting to-morrow night, between the hour of nine
and twelve, by the ivy summer-house, or in it, or near the great cascade,
at the bottom of the garden; and would unbolt the door, that he might
come in by his own key. but that, if I find the meeting impracticable,
or should change my mind, I would signify as much by another line; which
he must wait for until it be dark.'
TUESDAY, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.
I be just return from deposit my billet. how diligent be this man!
it be plain he be in wait: for I have walk but a few pace, after I
have deposit it, when, my heart misgive I, I return, to have take
it back, in order to reconsider it as I walk, and whether I should or
should not let it go. but I find it go.
in all probability, there be but a brick wall, of a few inch thick,
between Mr. Lovelace and I, at the very time I put the letter under the
brick!
I be come back dissatisfied with myself. but I think, my dear, there can
be no harm in meet he. if I do not, he may take some violent
measure. what he know of the treatment I meet with in malice to he,
and with the view to frustrate all his hope, may make he desperate.
his behaviour last time I see he, under the disadvantage of time and
place, and surprised as I be, give I no apprehension of any thing but
discovery. what he require be not unreasonable, and cannot affect my
future choice and determination: it be only to assure he from my own
lip, that I never will be the wife of a man I hate. if I have not an
opportunity to meet without hazard or detection, he must once more bear
the disappointment. all his trouble, and mine too, be owe to his
faulty character. this, although I hate tyranny and arrogance in all
shape, make I think less of the risque he run, and the fatigue he
undergo, than otherwise I should do; and still less, as my suffering
(derive from the same source) be great than his.
Betty confirm this intimation, that I must go to my uncle's on Thursday.
she be send on purpose to direct I to prepare myself for go, and to
help I to get every thing up in order for my removal.
LETTER XIX
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY, three O'CLOCK, MARCH 28.
I have mention several time the pertness of Mrs. Betty to I; and now,
have a little time upon my hand, I will give you a short dialogue that
pass just now between we. it may, perhaps, be a little relief to you
from the dull subject with which I be perpetually tease you.
as she attend I at dinner, she take notice, that Nature be satisfied
with a very little nourishment: and thus she complimentally prove it--
For, Miss, say she, you eat nothing; yet never look more charmingly in
your life.
as to the former part of your speech, Betty, say I, you observe well;
and I have often think, when I have see how healthy the child of
the labour poor look, and be, with empty stomach, and hardly a good
meal in a week, that God Almighty be very kind to his creature, in this
respect, as well as in all other in make much not necessary to the
support of life; when three part in four of his creature, if it be,
would not know how to obtain it. it put I in mind of two proverbial
sentence which be full of admirable meaning.
what, pray, Miss, be they? I love to hear you talk, when you be so
sedate as you seem now to be.
the one be to the purpose we be speak of: poverty be the mother of
health. and let I tell you, Betty, if I have a well appetite, and be
to encourage it, with so little rest, and so much distress and
persecution, I donot think I should be able to preserve my reason.
therebe no inconvenience but have its convenience, say Betty, give I
proverb for proverb. but what be the other, Madam?
that the pleasure of the mighty be not obtain by the tear of the
poor. it be but reasonable, therefore, methink, that the plenty of the
one should be follow by distemper; and that the indigence of the other
should be attend with that health, which make all its other
discomfort light on the comparison. and hence a third proverb, Betty,
since you be an admirer of proverb: well a hare-foot than none at
all; that be to say, than not to be able to walk.
she be mightily take with what I say: see, return she, what a fine
thing scholarship is!--I, say she, have always, from a girl, a taste for
reading, though it be but in Mother Goose, and concern the fairy
[and then she take genteelly a pinch of snuff]: could but my parent have
let go as fast as I pull, I should have be a very happy creature.
very likely, you would have make great improvement, Betty: but as it be,
I cannot say, but since I have the favour of your attendance in this
intimate manner, I have hear smart thing from you, than I have hear
at table from some of my brother's fellow-collegian.
your servant, dear Miss; drop I one of her good courtesy: so fine
a judge as you are!--it be enough to make one very proud. then with
another pinch--I cannot indeed but say, bridle upon it, that I have
hear famous scholar often and often say very silly thing: thing I
should be ashamed myself to say; but I think they do it out of
humility, and in condescension to those who have not their learning.
that she might not be too proud, I tell she, I would observe, that the
liveliness or quickness she so happily discover in herself, be not so
much an honour to she, as what she owe to her sex; which, as I have
observe in many instance, have great advantage over the other, in all
the power that relate to imagination. and hence, Mrs. Betty, youwill
take notice, as I have of late have opportunity to do, that your own
talent at repartee and smartness, when it have something to work upon,
display itself to more advantage, than could well be expect from one
whose friend, to speak in your own phrase, could not let go so fast as
you pull.
the wench give I a proof of the truth of my observation, in a manner
still more alert than I have expect: if, say she, our sex have so much
advantage in smartness, it be the less to be wonder at, that you, Miss,
who have have such an education, should outdo all the man and woman too,
that come near you.
bless I, Betty, say I, what a proof do you give I of your wit and your
courage at the same time! this be outdo yourself. it would make
young lady less proud, and more apprehensive, be they generally
attend by such smart servant, and their mouth permit to be
unlocked upon they as yours have be lately upon me.--but, take away,
Mrs. Betty.
why, Miss, you have eat nothing at all--I hope you be not displeased
with your dinner for any thing I have say.
no, Mrs. Betty, I be pretty well use to your freedom now, you know.
--I be not displeased in the main, to observe, that, be the succession
of modern fine lady to be extinct, it might be supply from those whom
they place in the next rank to themselves, their chamber-maid and
confidant. your young mistress have contribute a great deal to this
quickness of your. she always prefer your company to mine. as you
pull, she let go; and so, Mrs. Betty, you have gain by her
conversation what I have lose.
why, Miss, if you come to that, nobody say well thing than Miss
Harlowe. I could tell you one, if I please, upon my observe to she,
that you live of late upon the air, and have no stomach to any thing; yet
look as charmingly as ever.
I dare say, it be a very good-natured one, Mrs. Betty! do you then
please that I shall hear it?
only this, Miss, that your stomachfulness have swallow up your stomach;
and, that obstinacy be meat, drink, and clothe to you.
ay, Mrs. Betty; and do she say this?--i hope she laugh when she say
it, as she do at all her good thing, as she call they. it be very
smart, and very witty. I wish my mind be so much at ease, as to aim at
be witty too. but if you admire such sententious saying, Iwill help
you to another; and that be, encouragement and approbation make people
show talent they be never suspect to have; and this will do both for
mistress and maid. and another Iwill furnish you with, the contrary of
the former, that will do only for I: that persecution and discouragement
depress ingenuous mind, and blunt the edge of lively imagination. and
hence may my sister's brilliancy and my stupidity be both account for.
Ingenuous, you must know, Mrs. Betty, and ingenious, be two thing; and
I would not arrogate the latter to myself.
Lord, Miss, say the foolish girl, you know a great deal for your year.
--you be a very learn young lady!--what pity--
none of your pittie, Mrs. Betty, I know what youwould say. but tell I, if
you can, be it resolve that I shall be carry to my uncle Antony's on
Thursday?
I be willing to reward myself for the patience she have make I exercise,
by get at what intelligence I could from she.
why, Miss, seat herself at a little distance (excuse my sit down)
with the snuff-box tap very smartly, the lid open, and a pinch take
with a dainty finger and thumb, the other three finger distendedly bent,
and with a fine flourish--I cannot but say, that it be my opinion, you
will certainly go on Thursday; and this noless foless, as I have hear my
young lady say in FRENCH.
whether I be willing or not willing, you mean, I suppose, Mrs. Betty?
you have it, Miss.
well but, Betty, I have no mind to be turn out of door so suddenly.
do you think I could not be permit to tarry one week long?
how can I tell, Miss?
o Mrs. Betty, you can tell a great deal, if you please. but here I be
forbid writing to any one of my family; none of it now will come near I;
nor will any of it permit I to see they: how shall I do to make known my
request, to stay here a week or fortnight long?
why, Miss, I fancy, if you be to shew a compliable temper, your friend
would shew a compliable one too. but would you expect favour, and grant
none?
smartly put, Betty! but who know what may be the result of my being
carry to my uncle Antony's?
who know, miss!--why any body will guess what may be the result.
as how, Betty?
as how! repeat the pert wench, why, Miss, you will stand in your own
light, as you have hitherto do: and your parent, as such good parent
ought, will be obey.
if, Mrs. Betty, I have not be use to your ought, and to have my duty
lay down to I by your oraculous wisdom I should be apt to stare at the
liberty of you speech.
you seem angry, Miss. I hope I take no unbecoming liberty.
if thou really think thou dost not, thy ignorance be more to be
pity, than thy pertness resent. I wish thou wouldst leave I to
myself.
when young lady fall out with their own duty, it be not much to be
wonder at, that they be angry at any body who do theirs.
thatbe a very pretty saying, Mrs. Betty!--I see plainly what thy duty be
in thy notion, and be oblige to those who teach it thee.
every body take notice, Miss, that you can say very cut word in a
cool manner, and yet not call name, as I have know some gentlefolk as
well as other do when in a passion. but I wish you have permit
'Squire Solmes to see you: he would have tell you such story of 'squire
Lovelace, as you would have turn your heart against he for ever.
and know you any of the particular of those sad story?
indeed I donot; but youwill hear all at your uncle Antony's, I suppose;
and a great deal more perhaps than you will like to hear.
let I hear what I will, I be determine against Mr. Solmes, be it to
cost I my life.
if you be, Miss, the Lord have mercy on you! for what with this letter
of yours to 'Squire Solmes, whom they so much value, and what with their
antipathy to 'Squire Lovelace, whom they hate, they will have no patience
with you.
what will they do, Betty? they willnot kill I? what will they do?
kill you! no!--but you will not be suffer to stir from thence, till
you have comply with your duty. and no pen and ink will be allow you
as here; where they be of opinion you make no good use of it: nor would
it be allow here, only as they intend so soon to send you away to your
uncle's. no-body will be permit to see you, or to correspond with
you. what far will be do, I cannot say; and, if I could, it may not
be proper. but you may prevent all, by one word: and I wish you would,
Miss. all then would be easy and happy. and, if I may speak my mind, I
see not why one man be not as good as another: why, especially, a sober
man be not as good as a rake.
well, Betty, say I, sigh, all thy impertinence go for nothing. but
I see I be destine to be a very unhappy creature. yet I will venture
upon one request more to they.
and so, quite sick of the pert creature and of myself, I retire to my
closet, and write a few line to my uncle Harlowe, notwithstanding his
prohibition; in order to get a reprieve from be carry away so soon
as Thursday next, if I must go. and this, that I might, if comply
with, suspend the appointment I have make with Mr. Lovelace; for my heart
misgive I as to meet he; and that more and more; I know not why.
under the superscription of the letter, I write these word: 'pray, dear
Sir, be pleased to give this a reading.'
this be a copy of what I write:
TUESDAY AFTERNOON.
HONOURED SIR,
let I this once be hear with patience, and have my petition grant. it
be only, that I may not be hurry away so soon as next Thursday.
why should the poor girl be turn out of door so suddenly, so
disgracefully? procure for I, Sir, one fortnight's respite. in that
space of time, I hope you will all relent. my mamma shall not need to
shut her door in apprehension of see her disgraceful child. I will
not presume to think of enter her presence, or my papabe without
leave. one fortnight's respite be but a small favour for they to grant,
except I be to be refuse every thing I ask; but it be of the high
import to my peace of mind. procure it for I, therefore, dearest Sir;
and you will exceedingly oblige
your dutiful, though greatly afflict niece,
CL. HARLOWE.
I send this down: my uncle be not go: and he now stay to know the
result of the question put to I in the enclose answer which he have
give to mind.
your go to your uncle's be absolutely conclude upon for next
Thursday. nevertheless, your mother, second by Mr. Solmes, plead so
strongly to have you indulge, that your request for a delay will be
comply with, upon one condition; and whether for a fortnight, or a
short time, that will depend upon yourself. if you refuse the
condition, your mother declare she will give over all further
intercession for you.--nor do you deserve this favour, as you put it upon
our yield to you, not you to we.
this condition be, that you admit of a visit from Mr. Solmes, for one
hour, in company of your brother, your sister, or your uncle Antony,
choose who you will.
if you comply not, go next Thursday to a house which be become strangely
odious to you of late, whether you get ready to go or not. answer
therefore directly to the point. no evasion. name your day and hour.
Mr. Solmes will neither eat you, nor drink you. let we see, whether we
be to be comply with in any thing, or not.
JOHN HARLOWE.
***
after a very little deliberation, I resolve to comply with this
condition. all I fear be, that Mr. Lovelace's intelligencer may inform
he of it; and that his apprehension upon it may make he take some
desperate resolution: especially as now (have more time give I here)
I think to write to he to suspend the interview he be possibly so sure
of. I send down the following to my uncle:
HONOURED SIR,
although I see not what end the propose condition can answer, I comply
with it. I wish I could with every thing expect of I. if I must name
one, in whose company I be to see the gentleman, and that one not my
mamma, whose presence I could wish to be honour by on the occasion, let
my uncle, if he please, be the person. if I must name the day, (a long
day, I doubt, will not be permit I,) let it be next Tuesday.
the hour, four in the afternoon. the place either the ivy summer-house,
or in the little parlour I use to be permit to call mine.
be pleased, Sir, nevertheless, to prevail upon my mamma, to vouchsafe I
her presence on the occasion.
I be, Sir, your ever-dutiful
CL. HARLOWE.
a reply be just send I. I think it become my averseness to this
meeting, to name a distant day: but I do not expect they would have
comply with it. so here be one week gain!
this be the reply:
you have do well to comply. we be willing to think the good of every
slight instance of duty from you. yet have you seem to consider the
day as an evil day, and so put if far off. this nevertheless be grant
you, as no time need to be lose, if you be as generous after the day, as
we be condescend before it. let I advise you, not to harden your
mind; nor take up your resolution beforehand. Mr. Solmes have more awe,
and even terror, at the thought of see you, than you can have at the
thought of see he. his motive be love; let not yours be hatre. my
brother Antony will be present, in hope you will deserve well of he, by
behave well to the friend of the family. see you use he as such.
your mother have permission to be there, if she think fit: but say, she
would not for a thousand pound, unless you would encourage she beforehand
as she wish to be encourage. one hint I be to give you mean time. it
be this: to make a discreet use of your pen and ink. methink a young
creature of niceness should be less ready to write to one man, when she
be design to be another's.
this compliance, I hope, will produce great, and then the peace of the
family will be restore: which be what be heartily wish by
your love uncle,
JOHN HARLOWE.
unless it be to the purpose our heart be set upon, you need not write
again.
***
this man have more terror at see I, than I can have at see him!--
how can that be? if he have half as much, he would not wish to see me!--
his motive love!--Yes, indeed! love of himself! he know no other; for
love, that deserve the name, seek the satisfaction of the beloved
object more than its own. weigh in this scale, what a profanation be
this man guilty of!
not to take up my resolution beforehand!--that advice come too late.
but I must make a discreet use of my pen. that, I doubt, as they have
manage it, in the sense they mean it, be as much out of my power, as the
other.
but write to one man, when I be design for another!--what a shocking
expression be that!
repent of my appointment with Mr. Lovelace before I have this favour
grant I, you may believe I hesitate not a moment to revoke it now
that I have gain such a respite. accordingly, I write, 'that I find it
inconvenient to meet he, as I have intend: that the risque I should run
of a discovery, and the mischief that might flow from it, could not be
justify by any end that such a meeting could answer: that I find one
certain servant more in my way, when I take my morning and evening
airing, than any other: that the person who might reveal the secret of
a family to he, might, if opportunity be give he, betray I, or he,
to those whom it be his duty to serve: that I have not be use to a
conduct so faulty, as to lay myself at the mercy of servant: and be
sorry he have measure to pursue, that make step necessary in his own
opinion, which, in mine, be very culpable, and which no end could
justify: that thing draw towards a crisis between my friend and I,
an interview could avail nothing; especially as the method by which this
correspondence be carry on be not suspect, and he could write all
that be in his mind to write: that I expect to be at liberty to judge
of what be proper and fit upon this occasion: especially as he might be
assure, that I would soon choose death, than Mr. Solmes.'
TUESDAY NIGHT.
I have deposit my letter to Mr. Lovelace. threaten as thing look
against I, I be much well pleased with myself for decline the
interview than I be before. I suppose he will be a little out of humour
upon it, however: but as I reserve to myself the liberty of change my
mind; and as it be easy for he to imagine there may be reason for it
within-door, which he cannot judge of without; besides those I have
suggest, which of themselves be of sufficient weight to engage his
acquiescence; I should think it strange, if he acquiesce not on this
occasion, and that with a cheerfulness, which may shew I, that his last
letter be write from his heart: for, if he be really so much concerned
at his past fault, as he pretend, and have for some time pretend, must
he not, of course, have correct, in some degree, the impetuosity of his
temper? the first step to reformation, as I conceive, be to subdue
sudden gust of passion, from which frequently the great evil arise,
and to learn to bear disappointment. if the irascible passion cannot
be overcome, what opinion can we have of the person's power over those to
which bad habit, join to great temptation, give strong force?
Pray, my dear, be so kind as to make inquiry, by some safe hand, after
the disguise Mr. Lovelace assume at the inn he put up at in the poor
village of Neale, he call it. if it be the same I take it to be, I
never know it be considerable enough to have a name; nor that it have an
inn in it.
as he must, to be so constantly near we, be much there, I would be glad
to have some account of his behaviour; and what the people think of he.
in such a length of time, he must by his conduct either give scandal, or
hope of reformation. pray, my dear, humour I in this inquiry. I have
reason for it, which you shall be acquaint with another time, if the
result of the inquiry discover they not.
LETTER XX
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
WEDNESDAY MORNING, NINE O'CLOCK.
I be just return from my morning walk, and already have receive a
letter from Mr. Lovelace in answer to mine deposit last night. he must
have have pen, ink, and paper with he; for it be write in the coppice;
with this circumstance: on one knee, kneel with the other. not from
reverence to the write to, however, as youwill find!
well we be instruct early to keep these man at distance. an
undesigne open heart, where it be loth to disoblige, be easily draw
in, I see, to oblige more than ever it design. it be too apt to govern
itself by what a bold spirit be encourage to expect of it. it be very
difficult for a good-natured young person to give a negative where it
disesteem not.
our heart may harden and contract, as we gain experience, and when we
have smart perhaps for our easy folly: and so they ought, or we should
be upon very unequal term with the world.
excuse these grave reflection. this man have vex I heartily. I see
his gentleness be art: fierceness, and a temper like what I have be
too much use to at home, be nature in he. nothing, I think, shall
ever make I forgive he; for, surely, there can be no good reason for
his impatience on an expectation give with reserve, and revocable.--I so
much to suffer through he; yet, to be treat as if I be oblige to
bear insult from him!--
but here you will be pleased to read his letter; which I shall enclose.
to MISS clarissa HARLOWE
good GOD!
what be now to become of me!--how shall I support this disappointment!--
no new cause!--On one knee, kneel with the other, I write!--my foot
benumb with midnight wandering through the heavy dew that ever
fall: my wig and my linen dripping with the hoar frost dissolve on
them!--day but just break--Sun not rise to exhale--may it never rise
again!--unless it bring healing and comfort to a benighted soul! in
proportion to the joy you have inspire (ever lovely promis!) in such
proportion be my anguish!
o my beloved creature!--but be not your very excuse confession of
excuse inexcusable? I know not what I write!--that servant in your
way!* by the great God of Heaven, that servant be not, dare not, could
not, be in your way!--curse upon the cool caution that be pleased to
deprive I of an expectation so transport!
* see Letter XIX.
and be thing draw towards a crisis between your friend and you?--Is
not this a reason for I to expect, the rather to expect, the promise
interview?
can I write all that be in my mind, say you?--impossible!--not the
hundredth part of what be in my mind, and in my apprehension, can I
write!
oh! the wavering, the changeable sex!--but can Miss Clarissa harlowe--
forgive I, Madam!--I know not what I write!
yet, I must, I do, insist upon your promise--or that you will condescend
to find well excuse for the failure--or convince I, that strong
reason be impose upon you, than those you offer.--a promise once give
(upon deliberation give,) the promise only can dispense with; except in
case of a very apparent necessity impose upon the promiser, which
leave no power to perform it.
the first promise you ever make I! life and death perhaps depend
upon it--my heart despond from the barbarous method resolve to be
take with you in malice to I!
you would soon choose death than Solmes. (how my soul spurn the
competition!) o my beloved creature, what be these but words?--whose
words?--sweet and ever adorable--what?--promise breaker--must I call
you?--How shall I believe the asseveration, (your suppose duty in the
question! persecution so flaming!--hatred to I so strongly avow!)
after this instance of you so lightly dispense with your promise?
if, my dear life! you would prevent my distraction, or, at least,
distracted consequence, renew the promise hope!--My fate be indeed upon
its crisis.
forgive I, dear creature, forgive me!--I know I have write in too
much anguish of mind!--Writing this, in the same moment that the just
dawn light have impart to I the heavy disappointment.
I dare not re-peruse what I have write. I must deposit it. it may
serve to shew you my distracted apprehension that this disappointment be
but a prelude to the great of all.--Nor, have here any other paper,
be I able to write again, if I would, on this gloomy spot. (Gloomy be my
soul; and all nature around I partake of my gloom!)--i trust it
therefore to your goodness--if its fervour excite your displeasure rather
than your pity, you wrong my passion; and I shall be ready to apprehend,
that I be intend to be the sacrifice of more miscreant than one! [have
patience with I, dearest creature!--I mean Solmes and your brother
only.] but if, exert your usual generosity, you will excuse and re
appoint, may that God, whom you profess to serve, and who be the God of
truth and of promise, protect and bless you, for both; and for restore
to himself, and to hope,
your ever-adore,
yet almost despond,
LOVELACE!
Ivy Cavern, in the Coppice--
Day but just break.
***
this be the answer I shall return:
WEDNESDAY MORNING.
I be amazed, Sir, at the freedom of your reproach. press and tease,
against convenience and inclination, to give you a private meeting, be I
to be thus challenge and upbraided, and my sex reflect upon, because I
think it prudent to change my mind?--a liberty I have reserve to
myself, when I make the appointment, as you call it. I want not
instance of your impatient spirit to other people: yet may it be happy
for I, that I can have this new one; which show, that you can as little
spare I, when I pursue the dictate of my own reason, as you do other,
for act up to theirs. two motif you must be govern by in this
excess. the one my easiness; the other your own presumption. since you
think you have find out the first, and have show so much of the last
upon it, I be too much alarm, not to wish and desire, that your letter
of this day may conclude all the trouble you have from, or for,
your humble servant,
CL. HARLOWE.
***
I believe, my dear, I may promise myself your approbation, whenever I
write or speak with spirit, be it to whom it will. indeed, I find but
too much reason to exert it, since I have to deal with people, who
govern themselves in their conduct to I, not by what be fit or decent,
right or wrong, but by what they think my temper will bear. I have, till
very lately, be praise for mine; but it have always be by those who
never give I opportunity to return the compliment to they. some people
have act, as if they think forbearance on one side absolutely
necessary for they and I to be upon good term together; and in this
case have ever take care rather to owe that obligation than to lay it.
you have hint to I, that resentment be not natural to my temper, and
that therefore it must soon subside: it may be so with respect to my
relation; but not to Mr. Lovelace, I assure you.
WEDNESDAY NOON, MARCH 29.
we cannot always answer for what we can do: but to convince you, that I
can keep my above resolution, with regard to Mr. Lovelace, angry as my
letter be, and three hour since it be write, I assure you, that I
repent it not; nor will soften it, although I find it be not take away.
and yet I hardly ever before do any thing in anger, that I do not
repent in half an hour; and question myself in less that that time,
whether I be right or wrong.
in this respite till Tuesday, I have a little time to look about I, as I
may say, and to consider of what I have to do, and can do. and Mr.
Lovelace's insolence will make I go very home with myself. not that I
think I can conquer my aversion to Mr. Solmes. I be sure I cannot. but,
if I absolutely break with Mr. Lovelace, and give my friend convince
proof of it, who know but they will restore I to their favour, and let
their view in relation to the other man go off by degrees?--or, at
least, that I may be safe till my cousin Morden arrive: to whom, I
think, I will write; and the rather, as Mr. Lovelace have assure I, that
my friend have write to he to make good their side of the question.
but, with all my courage, I be exceedingly apprehensive about the Tuesday
next, and about what may result from my steadfastness; for steadfast I be
sure I shall be. they be resolve, I be tell, to try every mean to
induce I to comply with what they be determine upon. and I be
resolve to do all I can to avoid what they would force I to do. a
dreadful contention between parent and child!--each hop to leave the
other without excuse, whatever the consequence may be.
what can I do? advise I, my dear. something be strangely wrong
somewhere! to make parent, the most indulgent till now, seem cruel in a
child's eye; and a daughter, till within these few week, think
unexceptionably dutiful, appear, in their judgment, a rebel!--oh! my
ambitious and violent brother! what may he have to answer for to both!
be pleased to remember, my dear, that your last favour be date on
Saturday. this be Wednesday: and none of mine have be take away
since. donot let I want you advice. my situation be extremely
difficult.--but I be sure you love I still: and not the less on that
account. Adieu, my beloved friend.
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XXI
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY morning, DAY-BREAK, MARCH 30.
an accident, and not remissness, have occasion my silence.
my mother be send for on Sunday night by her cousin Larkin, whom I
mention in one of my former, and who be extremely earnest to see she.
this poor woman be always afraid of death, and be one of those weak
person who imagine that the making of their will must be an undoubted
forerunner of it.
she have always say, when urge to the necessary work, that whenever she
make it, she should not live long after; and, one would think, imagine
she be under an obligation to prove her word: for, though she have be
long bed-rid, and be, in a manner, wear out before, yet she think
herself well, till she be persuade to make it: and from that moment,
remember what she use to prognosticate, (her fear, help on what
she fear, as be often the case, particularly in the small-pox,) grow
worse; and have it in her head once to burn her will, in hope to grow
well upon it.
she send my mother word, that the doctor have give she over: but that
she could not die till she see she. I tell my mother, that if she wish
she a chance for recovery, she should not, for that reason, go. but go
she would; and, what be bad, would make I go with she; and that, at
an hour's warning; for she say nothing of it to I, till she be rise
in the morning early, resolve to return again at night. have there be
more time for argumentation, to be sure I have not go; but as it be,
there be a kind of necessity that my preparation to obey she, should, in
a manner, accompany her command.--a command so much out of the way, on
such a solemn occasion! and this I represent: but to no purpose: there
never be such a contradict girl in the world--my wisdom always make
she a fool!--but she would be oblige this time, proper or improper.
I have but one way of accounting for this sudden whim of my mother; and
that be this--she have a mind to accept of Mr. Hickman's offer to escort
her:--and I verily believe [I wish I be quite sure of it] have a mind to
oblige he with my company--as far as I know, to keep I out of bad.
for, would you believe it?--as sure as you be alive, she be afraid for
her favourite Hickman, because of the long visit your Lovelace, though so
much by accident, make I in her absence, last time she be at the same
place. I hope, my dear, you be not jealous too. but indeed I now-and-
then, when she tease I with praise which Hickman cannot deserve, in
return fall to praise those quality and personality in Lovelace,
which the other never will have. indeed I do love to tease a little bit,
that I do.--My mamma's girl--I have like to have say.
as you know she be as passionate, as I be pert, you will not wonder to be
tell, that we generally fall out on these occasion. she fly from I,
at the long run. it would be undutiful in I to leave she first--and
then I get an opportunity to pursue our correspondence.
for, now I be ramble, let I tell you, that she do not much favour
that;--for two reason, I believe:--one, that I donot shew she all that
pass between we; the other, that she think I harden your mind against
your duty, as it be call. and with she, for a reason at home, as I
have hint more than once, parent cannot do wrong; child cannot
oppose, and be right. this oblige I now-and-then to steal an hour, as
I may say, and not let she know how I be employ.
you may guess from what I have write, how averse I be to comply with
such an unreasonable stretch of motherly authority. but it come to be a
test of duty; so I be oblige to yield, though with a full persuasion of
be in the right.
I have always your reproof upon these occasion: in your late letter
strong than ever. a good reason why, youwill say, because more deserve
than ever. I thank you kindly for your correction. I hope to make
correction of it. but let I tell you, that your stripe, whether
deserve or not, have make I sensible, deep than the skin--but of this
another time.
it be Monday afternoon before we reach the old lady's house. that
fiddle, parade fellow [you know who I mean] make we wait for he two
hour, and I to go to a journey I dislike! only for the sake of have a
little more tawdry upon his housing; which he have hurry his sadler to
put on, to make he look fine, be to escort his dear Madam Howe, and
her fair daughter. I tell he, that I suppose he be afraid, that the
double solemnity in the case (that of the visit to a die woman, and
that of his own countenance) would give he the appearance of an
undertaker; to avoid which, he run into as bad an extreme, and I doubt
would be take for a mountebank.
the man be confound. he take it as strongly, as if his conscience
give assent to the justice of the remark: otherwise he would have bear
it well; for he be use enough to this sort of treatment. I think he
would have cry. I have heretofore observe, that on this side of the
contract, he seem to be a mighty meek sort of creature. and though I
should like it in he hereafter perhaps, yet I cannot help despise he
a little in my heart for it now. I believe, my dear, we all love your
blustering fellow well; could we but direct the bluster, and bid it roar
when and at whom we please.
the poor man look at my mother. she be so angry, (my air upon it,
and my opposition to the journey, have all help,) that for half the way
she would not speak to I. and when she do, it be, I wish I have not
bring you! you know not what it be to condescend. it be my fault, not
Mr. Hickman's, that you be here so much against your will. have you no
eye for this side of the chariot?
and then he fare the well from she, as he always do, for fare
bad from I: for there be, how do you now, Sir? and how do you now,
Mr. Hickman? as he amble now on this side of the chariot, now on that,
steal a prim look at I; her head half out of the chariot, kindly
smiling, as if marry to the man but a fortnight herself: while I always
see something to divert myself on the side of the chariot where the
honest man be not, be it but old Robin at a distance, on his roan
Keffel.
our courtship-day, they say, be our good day. Favour destroy
courtship. distance increase it. its essence be distance. and, to see
how familiar these man-wretch grow upon a smile, what an awe they be
strike into when we frown; who would not make they stand off? who would
not enjoy a power, that be to be short-lived?
donot chide I one bit for this, my dear. it be in nature. I cannot help
it. Nay, for that matter, I love it, and wish not to help it. so spare
your gravity, I beseech you on this subject. I set up not for a perfect
character. the man will bear it. and what need you care? my mother
overbalance all he suffer: and if he think himself unhappy, he ought
never to be otherwise.
then do he not deserve a fit of the sullen, think you, to make we lose
our dinner for his parade, since in so short a journey my mother would
not bait, and lose the opportunity of come back that night, have the old
lady's condition permit it? to say nothing of be the cause, that
my mamma be in the glout with her poor daughter all the way.
at our alighting I give he another dab; but it be but a little one.
yet the manner, and the air, make up (as I intend they should) for that
defect. my mother's hand be kindly put into his, with a simpering
altogether bridal; and with another how do you now, sir?--all his plump
muscle be in motion, and a double charge of care and obsequiousness
fidget up his whole form, when he offer to I his officious palm. my
mother, when I be a girl, always bid I hold up my head. I just then
remember her command, and be dutiful--I never hold up my head so
high. with an avert supercilious eye, and a reject hand, half
flourishing--I have no need of help, Sir!--You be in my way.
he run back, as if on wheel; with a face excessively mortify: I have
thought else to have follow the too-gentle touch, with a declaration,
that I have as many hand and foot as himself. but this would have be
tell he a piece of news, as to the latter, that I hope he have not the
presumption to guess at.
***
we find the poor woman, as we think, at the last gasp. have we come
soon, we could not have get away as we intend, that night. you see I
be for excuse the man all I can; and yet, I assure you, I have not so
much as a conditional liking to he. my mother sit up most part of the
night, expect every hour would have be her poor cousin's last. I
bear her company till two.
I never see the approach of death in a grown person before; and be
extremely shocked. death, to one in health, be a very terrible thing.
we pity the person for what she suffer: and we pity ourselves for what
we must some time hence in like sort suffer; and so be doubly affected.
she hold out till Tuesday morning, eleven. as she have tell my mother
that she have leave she an executrix, and she and I ring and mourning; we
be employ all that day in matter of the will [by which, by the way,
my own cousin Jenny Fynnett be handsomely provide for], so that it be
Wednesday morning early, before we could set out on our return.
it be true, we get home (have no housing to stay for) by noon: but
though I send Robin away before he dismount, (who bring I back a
whole packet, down to the same Wednesday noon,) yet be I really so
fatigued, and shock, as I must own, at the hard death of the old lady;
my mother likewise (who have no reason to dislike this world) be
indispose from the same occasion; that I could not set about write
time enough for Robin's return that night.
but have recruit my spirit, my mother have also have a good night,
I arise with the dawn, to write this, and get it dispatch time enough
for your breakfast air; that your suspense might be as short as
possible.
***
I will soon follow this with another. I will employ a person directly to
find out how Lovelace behave himself at his inn. such a busy spirit
must be traceable.
but, perhaps, my dear, you be indifferent now about he, or his
employment; for this request be make before he mortally offend you.
nevertheless, I will have inquiry make. the result, it be very probable,
will be of use to confirm you in your present unforgive temper.--And
yet, if the poor man [shall I pity he for you, my dear?] should be
deprive of the great blessing any man on earth can receive, and to
which he have the presumption, with so little merit, to aspire; he will
have run great risk; catch great cold; hazard fever; sustain the
high indignity; brave the inclemency of sky, and all for--
nothing!--will not this move your generosity (if nothing else) in his
favour!--poor Mr. Lovelace!--
I would occasion no throb; nor half-throb; no flash of sensibility, like
lightning dart in, and as soon suppress by a discretion that no one
of the sex ever before could give such an example of--I would not, I say;
and yet, for such a trial of you to yourself, rather than as an
impertinent overflow of raillery in your friend, as money-taker try a
suspect guinea by the sound, let I on such a supposition, sound you,
by repeat, poor Mr. Lovelace!
and now, my dear, how be it with you? how do you now, as my mother say
to Mr. Hickman, when her pert daughter have make he look sorrowful?
LETTER XXII
MR. HICKMAN, to MRS. HOWE
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 29.
MADAM,
it be with infinite regret that I think myself oblige, by pen and ink,
to repeat my apprehension, that it be impossible for I ever to obtain a
share in the affection of your beloved daughter. o that it be not too
evident to every one, as well as to myself, even to our very servant,
that my love for she, and my assiduity, expose I rather to her scorn
[forgive I, Madam, the hard word!] than to the treatment due to a man
whose proposal have meet with your approbation, and who love she above
all the woman in the world!
well might the merit of my passion be doubt, if, like Mr. Solmes to the
truly-admirably Miss Clarissa Harlowe, I could continue my address to
Miss Howe's distaste. yet what will not the discontinuance cost I!
give I leave, nevertheless, dearest, worthiest Lady, to repeat, what I
tell you, on Monday night, at Mrs. Larkin's, with a heart even burst
with grief, that I want not the treatment of that day to convince I,
that I be not, nor ever can be, the object of Miss Howe's voluntary
favour. what hop can there be, that a lady will ever esteem, as a
husband, the man, whom, as a lover, she despise? will not every act of
obligingness from such a one, be construe as an unmanly tameness of
spirit, and entitle he the more to her disdain?--my heart be full:
forgive I, if I say, that Miss Howe's treatment of I do no credit
either to her education, or fine sense.
since, then, it be too evident, that she cannot esteem I; and since, as
I have hear it justly observe by the excellent Miss Clarissa Harlowe,
that love be not a voluntary passion; would it not be ungenerous to
subject the dear daughter to the displeasure of a mother so justly fond
of she; and you, Madam, while you be so good as to interest yourself in
my favour, to uneasiness? and why, be I even to be sure, at last, of
succeed by mean of your kind partiality to I, should I wish to make
the well-beloved of my soul unhappy; since mutual must be our happiness,
or misery for life the consequence to both?
my good wish will for ever attend the dear, the ever-dear lady! may she
nuptial be happy! they must be so, if she marry the man she can honour
with her love. yet I will say, that whoever be the happy, the thrice-
happy man, he can never love she with a passion more ardent and more
sincere than mine.
Accept, dear Madam, of my most grateful thank for a distinction that have
be the only support of my presumption in an address I be oblige, as
utterly hopeless, to discontinue. a distinction, on which (and not on my
own merit) I have entirely rely; but which, I find, can avail I
nothing. to the last hour of my life, it will give I pleasure to think,
that have your favour, your recommendation, be of sufficient weight to
conquer what seem to be an invincible aversion, I have be the happy
of man.
I be, dear Madam, with inviolable respect,
your ever oblige and faithful
humble servant,
CHARLES HICKMAN.
LETTER XXIII
MRS. HOWE, to CHARLES HICKMAN, ESQ.
THURSDAY, MARCH 30.
I cannot but say, Mr. Hickman, but you have cause to be dissatisfy--to
be out of humour--to be displease--with Nancy--but, upon my word; but
indeed--what shall I say?--yet this I will say, that you good young
gentleman know nothing at all of our sex. shall I tell you--but why
should I? and yet I will, that if Nancy do not think well of you upon
the main, she be too generous to treat you so freely as she does.--Don't
you think she have courage enough to tell I, she would not see you, and
to refuse at any time see you, as she know on what account you come,
if she have not something in her head favourable to you?--Fie! that I be
force to say thus much in writing, when I have hint it to you twenty
and twenty time by word of mouth!
but if you be so indifferent, Mr. Hickman--if you think you can part
with she for her skittish trick--if my interest in your favour--why, Mr.
Hickman, I must tell you that my Nancy be worth bear with. if she be
foolish--what be that owe to?--is it not to her wit? let I tell you,
Sir, you cannot have the convenience without the inconvenience. what
workman love not a sharp tool to work with? but be there not more
danger from a sharp tool than from a blunt one? and what workman will
throw away a sharp tool, because it may cut his finger? Wit may be
liken to a sharp tool. and there be something very pretty in wit, let
I tell you. often and often have I be force to smile at her arch
turn upon I, when I could have beat she for they. and, pray, donot I
bear a great deal from her?--And why? because I love she. and would you
not wish I to judge of your love for she by my own? and would not you
bear with her?--don't you love she (what though with another sort of
love?) as well as I do? I do assure you, Sir, that if I think you do
not--well, but it be plain that you don't!--and be it plain that you
don't?--Well, then, you must do as you think well.
well might the merit of your passion be doubt, you say, if, like Mr.
Solmes--fiddle-faddle!--why, you be a captious man, I think!--has Nancy
be so plain in her repulse of you as Miss Clary Harlowe have be to
Mr. solmes?--doe Nancy love any man well than you, although she may
not shew so much love to you as you wish for?--if she do, let I tell
you, she would have let we all hear of it.--what idle comparison then!
but it mat be you be tired out. it may be you have see somebody else--
it may be you would wish to change mistress with that gay wretch Mr.
Lovelace. it may be too, that, in that case, Nancy would not be sorry to
change lover--the truly-admirable Miss Clarissa Harlowe!--Good lack!-
but take care, Mr. Hickman, that you do not praise any woman live, let
she be as admirable and as excellent as she will, above your own
mistress. no polite man will do that, surely. and take care too, that
you do not make she or I think you be in earnest in your anger--just
though it may be, as anger only--I would not for a thousand pound, that
Nancy should know that you can so easily part with she, if you have the
love for she which you declare you have. be sure, if you be not
absolutely determined, that you do not so much as whisper the content of
this your letter to your own heart, as I may say.
her treatment of you, you say, do no credit either to her education or
fine sense. very home put, truly! nevertheless, so say i. but be not
her the disgrace, more than your? I can assure you, that every body
blame she for it. and why do they blame her?--why? because they think
you merit well treatment at her hand: and be not this to your credit?
who but pity you, and blame he? do the servant, who, as you observe,
see her skittish air, disrespect you for they? do they not, at such
time, look concerned for you? be they not then doubly officious in
their respect and service to you?--i have observe, with pleasure, that
they be.
but you be afraid you shall be think tame, perhaps, when marry.
that you shall not be though manly enough, I warrant!--and this be poor
Mr. Howe's fear. and many a tug do this lordly fear cost we both, God
knows!--many more than need, I be sure:--and more than ought to have
be, have he know how to bear and forbear; as be the duty of those who
pretend to have most sense--and, pray, which would you have to have most
sense, the woman or the man?
well, Sir, and now what remain, if you really love Nancy so well as you
say you do?--why, I leave that to you. you may, if you please, come to
breakfast with I in the morning. but with no full heart, nor resent
look, I advise you; except you can brave it out. that have I, when
provoke, do many a time with my husband, but never do I get any thing
by it with my daughter: much less will you. of which, for your
observation, I think fit to advise you. as from
your friend,
Anabella Howe.
LETTER XXIV
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY MORNING.
I will now take some notice of your last favour. but be so far
behind-hand with you, must be brief.
in the first place, as to your reproof, thus shall I discharge myself of
that part of my subject. be it likely, think you, that I should avoid
deserve they now-and-then, occasionally, when I admire the manner in
which you give I your rebuke, and love you the well for they? and
when you be so well entitle to give they? for what fault can you
possibly have, unless your relation be so kind as to find you a few to
keep their many in countenance?--But they be as king to I in this, as
to you; for I may venture to affirm, that any one who should read your
letter, and would say you be right, would not on read mine, condemn
I for they quite wrong.
your resolution not to leave your father's house be right--if you can
stay in it, and avoid be Solmes's wife.
I think you have answer Solmes's letter, as I should have answer it.
--Will you not compliment I and yourself at once, by say, that be
right?
you have, in your letter to your uncle and the rest, do all that you
ought to do. you be wholly guiltless of the consequence, be it what it
will. to offer to give up your estate!--that would not I have do! you
see this offer stagger they: they take time to consider of it. they
make my heart ache in the time they take. I be afraid they would have
take you at your word: and so, but for shame, and for fear of Lovelace,
I dare say they would. you be too noble for they. this, I repeat, be
an offer I would not have make. let I beg of you, my dear, never to
repeat the temptation to they.
I freely own to you, that their usage of you upon it, and Lovelace's
different treatment of you* in his letter receive at the same time,
would have make I his, past redemption. the duce take the man, I be
go to say, for not have so much regard to his character and moral,
as would have entirely justify such a step in a CLARISSA, persecute as
she be!
* see Letter XVIII.
I wonder not at your appointment with he. I may far touch upon some
part of this subject by-and-by.
pray--pray--I pray you now, my dear friend, contrive to send your
Betty Banes to me!--doe the Coventry Act extend to woman, know ye?--the
least I will do, shall be, to send her home well souse in and drag
through our deep horsepond. Iwill engage, if I get her hither, that
she will keep the anniversary of her deliverance as long as she live.
I wonder not at Lovelace's saucy answer, saucy as it really be.* if he
love you as he ought, he must be vex at so great a disappointment.
the man must have be a detestable hypocrite, I think, have he not show
his vexation. your expectation of such a christian command of temper in
he, in a disappointment of this nature especially, be too early by
almost half a century in a man of his constitution. but nevertheless I
be very far from blame you for your resentment.
* see Letter XX.
I shall be all impatience to know how this matter end between you and
he. but a few inch of brick wall between you so lately; and now such
mountains?--And you think to hold it?--May be so!
you see, you say, that the temper he shew in his letter be not natural
to he. wretched creeper and insinuator! yet when opportunity serve,
as insolent encroachers!--This very Hickman, I make no doubt, would be as
saucy as your Lovelace, if he dare. he have not half the arrogant
bravery of the other, and can well hide his horn; thatbe all. but
whenever he have the power, depend upon it, he will butt at one as
valiantly as the other.
if ever I should be persuade to have he, I shall watch how the
obsequious lover go off; and how the imperative husband come upon he;
in short, how he ascend, and how I descend, in the matrimonial wheel,
never to take my turn again, but by fit and start like the feeble
struggle of a sink state for its die liberty.
all good-natured man be passionate, say Mr. Lovelace. a pretty plea to
a beloved object in the plenitude of her power! as much as to say,
'greatly I value you, Madam, I will not take pain to curb my passion to
oblige you'--methink I should be glad to hear from Mr. Hickman such a
plea for good nature as this.
indeed, we be too apt to make allowance for such temper as early
indulgence have make uncontroulable; and therefore habitually evil. but
if a boisterous temper, when under obligation, be to be thus allow for,
what, when the table be turn, will it expect? you know a husband,
who, I fancy, have some of these early allowance make for he: and you
see that neither himself nor any body else be the happy for it.
the suiting of the temper of two person who be to come together, be a
great matter: and there should be boundary fix between they, by
consent as it be, beyond which neither should go: and each should hold
the other to it; or there would probably be encroachment in both. to
illustrate my assertion by a very high, and by a more manly (as some
would think it) than womanly instance--if the boundary of the three
estate that constitute our political union be not know, and
occasionally assert, what would become of the prerogative and
privilege of each? the two branch of the legislature would encroach
upon each other; and the executive power would swallow up both.
but if two person of discretion, youwill say, come together--
Ay, my dear, thatbe true: but, if none but person of discretion be to
marry--and would it not surprise you if I be to advance, that the
person of discretion be generally single?--such person be apt to
consider too much, to resolve.--are not you and I compliment as such?
--And would either of we marry, if the fellow and our friend would let
we alone?
but to the former point;--had Lovelace make his address to I, (unless
indeed I have be take with a liking for he more than conditional,) I
would have forbid he, upon the first passionate instance of his good-
nature, as he call it, ever to see I more: 'Thou must bear with I,
honest friend, might I have say [have I condescend to say any thing to
he] an hundred time more than this:--Begone, therefore!--i bear with no
passion that be predominant to that thou have pretend for I!'
but to one of your mild and gentle temper, it would be all one, be you
marry, whether the man be a Lovelace or a Hickman in his spirit.--You
be so obediently principle, that perhaps you would have tell a mild
man, that he must not entreat, but command; and that it be beneath he
not to exact from you the obedience you have so solemnly vow to he at
the altar.--I know of old, my dear, your meek regard to that little
piddle part of the marriage-vow which some prerogative-monger foist
into the office, to make that a duty, which he know be not a right.
our way of training-up, you say, make we need the protection of the
brave. very true: and how extremely brave and gallant be it, that this
brave man will free we from all insult but those which will go near
to our heart; that be to say, his own!
how artfully have Lovelace, in the abstract you give I of one of his
letter, calculate to your meridian! generous spirit hate compulsion!
--He be certainly a deep creature by much than once we think he. he
know, as you intimate, that his own wild prank cannot be conceal: and
so own just enough to palliate (because it teach you not to be
surprised at) any new one, that may come to your ear; and then, truly,
he be, however faulty, a mighty ingenuous man; and by no mean an
hypocrite: a character the most odious of all other, to our sex, in a
lover, and the least to be forgive, be it only because, when detect,
it make we doubt the justice of those praise which we be willing to
believe he think to be our due.
by mean of this suppose ingenuity, Lovelace obtain a praise, instead
of a merit dispraise; and, like an absolve confessionaire, wipe off
as he go along one score, to begin another: for an eye favourable to
he will not see his fault through a magnifying glass; nor will a woman,
willing to hope the good, forbear to impute it to ill-will and prejudice
all that charity can make so imputable. and if she even give credit to
such of the unfavourable imputation as may be too flagrant to be
doubt, she will be very apt to take in the future hope, which he
inculcate, and which to question would be to question her own power, and
perhaps merit: and thus may a woman be inclined to make a slight, even a
fancy merit atone for the most glaring vice.
I have a reason, a new one, for this preachment upon a text you have
give I. but, till I be well inform, I will not explain myself. if
it come out, as I shrewdly suspect it will, the man, my dear, be a devil;
and you must rather think of--I protest I have like to have say Solmes
than he.
but let this be as it will, shall I tell you, how, after all his
offence, he may creep in with you again?
I will. thus then: it be but to claim for himself the good-natured
character: and this, grant, will blot out the fault of passionate
insolence: and so he will have nothing to do, but this hour to accustom
you to insult; the next, to bring you to forgive he, upon his
submission: the consequence must be, that he will, by this teazing, break
your resentment all to piece: and then, a little more of the insult, and
a little less of the submission, on his part, will go down, till nothing
else but the first will be see, and not a bit of the second. you will
then be afraid to provoke so offensive a spirit: and at last will be
bring so prettily, and so audibly, to pronounce the little reptile word
OBEY, that it will do one's heart good to hear you. the muscovite wife
then take place of the manage mistress. and if you doubt the
progression, be pleased, my dear, to take your mother's judgment upon it.
but no more of this just now. your situation be become too critical to
permit I to dwell upon these sort of topic. and yet this be but an
affect levity with I. my heart, as I have heretofore say, be a
sincere sharer in all your distress. my sun-shine dart but through a
drizly cloud. my eye, be you to see it, when it seem to you so
gladden, as you mention in a former, be more than ready to overflow,
even at the very passage perhaps upon which you impute to I the
archness of exultation.
but now the unheard-of cruelty and perverseness of some of your friend
[relation, I should say--I be always blunder thus!] the as strange
determinedness of other; your present quarrel with Lovelace; and your
approach interview with Solmes, from which you be right to apprehend
a great deal; be such considerable circumstance in your story, that it
be fit they should engross all my attention.
you ask I to advise you how to behave upon Solmes's visit. I cannot for
my life. I know they expect a great deal from it: you have not else have
your long day comply with. all I will say be, that if Solmes cannot be
prevail for, now that Lovelace have so much offended you, he never will.
when the interview be over, I doubt not but that I shall have reason to
say, that all you do, that all you say, be right, and could not be
well: yet, if I donot think so, I willnot say so; that I promise you.
only let I advise you to pull up a spirit, even to your uncle, if there
be occasion. resent the vile and foolish treatment you meet with, in
which he have take so large a share, and make he ashamed of it, if you
can.
I know not, upon recollection, but this interview may be a good thing for
you, however design. for when Solmes see (if that be to be so) that
it be impossible he should succeed with you; and your relation see it
too; the one must, I think, recede, and the other come to term with you,
upon offer, that it be my opinion, will go hard enough with you to
comply with; when the still hard be dispense with.
there be several passage in your last letter, as well as in your
former, which authorize I to say this. but it would be unseasonable to
touch this subject far just now.
but, upon the whole, I have no patience to see you thus make sport of
your brother's and sister's cruelty: for what, after so much steadiness
on your part, in so many trial, can be their hope? except indeed it be
to drive you to extremity, and to ruin you in the opinion of your uncle
as well as father.
I urge you by all mean to send out of their reach all the letter and
paper you would not have they see. methink, I would wish you to
deposit likewise a parcel of clothe, linen, and the like, before your
interview with Solmes: lest you should not have an opportunity for it
afterwards. Robin shall fetch it away on the first order by day or by
night.
I be in hope to procure from my mother, if thing come to extremity,
leave for you to be privately with we.
I will condition to be good-humour, and even kind, to she favourite, if
she will shew I an indulgence that shall make I serviceable to mine.
this alternative have be a good while in my head. but as your foolish
uncle have so strangely attach my mother to their view, I cannot
promise that I shall succeed as I wish.
do not absolutely despair, however. what though the contention will be
between woman and woman? I fancy I shall be able to manage it, by the
help of a little female perseverance. your quarrel with Lovelace, if it
continue, will strengthen my hand. and the offer you make in your
answer to your uncle Harlowe's letter of Sunday night last, duly dwelt
upon, must add force to my plea.
I depend upon your forgiveness of all the perhaps unseasonable
flippancy of your naturally too lively, yet most sincerely
sympathize,
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XXV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
FRIDAY, MARCH 31.
you have very kindly account for your silence. People in misfortune
be always in doubt. they be too apt to turn even unavoidable accident
into slight and neglect; especially in those whose favourable opinion
they wish to preserve.
I be sure I ought evermore to exempt my Anna Howe from the suppose
possibility of she become one of those who bask only in the sun-shine
of a friend: but nevertheless her friendship be too precious to I, not
to doubt my own merit on the one hand, and not to be anxious for the
preservation of it, on the other.
you so generously give I liberty to chide you, that I be afraid of
take it, because I could soon mistrust my own judgment, than that of
a beloved friend, whose ingenuousness in acknowledge an imputed error
seem to set she above the commission of a wilful one. this make I
half-afraid to ask you, if you think you be not too cruel, too
ungenerous shall I say? in your behaviour to a man who love you so
dearly, and be so worthy and so sincere a man?
only it be by you, or I should be ashamed to be outdo in that true
magnanimity, which make one thankful for the wound give by a true
friend. I believe I be guilty of a petulance, which nothing but my
uneasy situation can excuse; if that can. I be but almost afraid to
beg of you, and yet I repeatedly do, to give way to that charming spirit,
whenever it rise to your pen, which smile, yet go to the quick of my
fault. what patient shall be afraid of a probe in so delicate a hand?--
I say, I be almost afraid to pray you to give way to it, for fear you
should, for that very reason, restrain it. for the edge may be take
off, if it do not make the subject of its raillery wince a little.
permit or desire satire may be apt, in a generous satirist, mend
as it rally, to turn too soon into panegyric. your be intend to
instruct; and though it bite, it please at the same time: no fear of a
wound's wrankling or fester by so delicate a point as you carry; not
envenom by personality, not intend to expose, or ridicule, or
exasperate. the most admire of our modern know nothing of this art:
why? because it must be found in good nature, and direct by a right
heart. the man, not the fault, be generally the subject of their satire:
and be it to be just, how should it be useful; how should it answer any
good purpose; when every gash (for their weapon be a broad sword, not a
lancet) let in the air of public ridicule, and exasperate where it
should heal? spare I not therefore because I be your friend. for that
very reason spare I not. I may feel your edge, fine as it be. I may be
pain: you would lose you end if I be not: but after the first
sensibility (as I have say more than once before) I will love you the
well, and my amend heart shall be all your; and it will then be more
worthy to be yours.
you have teach I what to say to, and what to think of, Mr. Lovelace.
you have, by agreeable anticipation, let I know how it be probable he
will apply to I to be excuse. I will lay every thing before you that
shall pass on the occasion, if he do apply, that I may take your advice,
when it can come in time; and when it cannot, that I may receive your
correction, or approbation, as I may happen to merit either.--only one
thing must be allow for I; that whatever course I shall be permit
or be force to steer, I must be consider as a person out of her own
direction. Tost to and fro by the high wind of passionate controul,
(and, as I think, unseasonable severity,) I behold the desire port, the
single state, into which I would fain steer; but be keep off by the
foaming billow of a brother's and sister's envy, and by the rag wind
of a suppose invade authority; while I see in Lovelace, the rock on
one hand, and in Solmes, the sand on the other; and tremble, lest I
should split upon the former, or strike upon the latter.
but you, my well pilot, to what a charming hope do you bid I aspire,
if thing come to extremity!--i will not, as you caution I, too much
depend upon your success with your mother in my favour; for well I know
her high notion of implicit duty in a child: but yet I will hope too;
because her seasonable protection may save I perhaps from a great
rashness: and in this case, she shall direct I in all my way: I will do
nothing but by her order, and by her advice and your: not see any body:
not write to any body: nor shall any live soul, but by her direction
and your, know where I be. in any cottage place I, I will never stir
out, unless, disguise as your servant, I be now-and-then permit an
evening-walk with you: and this private protection to be grant for no
long time than till my cousin Morden come; which, as I hope, cannot be
long.
I be afraid I must not venture to take the hint you give I, to deposit
some of my clothe; although I will some of my linen, as well as paper.
I will tell you why--Betty have for some time be very curious about my
wardrobe, whenever I take out any of my thing before she.
observe this, I once, on take one of my garden-airing, leave my key
in the lock: and on my return surprise the creature with her hand upon
the key, as if shut the door.
she be confound at my sudden come back. I take no notice: but on
her retire, I find my cloath be not in the usual order.
I doubt not, upon this, that her curiosity be owe to the order she
have receive; and be afraid they would abridge I of my airing, if
their suspicion be not obviate, it have ever since be my custom
(among other contrivance) not only to leave my key in the lock, but to
employ the wench now-and-then in take out my cloath, suit by suit, on
pretence of prevent their be rumple or crease, and to see that
the flower silver suit do not tarnish: sometimes declaredly to give
myself employment, have little else to do. with which employment
(superadde to the delight take by the low as well as by the high of our
sex in see fine cloath) she seem always, I think, as well please
as if it answer one of the office she have in charge.
to this, and to the confidence they have in a spy so diligent, and to
their knowing that I have not one confidant in a family in which
nevertheless I believe every servant love I; nor have attempt to
make one; I suppose, I owe the freedom I enjoy of my airing: and perhaps
(find I make no movement towards go away) they be the more
secure, that I shall at last be prevail upon to comply with their
measure: since they must think, that, otherwise, they give I
provocation enough to take some rash step, in order to free myself from a
treatment so disgraceful; and which [God forgive I, if I judge amiss!] I
be afraid my brother and sister would not be sorry to drive I to take.
if, therefore, such a step should become necessary, (which I yet hope
will not,) I must be content to go away with the clothe I shall have
on at the time. my custom to be dress for the day, as soon as breakfast
be over, when I have have no household employment to prevent I, will
make such a step (if I be force to take it) less suspect. and the
linen I shall deposit, in pursuance of your kind hint, cannot be miss.
this custom, although a prisoner, (as I may too truly say,) and neither
visit nor visit, I continue. we owe to ourselves, and to our sex,
you know, to be always neat; and never to be surprised in a way we should
be pain to be see in.
besides, people in adversity (which be the state of trial of every good
quality) should endeavour to preserve laudable custom, that, if sun
shine return, they may not be loser by their trial.
do it not, moreover, manifest a firmness of mind, in an unhappy person,
to keep hope alive? to hope for well day, be half to deserve they:
for could we have just grind for such a hope, if we do not resolve to
deserve what that hope bid we aspire to?--then who shall befriend a
person who forsake herself?
these be reflection by which I sometimes endeavour to support myself.
I know you donot despise my grave air, although (with a view no doubt to
irradiate my mind in my misfortune) you rally I upon they. every body
have not your talent of introduce serious and important lesson, in such
a happy manner as at once to delight and instruct.
what a multitude of contrivance may not young people fall upon, if the
mind be not engage by act of kindness and condescension! I be not use
by my friend of late as I always use their servant.
when I be intrust with the family-management, I always find it right,
as well in policy as generosity, to repose a trust in they. not to seem
to expect or depend upon justice from they, be in a manner to bid they to
take opportunity, whenever they offer, to be unjust.
Mr. Solmes, (to expatiate on this low, but not unuseful subject,) in his
more trifling solicitude, would have have a sorry key-keeper in I. be
I mistress of a family, I would not either take to myself, or give to
servant, the pain of keep those I have reason to suspect. People low
in station have often mind not sordid. Nay, I have sometimes think,
that (even take number for number) there be more honest low people, than
honest high. in the one, honest be their chief pride. in the other, the
love of power, of grandeur, of pleasure, mislead; and that and their
ambition induce a paramount pride, which too often swallow up the more
laudable one.
many of the former would scorn to deceive a confidence. but I have see,
among the most ignorant of their class, a susceptibility of resentment,
if their honesty have be suspect: and have more than once be force
to put a servant right, whom I have hear say, that, although she value
herself upon her honesty, no master or mistress should suspect she for
nothing.
how far have the comparison I have in my head, between my friend treatment
of I, and my treatment of the servant, carry me!--But we always
allow ourselves to expatiate on such subject, whether low or high, as
might tend to enlarge our mind, or mend our management, whether notional
or practical, and whether such expatiating respect our present, or
might respect our probable future situation.
what I be principally lead to, be to tell you how ingenious I be in
my contrivance and pretence to blind my gaoleress, and to take off the
jealousy of her principal on my go down so often into the garden and
poultry-yard. People suspiciously treat be never I believe at a loss
for invention. sometimes I want air, and be well the moment I be out
of my chamber.--Sometimes spirit; and then my bantam and pheasant or
the cascade divert I; the former, by their inspire liveliness; the
latter, by its echo dash, and hollow murmurs.--sometime, solitude
be of all thing my wish; and the awful silence of the night, the
spangled element, and the rise and set sun, how promotive of
contemplation!--sometimes, when I intend nothing, and expect no letter,
I be officious to take Betty with I; and at other, bespeak she
attendance, when I know she be otherwise employ, and cannot give it I.
these more capital artifice I branch out into less one, without
number. yet all have not only the face of truth, but be real truth;
although not my principal motive. how prompt a thing be will!--what
impediment do dislike furnish!--how swiftly, through every difficulty,
do we move with the one!--how tardily with the other!--every trifling
obstruction weigh we down, as if lead be fasten to our foot!
FRIDAY MORNING, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.
I have already make up my parcel of linen. my heart ache all the time I
be employ about it; and still ache, at the thought of its be a
necessary precaution.
when the parcel come to your hand, as I hope it safely will, you will
be pleased to open it. you will find in it two parcel seal up; one of
which contain the letter you have not yet see; be those write
since I leave you: in the other be all the letter and copy of letter
that have pass between you and I since I be last with you; with some
other paper on subject so much above I, that I cannot wish they to be
see by any body whose indulgence I be not so sure of, as I be of your.
if my judgment ripen with my year, perhaps I may review they.
Mrs. Norton use to say, from her reverend father, that youth be the
time of life for imagination and fancy to work in: then, be a writer to
lay by his work till riper year and experience should direct the fire
rather to glow, than to flame out; something between both might perhaps
be produce that would not displease a judicious eye.
in a third division, fold up separately, be all Mr. Lovelace's letter
write to I since he be forbid this house, and copy of my answer
to they. I expect that you will break the seal of this parcel, and when
you have peruse they all, give I your free opinion of my conduct.
by the way, not a line from that man!--not one line! Wednesday I
deposit mine. it remain there on Wednesday night. what time it be
take away yesterday I cannot tell: for I do not concern myself about
it, till towards night; and then it be not there. no return at ten this
day. I suppose he be as much out of humour as I.--With all my heart.
he may be mean enough perhaps, if ever I should put it into his power, to
avenge himself for the trouble he have have with me.--but that now, I dare
say, I never shall.
I see what sort of a man the encroacher be. and I hope we be equally
sick of one another.--My heart be vexedly easy, if I may so describe it.
--vexedly--because of the apprehended interview with Solmes, and the
consequence it may be attend with: or else I should be quite easy; for
why? I have not deserve the usage I receive: and could I be rid of
Solmes, as I presume I be of Lovelace, their influence over my father,
mother, and uncle, against I, could not hold.
the five guineas tie up in one corner of a handkerchief under the linen,
I beg you will let pass as an acknowledgement for the trouble I give your
trusty servant. you must not chide I for this. you know I cannot be
easy unless I have my way in these little matter.
I be go to put up what little money I have, and some of my ornament;
but they be portable, and I cannot forget they. besides, should they
(suspect I) desire to see any of the jewel, and be I not able to
produce they, it would amount to a demonstration of an intention which
would have a guilty appearance to they.
FRIDAY, one O'CLOCK, in the WOOD-HOUSE.
no letter yet from this man! I have luckily deposit my parcel, and
have your letter of last night. if Robert take this without the parcel,
pray let he return immediately for it. but he cannot miss it, I think:
and must conclude that it be put there for he to take away. you may
believe, from the content of your, that I shall immediately write
again.--
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER XXVI
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY NIGHT, MARCH 30.
the fruit of my inquiry after your abominable wretch's behaviour and
baseness at the paltry alehouse, which he call an inn, prepare to hear.
Wrens and sparrow be not too ignoble a quarry for this villainous
go-hawk!--his assiduity; his watching; his nightly risque; the
inclement weather he journey in; must not be all place to your account.
he have opportunity of make every thing light to he of that sort.
a sweet pretty girl, I be tell--innocent till he go thither--now! (ah!
poor girl!) who know what?
but just turn of seventeen!--his friend and brother-rake (a man of
humour and intrigue) as I be tell, to share the social bottle with. and
sometimes another disguised rake or two. no sorrow come near their
heart. be not disturb, my dear, at his hoarseness! his pretty,
Betsey, his Rosebud, as the vile wretch call she, can hear all he say.
he be very fond of she. they say she be innocent even yet--her father,
her grandmother, believe she to be so. he be to fortune she out to a
young lover!--ah! the poor young lover!--ah! the poor simple girl!
Mr. Hickman tell I, that he hear in town, that he use to be often at
play, and at the opera, with woman; and every time with a different one
--Ah! my sweet friend!--But I hope he be nothing to you, if all this be
truth.--but this intelligence, in relation to this poor girl, will do his
business, if you have be ever so good friend before.
a vile wretch! cannot such purity in pursuit, in view, restrain he? but
I leave he to you!--There can be no hope of he. More of a fool, than
of such a man. yet I wish I may be able to snatch the poor young
creature out of his villainous paw. I have lay a scheme to do so; if
indeed she be hitherto innocent and heart-free.
he appear to the people as a military man, in disguise, secrete
himself on account of a duel fight in town; the adversary's life in
suspense. they believe he be a great man. his friend pass for an
inferior officer; upon a footing of freedom with he. he, accompany by
a third man, who be a sort of subordinate companion to the second. the
wretch himself with but one servant.
o my dear! how pleasantly can these devil, as I must call they, pass
their time, while our gentle bosom heave with pity for their suppose
suffering for we!
***
I have send for this girl and her father; and be just now inform, that
I shall see they. I will sift they thoroughly. I shall soon find out
such a simple thing as this, if he have not corrupt she already--and if
he have, I shall soon find out that too.--if more art than nature appear
either in she or her father, I shall give they both up--but depend upon
it, the girl's undone.
he be say to be fond of she. he place she at the upper end of his
table. he set she a-prattling. he keep his friend at a distance from
she. she prate away. he admire for nature all she say. once be
hear to call her charming little creature! an hundred have he call so
no doubt. he put she upon singing. he praise her wild note--o my
dear, the girl's undone!--must be undone!--the man, you know, be
LOVELACE.
let them bring Wyerley to you, if they will have you marry--any body but
Solmes and Lovelace be yours!--so advise
your
ANNA HOWE.
my dear friend, consider this alehouse as his garrison: he as an
enemy: his brother-rake as his assistant and abettor. would not your
brother, would not your uncle, tremble, if they know how near they he
be, as they pass to and fro?--I be tell, he be resolve you shall not be
carry to your uncle antony's.--what can you do, with or without such an
enterprising--
Fill up the blank i leave.--I cannot find a word bad enough
LETTER XXVII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
FRIDAY, three O'CLOCK.
you incense, alarm, and terrify I, at the same time.--hasten, my dearest
friend, hasten to I what further intelligence you can gather about this
vilest of man.
but never talk of innocence, of simplicity, and this unhappy girl,
together! must she not know, that such a man as that, dignified in his
very aspect; and no disguise able to conceal his being of condition; must
mean too much, when he place she at the upper end of his table, and
call she by such tender name? would a girl, modest as simple, above
seventeen, be set a-singing at the pleasure of such a man as that? a
stranger, and professedly in disguise!--Would her father and grandmother,
if honest people, and careful of their simple girl, permit such freedom?
keep his friend at a distance from her!--To be sure his design be
villainous, if they have not be already effect.
Warn, my dear, if not too late, the unthinke father, of his child's
danger. there cannot be a father in the world, who would sell his
child's virtue. nor mother!--the poor thing!
I long to hear the result of your intelligence. you shall see the simple
creature, you tell me.--Let I know what sort of a girl she is.--a sweet
pretty girl! you say. a sweet pretty girl, my dear!--they be sweet
pretty word from your pen. but be they yours or his of her?--if she be
so simple, if she have ease and nature in her manner, in her speech, and
warble prettily her wild note, why, such a girl as that must engage
such a profligate wretch, (as now indeed I doubt this man be,)
accustom, perhaps, to town woman, and their confident ways.--Must
deeply and for a long season engage he: since perhaps when her innocence
be depart, she will endeavour by art to supply the loss of the natural
charm which now engage he.
fine hope of such a wretch's reformation! I would not, my dear, for the
world, have any thing to say--but I need not make resolution. I have
not open, nor will I open, his letter.--a sycophant creature!--with
his hoarseness--get perhaps by a midnight revel, sing to his wild
note singer, and only increase in the coppice!
to be already on a footing!--in his esteem, I mean: for myself, I despise
he. I hate myself almost for write so much about he, and of such a
simpleton as this sweet pretty girl as you call she: but no one can be
either sweet or pretty, that be not modest, that be not virtuous.
and now, my dear, I will tell you how I come to put you upon this
inquiry.
this vile Joseph Leman have give a hint to Betty, and she to I, as if
Lovelace would be find out to be a very bad man, at a place where he have
be lately see in disguise. but he would see far, he say, before
he tell she more; and she promise secrecy, in hope to get at further
intelligence. I think it could be no harm, to get you to inform
yourself, and I, of what could be gather.* and now I see, his enemy
be but too well warrant in their report of he: and, if the ruin of
this poor young creature be his aim, and if he have not know she but for
his visit to Harlowe-place, I shall have reason to be doubly concerned
for she; and doubly incense against so vile a man.
* it will be see in Vol.I.Letter XXXIV. that Mr. Lovelace's motive for
spar his Rosebud be twofold. first, because his pride be gratify
by the grandmother's desire he to spare her grand-daughter. many a
pretty rogue, say he, have I spar, whom I do not spare, have my power
be acknowledge, and my mercy in time implore. but the debellare
superbo should be my motto, be I to have a new one.
his other motive will be explain in the following passage, in the same.
I never be so honest, for so long together, say he, since my
matriculation. it behove I so to be. some way or other my recess [at
the little inn] may be find out, and it then will be think that my
Rosebud have attract I. a report in my favour, from simplicity so
amiable, may establish I, &c.
accordingly, as the reader will hereafter see, Mr. Lovelace find by the
effect, his expectation from the contrivance he set on foot by mean of
his agent Joseph Leman (who play, as above, upon Betty Barnes) fully
answer, though he could not know what pass on the occasion between
the two lady.
this explanation be the more necessary to be give, as several of our
reader (through want of due attention) have attribute to Mr. Lovelace,
on his behaviour to his Rosebud, a great merit than be due to he; and
moreover imagine, that it be improbable, that a man, who be capable of
act so generously (as they suppose) in this instance, should be
guilty of any atrocious vileness. not consider, that love, pride, and
revenge as he own in Vol.I.Letter XXXI. be ingredient of equal force
in his composition; and that resistance be a stimulus to he.
I think I hate he bad than I do Solmes himself.
but I will not add one more word about hi,; and after I have tell you,
that I wish to know, as soon as possible what far occur from your
inquiry. I have a letter from he; but shall not open it till I do: and
then, if it come out as I dare say it will, I will directly put the
letter unopened into the place I take it from, and never trouble myself
more about he. Adieu, my dear friend.
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER xxviii
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE.
FRIDAY NOON, MARCH 31.
justice oblige I to forward this after my last on the wing of the
wind, as I may say. I really believe the man be innocent. of this one
accusation, I think he must be acquit; and I be sorry I be so forward
in dispatch away my intelligence by half.
I have see the girl. she be really a very pretty, a very neat, and,
what be still a great beauty, a very innocent young creature. he who
could have ruin such an undersigned home-breed, must have be indeed
infernally wicked. her father be an honest simple man; entirely
satisfied with his child, and with her new acquaintance.
I be almost afraid for your heart, when I tell you, that I find, now I
have get to the bottom of this inquiry, something noble come out in this
Lovelace's favour.
the girl be to be marry next week; and this promote and bring about
by he. he be resolve, her father say, to make one couple happy, and
wish he could make more so [therebe for you, my dear!] and she
profess to love, he have give she an hundred pound: the grandmother
actually have it in her hand, to answer to the like sum give to the
youth by one of his own relation: while Mr. Lovelace's companion,
attract by the example, have give twenty-five guineas to the father,
who be poor, towards clothe to equip the pretty rustic.
Mr. Lovelace and his friend, the poor man say, when they first come to
his house, affect to appear as person of low degree; but now he know
the one (but mention it in confidence) to be Colonel Barrow, the other
Captain Sloane. the colonel he own be at first very sweet upon his
girl: but her grandmother's begging of he to spare her innocence, he
vow, that he never would offer any thing but good counsel to she. he
keep his word; and the pretty fool acknowledge, that she never could
have be well instruct by the minister himself from the bible-book!
--the girl please I so well, that I make her visit to I worth she
while.
but what, my dear, will become of we now?--lovelace not only reform,
but turn preacher!--what will become of we now?--Why, my sweet friend,
your generosity be now engage in his favour!--fie upon this generosity!
I think in my heart, that it do as much mischief to the noble-minded,
as love to the ignobler.--what before be only a conditional liking, I be
now afraid will turn to like unconditional.
I could not endure to change my invective into panegyric all at once, and
so soon. we, or such as I at least, love to keep ourselves in
countenance for a rash judgment, even when we know it to be rash.
everybody have not your generosity in confess a mistake. it require a
greatness of soul frankly to do it. so I make still further inquiry
after his life and manner, and behaviour there, in hope to find
something bad: but all uniform!
upon the whole, Mr. Lovelace come out with so much advantage from this
inquiry, that be there the least room for it, I should suspect the
whole to be a plot set on foot to wash a blackamoor white. Adieu, my
dear.
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER xxix
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SATURDAY, APRIL 1.
Hasty censure do indeed subject themselves to the charge of variableness
and inconsistency in judgment: and so they ought; for, if you, even you,
my dear, be so loth to own a mistake, as in the instance before we you
pretend you be, I believe I should not have love you so well as I
really do love you. nor could you, in that case, have so frankly throw
the reflection I hint at upon yourself, have not your mind be one of
the most ingenuous that ever woman boast.
Mr. Lovelace have fault enow to deserve very severe censure, although he
be not guilty of this. if I be upon such term with he as he could
wish I to be, I should give he such a hint, that this treacherous
Joseph Leman cannot be so much attach to he, as perhaps he think he
to be. if it be, he would not have be so ready to report to his
disadvantage (and to Betty Barnes too) this slight affair of the pretty
rustic. Joseph have engage Betty to secrecy; promise to let she, and
her young master, to know more, when he know the whole of the matter:
and this hinder she from mention it, as she be nevertheless agog to
do, to my sister or brother. and then she do not choose to disoblige
Joseph; for although she pretend to look above he, she listen, I
believe, to some love-story he tell she.
woman have it not in their power to begin a courtship, some of they
very frequently, I believe, lend an ear where their heart incline not.
but to say no more of these low people, neither of whom I think tolerably
of; I must need own, that as I should for ever have despise this man,
have he be capable of such a vile intrigue in his way to harlowe-place,
and as I believe he be capable of it, it have indeed [I own it have]
proportionably engage my generosity, as you call it, in his favour:
perhaps more than I may have reason to wish it have. and, rally I as you
will, pray tell I fairly, my dear, would it not have have such an effect
upon you?
then the real generosity of the act.--I protest, my beloved friend, if he
would be good for the rest of his life from this time, I would forgive
he a great many of his past error, be it only for the demonstration
he have give in this, that he be capable of so good and bountiful a
manner of thinking.
you may believe I make no scruple to open his letter, after the receipt
of your second on this subject: nor shall I of answer it, as I have no
reason to find fault with it: an article in his favour, procure he,
however, so much the easy, (I must own,) by way of amend for the undue
displeasure I take against he; though he know it not.
be it lucky enough that this matter be clear up to I by your friendly
diligence so soon: for have I write before it be, it would have be to
reinforce my dismission of he; and perhaps I should have mention the
very motive; for it affect I more than I think it ought: and then,
what an advantage would that have give he, when he could have clear
up the matter so happily for himself!
when I send you this letter of his, you will see how very humble he be:
what acknowledgement of natural impatience: what confession of fault,
as you prognosticate.
a very different appearance, I must own, all these make, now the story of
the pretty rustic be clear up, to what they would have make, have it
not.
you will see how he account to I, 'that he could not, by reason of
indisposition, come for my letter in person: and the forward creature
labour the point, as if he think I should be uneasy that he do not.'
I be indeed sorry he should be ill on my account; and I will allow, that
the suspense he have be in for some time past, must have be vexatious
enough to so impatient a spirit. but all be owe originally to himself.
you will find he (in the presumption of be forgive) 'full of
contrivance and expedient for my escape my threatened compulsion.'
I have always say, that next to be without fault, be the
acknowledgement of a fault; since no amendment can be expect where an
error be defend: but you will see in this very letter, an haughtiness
even in his submission. 'tis true, I know not where to find fault as to
the expression; yet cannot I be satisfied, that his humility be humility;
or even an humility upon such conviction as one should be pleased with.
to be sure, he be far from be a polite man: yet be not directly and
characteristically, as I may say, unpolite. but his be such a sort of
politeness, as have, by a carelessness found on very early indulgence,
and perhaps on too much success in riper year, and an arrogance build
upon both, grow into assuredness, and, of course, I may say, into
indelicacy.
the distance you recommend at which to keep these man, be certainly right
in the main: familiarity destroy reverence: but with whom?--not with
those, surely, who be prudent, grateful, and generous.
but it be very difficult for person, who would avoid run into one
extreme, to keep clear of another. hence Mr. Lovelace, perhaps, think
it the mark of a great spirit to humour his pride, though at the expense
of his politeness: but can the man be a deep man, who know not how to
make such distinction as a person of but moderate part cannot miss?
he complain heavily of my 'readiness to take mortal offence at he, and
to dismiss he for ever: it be a high conduct, he say, he must be frank
enough to tell I; a conduct that must be very far from contribute to
allay his apprehension of the possibility that I may be prosecute into
my relation' measure in behalf of Mr. Solmes.'
you will see how he put his present and his future happiness, 'with
regard to both world, entirely upon I.' the ardour with which he vow
and promise, I think the heart only can dictate: how else can one guess
at a man's heart?
you will also see, 'that he have already hear of the interview I be to
have with Mr. Solmes;' and with what vehemence and anguish he express
himself on the occasion. I intend to take proper notice of the ignoble
mean he stoop to, to come at his early intelligence of our family. if
person pretend to principle, bear not their testimony against
unprincipled action, what check can they have?
you will see, 'how passionately he press I to oblige he with a few
line, before the interview between Mr. Solmes and I take place, (if,
as he say, it must take place,) to confirm his hope, that I have no
view, in my present displeasure against he, to give encouragement to
solme. an apprehension, he say, that he must be excuse for repeat;
especially as the interview be a favour grant to that man, which I have
refuse to he; since, as he infer, be it not with such an
expectation, why should my friend press it?'
***
I have write; and to this effect: 'that I have never intend to write
another line to a man, who could take upon himself to reflect upon my sex
and myself, for have think fit to make use of my own judgment.
'I tell he, that I have submit to the interview with Mr. Solmes,
purely as an act of duty, to shew my friend, that I will comply with
their command as far as I can; and that I hope, when Mr. Solmes himself
shall see how determined I be, he will cease to prosecute a suit, in
which it be impossible he should succeed with my consent.
'I assure he, that my aversion to Mr. Solmes be too sincere to permit I
to doubt myself on this occasion. but, nevertheless, he must not
imagine, that my rejecting of Mr. Solmes be in favour to he. that I
value my freedom and independency too much, if my friend will but leave
I to my own judgment, to give they up to a man so uncontroulable, and
who shews I beforehand what I have to expect from he, be I in his
power.
'I express my high disapprobation of the method he take to come at what
pass in a private family. the pretence of corrupt other people's
servant, by way of reprisal for the spy they have set upon he, I tell
he, be a very poor excuse; and no more than an attempt to justify one
meanness by another.
'there be, I observe to he, a right and a wrong in every thing, let
people put what gloss they please upon their action. to condemn a
deviation, and to follow it by as great a one, what, I ask he, be this,
but propagate a general corruption?--A stand must be make somebody,
turn round the evil as many as may, or virtue will be lose: and shall it
not be I, a worthy mind would ask, that shall make this stand?
'I leave he to judge, whether his be a worthy one, try by this rule:
and whether, know the impetuosity of his own disposition, and the
improbability there be that my father and family will ever be reconcile
to he, I ought to encourage his hope?
'these spot and blemish, I far tell he, give I not earnestness
enough for any sake but his own, to wish he in a juster and nobler train
of thinking and acting; for that I truly despise many of the way he
allow himself in: our mind be therefore infinitely different: and as
to his profession of reformation, I must tell he, that profuse
acknowledgement, without amendment, be but to I as so many
anticipate concession, which he may find much easy to make, thane
either to defend himself, or amend his error.
'I inform he, that I have be lately make acquainted' [and so I have by
Betty, and she by my brother] 'with the weak and wanton air he give
himself of declaim against matrimony. I severely reprehend he on
this occasion: and ask he, with what view he can take so witless, so
despicable a liberty, in which only the most abandon of man allow
themselves, and yet presume to address I?
'I tell he, that if I be oblige to go to my uncle Antony's, it be not
to be infer, that I must therefore necessarily be Mr. Solmes's wife:
since I must therefore so sure perhaps that the same exception lie so
strongly against my quit a house to which I shall be forcibly
carry, as if I leave my father's house: and, at the bad, I may be able
to keep they in suspense till my cousin Morden come, who will have a
right to put I in possession of my grandfather's estate, if I insist
upon it.'
this, I doubt, be somewhat of an artifice; which can only be excusable,
as it be principally design to keep he out of mischief. for I have
but little hope, if carry thither, whether sensible or senseless,
absolutely if I be leave to the mercy of my brother and sister, but they
will endeavour to force the solemn obligation upon I. otherwise, be
there but any prospect of avoid this, by delay (or even by take
thing to make I ill, if nothing else would do,) till my cousin come, I
hope I should not think of leave even my uncle's house. for I should
not know how to square it to my own principle, to dispense with the duty
I owe to my father, wherever it shall be his will to place I.
but while you give I the charming hope, that, in order to avoid one man,
I shall not be under the necessity of throw myself upon the friend of
the other; I think my case not desperate.
***
I see not any of my family, nor hear from they in any way of kindness.
this look as if they themselves expect no great matter from the
Tuesday's conference which make my heart flutter every time I think of
it.
my uncle Antony's presence on the occasion I do not much like: but I have
rather meet he than my brother or sister: yet my uncle be very
impetuous. I cannot think Mr. Lovelace can be much more so; at least he
cannot look angry, as my uncle, with his hard feature, can. these
sea-prosper gentleman, as my uncle have often make I think, not use to
any but elemental controul, and even ready to buffet that, bluster often
as violently as the wind they be accustomed to be angry at.
I believe Mr. Solmes will look as much like a fool as I shall do, if it
be true, as my uncle Harlowe write, and as Betty often tell I, that he
be as much afraid of see I, as I be of see he.
Adieu, my happy, thrice-happy Miss Howe, who have no hard term fix to
your duty!--Who have nothing to do, but to fall in with a choice your
mother have make for you, to which you have not, nor can have, a just
objection: except the frowardness of our sex, as our free censurer would
perhaps take the liberty to say, make it one, that the choice be your
mother's, at first hand. perverse nature, we know, love not to be
prescribe to; although youth be not so well qualified, either by
sedateness or experience, to choose for itself.
to know your own happiness, and that it be now, nor to leave it to after
reflection to look back upon the preferable past with a heavy and self
accuse heart, that you do not choose it when you might have choose it,
be all that be necessary to complete your felicity!--and this power be
wish you by
your
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER XXX
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
SATURDAY, APRIL 2.
I ought yesterday to have acknowledge the receipt of your parcel. Robin
tell I, that the Joseph Leman, whom you mention as the traitor, see
he. he be in the poultry-yard, and speak to Robin over the bank which
divide that from the green-lane. 'what bring you hither, Mr. Robert?--
but I can tell. hie away, as fast as you can.'
no doubt but their dependence upon this fellow's vigilance, and upon
Betty's, leave you more at liberty in your airing, than you would
otherwise be. but you be the only person I ever hear of, who in such
circumstance have not some faithful servant to trust little office to.
a poet, my dear, would not have go to work for an Angelica, without
give she her Violetta, her Cleante, her Clelia, or some such pretty-
name confidant--an old nurse at the least.
I read to my mother several passage of your letter. but your last
paragraph, in your yesterday's quite charm she. you have win her heart
by it, she tell I. and while her fit of gratitude for it last, I be
think to make my proposal, and to press it with all the earnestness I
could give it, when Hickman come in, make his leg, and stroke his
cravat and ruffle.
I could most freely have ruffle he for it. as it be--Sir, say I, see
you not some of the servants?--could not one of they have come in before
you?
he beg pardon: look as if he know not whether he have well keep his
ground, or withdraw:--till my mother, his fast friend, interpose--why,
Nancy, we be not upon particulars.--Pray, Mr. Hickman, sit down.
by your le--ave, good Madam, to I. you know his drawl, when his muscle
give he the respectful hesitation.--
Ay, ay, pray sit down, honest man, if you be weary--but by mamma, if you
please. I desire my hoop may have its full circumference. all theybe
good for, that I know, be to clean dirty shoe, and to keep fellow at a
distance.
strange girl! cry my mother, displease; but with a milder turn, ay,
ay, Mr. Hickman, sit down by I: I have no such forbid folly in my
dress.
I look serious; and in my heart be glad this speech of hers be not
make to your uncle Antony.
my mother, with the true widow's freedom, would mighty prudently have lead
into the subject we have be upon; and would have have read to he, I
question not, that very paragraph in your letter which be so much in his
favour. he be highly obliged to dear Miss Harlowe, she would assure
he; that she do say--
but I ask he, if he have any news by his last letter from London?--A
question which he always understand to be a subject changer; for
otherwise I never put it. and so if he be but silent, I be not angry
with he that he answer it not.
I choose not to mention my proposal before he, till I know how it will
be relish by my mother. if it be not well receive, perhaps I may
employ he on the occasion. yet I donot like to owe he an obligation,
if I could help it. for man who have his view in their head, do so
parade it, so strut about, if a woman condescend to employ they in her
affair, that one have no patience with they.
however, if I find not an opportunity this day, I will make one
to-morrow.
I shall not open either of your seal-up parcel, but in your presence.
there be no need. your conduct be out of all question with I: and by
the extract you have give I from his letter and your own, I know all
that relate to the present situation of thing between you.
I be go to give you a little flippant hint or two. but since you
wish to be think superior to all our sex in the command of yourself;
and since indeed you deserve to be think so; I will spare you. you
be, however, at time, more than half inclined to speak out. that you
do not, be only owe to a little bashful struggle between you and
yourself, as I may say. when that be quite get over, I know you will
favour I undisguisedly with the result.
I cannot forgive your taking upon I (at so extravagant a rate too) to
pay my mother's servant. indeed I be, and I will be, angry with you for
it. a year's wage at once well nigh! only as, unknown to my mother, I
make it well for the servant accord to their merit--how it make
the man stare!--and it may be his ruin too, as far as I know. if he
should buy a ring, and marry a sorry body in the neighbourhood with the
money, one would be loth, a twelvemonth hence, that the poor old fellow
should think he have reason to wish the bounty never confer.
I must give you your way in these thing, you say.--And I know there be
no contradict you: for you be ever put too great a value upon
little office do for you, and too little upon the great one you do
for other. the satisfaction you have in do so, I grant it, repay
you. but why should you, by the nobleness of your mind, throw reproach
upon the rest of the world? particularly, upon your own family--and upon
ours too?
if, as I have hear you say, it be a good rule to give word the hearing,
but to form our judgment of man and thing by DEEDS only; what shall we
think of one, who seek to find palliative in word, for narrowness of
heart in the very person her deed so silently, yet so forcibly, reflect
upon? why blush you not, my dear friend, to be thus singular?--when you
meet with another person whose mind be like your own, then display your
excellency as you please: but till then, for pity's sake, let your
heart and your spirit suffer a little contradiction.
I intend to write but a few line; chiefly to let you know your parcel
be come safe. and accordingly I begin in a large hand; and I be already
come to the end of my second sheet. but I could write a quire without
hesitation upon a subject so copious and so beloved as be your praise.
not for this single instance of your generosity; since I be really angry
with you for it; but for the benevolence exemplify in the whole tenor
of your life and action; of which this be but a common instance. Heaven
direct you, in your own arduous trial, be all I have room to add; and
make you as happy, as you think to be
your own
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XXXI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SUNDAY NIGHT, APRIL 2.
I have many new particular to acquaint you with, that shew a great
change in the behaviour of my friend as I find we have. I will give
these particular to you as they offer.
all the family be at church in the morning. they bring good Dr. Lewen
with they, in pursuance of a previous invitation. and the doctor send up
to desire my permission to attend I in my own apartment.
you may believe it be easily grant.
so the doctor come up.
we have a conversation of near an hour before dinner: but, to my surprise,
he wave every thing that would have lead I to the subject I suppose he
want to talk about. at last, I ask he, if it be not think
strange I should be so long absent from church? he make I some handsome
compliment upon it: but say, for his part, he have ever make it a rule
to avoid interfere in the private concern of family, unless desire
to do so.
I be prodigiously disappointed; but suppose that he be think too
just a man to be make a judge of in this cause; I lead no more to it: nor,
when he be call down to dinner, do he take the least notice of
leave I behind he there.
but this be not the first time since my confinement that I think it a
hardship not to dine below. and when I part with he on the stair, a
tear would burst its way; and he hurry down; his own good-natured eye
glistening; for he see it.--nor trust he his voice, lest the accent I
suppose should have discover his concern; depart in silence; though
with his usual graceful obligingness.
I hear that he praise I, and my part in the conversation that pass
between we. to shew they, I suppose, that it be not upon the
interesting subject which I make no doubt he be desire not to enter
upon.
he leave I so dissatisfied, yet so perplex with this new way of
treatment, that I never find myself so much disconcert, and out of my
train.
but I be to be more so. this be to be a day of puzzle to I. pregnant
puzzle, if I may say so: for there must great meaning lie behind it.
in the afternoon, all but my brother and sister go to church with the
good doctor; who leave his compliment for I. I take a walk in the
garden. my brother and sister walk in it too, and keep I in their
eye a good while, on purpose, as I think, that I might see how gay and
good-humour they be together. at last they come down the walk that I
be come up, hand-in-hand, lover-like.
your servant, Miss--your servant, Sir--pass between my brother and I.
be it not cold-ish, Clary! in a kind voice than usual, say my sister,
and stopped.--i stop and courtesie low to her half-courtesy.--I think
not, Sister, say I.
she go on. I courtesie without return; and proceed, turn to my
poultry-yard.
by a short turn, arm-in-arm, they be there before I.
I think, Clary, say my brother, you must present I with some of this
breed, for Scotland.
if you please, Brother.
Iwill choose for you, say my sister.
and while I feed they, they point to half a dozen: yet intend nothing
by it, I believe, but to shew a deal of love and good-humour to each
other before I.
my uncle next, (at their return from church) be to do I the honour of
their notice. they bid Betty tell I, they would drink tea with I in my
own apartment. now, think I, shall I have the subject of next Tuesday
enforce upon I.
but they contradict the order for tea, and only my uncle Harlowe come
up to I.
half-distant, half-affectionate, at his enter my chamber, be the air
he put on to his daughter-niece, as he use to call I; and I throw
myself at his foot, and besought his favour.
none of these discomposure, child. none of these apprehension. you
will now have every body's favour. all be come about, my dear. I be
impatient to see you. I could no long deny myself this satisfaction.
he then raise I, and kiss I, and call I charming creature!
but he wave enter into any interesting subject. all will be well
now. all will be right!--no more complaining! every body love you!--I
only come to make my early court to you! [be his condescending
word] and to sit and talk of twenty and twenty fond thing, as I use to
do. and let every past disagreeable thing be forget; as if nothing
have happen.
he understand I as begin to hint at the disgrace of my confinement--
no disgrace my dear can fall to your lot: your reputation be too well
established.--I long to see you, repeat I--I have see nobody half
so amiable since I see you last.
and again he kiss my cheek, my glow cheek; for I be impatient, I
be vex, to be thus, as I think, play upon: and how could I be
thankful for a visit, that (it be now evident) be only a too humble
artifice, to draw I in against the next Tuesday, or to leave I
inexcusable to they all?
o my cunning brother!--this be his contrivance. and then my anger make
I recollect the triumph in his and my sister's fondness for each other,
as practise before I; and the mingled indignation flash from their
eye, as arm-in-arm they speak to I, and the forced condescension
playing upon their lip, when they call I Clary, and Sister.
do you think I could, with these reflection, look upon my uncle
Harlowe's visit as the favour he seem desirous I should think it to be?
--indeed I could not; and see he so studiously avoid all
recrimination, as I may call it, I give into the affectation; and
follow he in his talk of indifferent thing: while he seem to admire
this thing and that, as if he have never see they before; and now-and
then condescendingly kiss the hand that work some of the thing he
fix his eye upon; not so much to admire they, as to find subject to
divert what be most in his head, and in my heart.
at his go away--how can I leave you here by yourself, my dear? you,
whose company use to enliven we all. you be not expect down indeed:
but I protest I have a good mind to surprise your father and mother!--if I
think nothing would arise that would be disagreeable--my dear! my love!
[o the dear artful gentleman! how could my uncle Harlowe so dissemble?]
what say you? will you give I your hand? will you see your father?
can you stand his displeasure, on first see the dear creature who have
give he and all of we so much disturbance? can you promise future--
he see I rise in my temper--Nay, my dear, interrupt himself, if you
cannot be all resignation, I would not have you think of it.
my heart, struggle between duty and warmth of temper, be full. you
know, my dear, I never could bear to be deal meanly with!--how--how can
you, Sir! you my papa-uncle--how can you, Sir!--The poor girl!--for I
could not speak with connexion.
Nay, my dear, if you cannot be all duty, all resignation--well stay
where you are.--but after the instance you have given--
Instance I have given!--What instance, Sir?
well, well, child, well stay where you be, if your past confinement
hang so heavy upon you--but now there will be a sudden end to it--Adieu,
my dear!--Three word only--let your compliance be sincere!--and love I,
as you use to love I--your Grandfather do not do so much for you, as I
will do for you.
without suffer I to reply, he hurry away, as I think, like one
who have be employ to act a part against his will, and be glad it be
over.
donot you see, my dear Miss Howe, how they be all determined?--Have I
not reason to dread next Tuesday?
up presently after come my sister:--to observe, I suppose, the way I be
in.
she find I in tear.
have you not a Thomas a Kempis, Sister? with a stiff air.
I have, Madam.
Madam!--How long be we to be at this distance, Clary?
no long, my dear Bella, if you allow I to call you sister. and I take
her hand.
no fawn neither, Girl!
I withdraw my hand as hastily, as you may believe I should have do, have
I, in feel for one of your parcel under the wood, be bite by a
viper.
I beg pardon, say I,--Too-too ready to make advance, I be always
subject myself to contempt.
People who know not how to keep a middle behaviour, say she, must ever
do so.
I will fetch you the Kempis, Sister. I do. here it be. you will find
excellent thing, Bella, in that little book.
I wish, retort she, you have profit by they.
I wish you may, say I. Example from a sister old than one's self be a
fine thing.
old! saucy little fool!--and away she fling.
what a captious old woman will my sister make, if she live to be one!--
demand the reverence, perhaps, yet not aim at the merit; and
ashamed of the year that can only entitle she to the reverence.
it be plain, from what I have relate, that they think they have get I
at some advantage by obtain my consent to the interview: but if it
be not, Betty's impertinence just now would make it evident. she have
be compliment I upon it; and upon the visit of my uncle Harlowe.
she say, the difficulty now be more than half over with I. she be sure
I would not see Mr. Solmes, but to have he. now shall she be soon
well employ than of late she have be. all hand will be at work.
she love dearly to have wedding go forward!--who know, whose turn will
be next?
I find in the afternoon a reply to my answer to Mr. Lovelace's letter.
it be full of promise, full of vow of gratitude, of eternal gratitude,
be his word, among other still more hyperbolic. yet Mr. Lovelace, the
least of any man whose letter I have see, run into those elevated
absurdity. I should be apt to despise he for it, if he do. such
language look always to I, as if the flatterer think to find a woman
a fool, or hop to make her one.
'he regret my indifference to he; which put all the hope he have in my
favour upon the shocking usage I receive from my friend.
'as to my charge upon he of unpoliteness and uncontroulableness--what
[he ask] can he say? since be unable absolutely to vindicate himself,
he have too much ingenuousness to attempt to do so: yet be strike dumb by
my harsh construction, that his acknowledge temper be owe more to his
carelessness to defend himself, than to his inclination to amend. he have
never before meet with the objection against his moral which I have
raise, justly raise: and he be resolve to obviate they. what be it,
he ask, that he have promise, but reformation by my example? and what
occasion for the promise, if he have not fault, and those very great
one, to reform? he hop acknowledgement of an error be no bad sign;
although my severe virtue have interpret it into one.
'he believe I may be right (severely right, he call it) in my judgment
against make reprisal in the case of the intelligence he receive from
my family: he cannot charge himself to be of a temper that lead he to
be inquisitive into any body's private affair; but hope, that the
circumstance of the case, and the strange conduct of my friend, will
excuse he; especially when so much depend upon his know the
movement of a family so violently bent, by measure right or wrong, to
carry their point against I, in malice to he. People, he say, who act
like angel, ought to have angel to deal with. for his part, he have not
yet learn the difficult lesson of return good for evil: and shall
think himself the less encouraged to learn it by the treatment I have meet
with from the very person who would trample upon he, as they do upon
I, be he to lay himself under their foot.
'he excuse himself for the liberty he own he have heretofore take in
ridicule the marriage-state. it be a subject, he say, that he have not
of late treat so lightly. he own it to be so trite, so beat a topic
with all libertine and witling; so frothy, so empty, so nothing
meaning, so wear-out a theme, that he be heartily ashamed of himself,
ever to have make it his. he condemn it as a stupid reflection upon the
law and good order of society, and upon a man's own ancestor: and in
himself, who have some reason to value himself upon his descent and
alliance, more censurable, than in those who have not the same
advantage to boast of. he promise to be more circumspect than ever,
both in his word and action, that he may be more and more worthy of my
approbation; and that he may give an assurance before hand, that a
foundation be lay in his mind for my example to work upon with equal
reputation and effect to we both;--if he may be so happy to call I his.
'he give I up, as absolutely lose, if I go to my uncle Antony's; the
close confinement; the moated house; the chapel; the implacableness of
my brother and sister; and their power over the rest of the family, he
set forth in strong light; and plainly say, that he must have a
struggle to prevent my be carry thither.'
your kind, your generous endeavour to interest your mother in my behalf,
will, I hope, prevent those harsh extremity to which I might be
otherwise drive. and to you I will fly, if permit, and keep all my
promise, of not correspond with any body, not see any body, but by
your mother's direction and your.
I will close and deposit at this place. it be not necessary to say, how
much I be
your ever affectionate and oblige
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XXXII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
I be glad my paper be safe in your hand. I will make it my endeavour
to deserve your good opinion, that I may not at once disgrace your
judgment, and my own heart.
I have another letter from Mr. Lovelace. he be extremely apprehensive of
the meeting I be to have with Mr. Solmes to-morrow. he say, 'that the
air that wretch give himself on the occasion add to his concern; and it
be with infinite difficulty that he prevail upon himself not to make he
a visit to let he know what he may expect, if compulsion be use towards
I in his favour. he assure I, that Solmes have actually talk with
tradesman of new equipage, and name the people in town with whom he have
treat: that he have even' [be there ever such a horrid wretch!]
'allot this and that apartment in his house, for a nursery, and other
office.'
how shall I bear to hear such a creature talk of love to I? I shall be
out of all patience with he. besides, I think that he do not dare to
make or talk of these impudent preparations.--so inconsistent as such be
with my brother's view--but I fly the subject.
upon this confidence of Solmes, you will less wonder at that of Lovelace,
'in press I in the name of all his family, to escape from so
determine a violence as be intend to be offer to I at my uncle's:
that the forward contriver should propose Lord M.'s chariot and six to be
at the stile that lead up to the lonely coppice adjoining to our
paddock. you will see how audaciously he mention settlement ready
draw; horseman ready to mount; and one of his cousin Montague to be in
the chariot, or at the George in the neighbouring village, wait to
accompany I to Lord M.'s, or to Lady Betty's or Lady Sarah's, or to
town, as I please; and upon such order, or condition, and under such
restriction, as to himself, as I shall prescribe.'
you will see how he threaten, 'to watch and waylay they, and to rescue
I as he call it, by an armed force of friend and servant, if they
attempt to carry I against my will to my uncle's; and this, whether I
give my consent to the enterprise, or not:--since he shall have no hope
if I be once there.'
o my dear friend! who can think of these thing, and not be extremely
miserable in her apprehension!
this mischievous sex! what have I to do with any of they; or they with
me?--I have deserve this, be it by my own seeking, by my own giddiness,
that I have bring myself into this situation--I wish with all my heart
--but how foolish we be apt to wish when we find ourselves unhappy, and
know not how to help ourselves!
on your mother's goodness, however, be my reliance. if I can but avoid
be precipitate on either hand, till my cousin Morden arrive, a
reconciliation must follow; and all will be happy.
I have deposit a letter for Mr. Lovelace; in which 'I charge he, as he
would not disoblige I for ever, to avoid any rash step, any visit to Mr.
Solmes, which may be follow by act of violence.'
I re-assure he, 'that I will soon die than be that man's wife.
'whatever be my usage, whatever shall be the result of the apprehend
interview, I insist upon it that he presume not to offer violence to any
of my friend: and express myself highly displeased, that he should
presume upon such an interest in my esteem, as to think himself entitle
to dispute my father's authority in my removal to my uncle's; although I
tell he, that I will omit neither prayer nor contrivance, even to the
make myself ill, to avoid go.'
to-morrow be Tuesday! how soon come upon we the day we dread!--Oh that
a deep sleep of twenty four hour would seize my faculties!--but then the
next day would be Tuesday, as to all the effect and purpose for which I
so much dread it. if this reach you before the event of the so much
apprehend interview can be know, pray for
your
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER XXXIII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
TUESDAY morning, SIX O'CLOCK.
the day be come!--i wish it be happily over. I have have a wretched
night. hardly a wink have I sleep, ruminate upon the approach
interview. the very distance of time to which they consent, have add
solemnity to the meeting, which otherwise it would not have have.
a thoughtful mind be not a blessing to be covet, unless it have such a
happy vivacity with it as your: a vivacity, which enable a person to
enjoy the present, without be over-anxious about the future.
TUESDAY, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.
I have have a visit from my aunt hervey. Betty, in her alarming way, tell
I, I should have a lady to breakfast with I, whom I little expect;
give I to believe it be my mother. this flutter I so much, on
hear a lady come up-stair, suppose it be she, (and not know
how to account for her motif in such a visit, after I have be so long
banish from her presence,) that my aunt, at her entrance, take notice
of my disorder; and, after her first salutation,
why, Miss, say she, you seem surprised.--upon my word, you thoughtful
young lady have strange apprehension about nothing at all. what,
take my hand, can be the matter with you?--Why, my dear, tremble,
tremble, tremble, at this rate? youwill not be fit to be see by any
body. come, my love, kiss my cheek, pluck up a courage. by this
needless flutter on the approach interview, when it be over you will
judge of your other antipathy, and laugh at yourself for give way to
so apprehensive an imagination.
I say, that whatever we strongly imagine, be in its effect at the time
more than imaginary, although to other it might not appear so: that I
have not rest one hour all night: that the impertinent set over I, by
give I room to think my mother be come up, have so much disconcert
I, that I should be very little qualified to see any body I dislike to
see.
there be no accounting for these thing, she say. Mr. Solmes last
night suppose he should be under as much agitation as I could be.
who be it, then, Madam, that so reluctant an interview on both side, be
to please?
both of you, my dear, I hope, after the first flurry be over. the
most apprehensive beginning, I have often know, make the happy
conclusion.
there can be but one happy conclusion to the intend visit; and that be,
that both side may be satisfied it will be the last.
she then represent how unhappy it would be for I, if I do not suffer
myself to be prevail upon: she press I to receive Mr. Solmes as
become my education: and declare, that his apprehension on the
expectation he have of see I, be owe to his love and his awe;
intimate, that true love be ever accompany by fear and reverence; and
that no blustering, brave lover could deserve encouragement.
to this I answer, that constitution be to be consider: that a man of
spirit would act like one, and could do nothing meanly: that a creep
mind would creep into every thing, where it have a view to obtain a
benefit by it; and insult, where it have power, and nothing to expect:
that this be not a point now to be determine with I: that I have say
as much as I could possibly say on the subject: that this interview be
impose upon I: by those, indeed, who have a right to impose it: but that
it be sorely against my will comply with: and for this reason, that
there be aversion, not wilfulness, in the case; and so nothing could
come of it, but a pretence, as I much apprehend, to use I still more
severely than I have be use.
she be then pleased to charge I with prepossession and prejudice. she
expatiate upon the duty of a child. she impute to I abundance of fine
quality; but tell I, that, in this case, that of persuadableness be
want to crown all. she insist upon the merit of obedience, although
my will be not in it. from a little hint I give of my still great
dislike to see Mr. Solmes, on account of the freedom I have treat he
with, she talk to I of his forgiving disposition; of his infinite
respect for I; and I cannot tell what of this sort.
I never find myself so fretful in my life: and so I tell my aunt; and
beg her pardon for it. but she say, it be well disguised then; for
she see nothing but little tremor, which be usual with young lady
when they be to see their admirer for the first time; and this might
be call so, with respect to I; since it be the first time I have
consent to see Mr. Solmes in that light--but that the next--
how, Madam, interrupt I--be it then imagine, that I give this meeting
on that footing?
to be sure it be, child.
to be sure it be, Madam! then I do yet desire to decline it.--I will
not, I cannot, see he, if he expect I to see he upon those term.
Niceness, punctilio, mere punctilio, niece!--can you think that your
appointment, (day, place, hour,) and know what the intent of it be,
be to be interpret away as a mere ceremony, and to mean nothing?--let
I tell you, my dear, your father, mother, uncle, every body, respect
this appointment as the first act of your compliance with their will:
and therefore recede not, I desire you; but make a merit of what cannot
be avoid.
o the hideous wretch!--Pardon I, Madam.--I to be suppose to meet such
a man as that, with such a view! and he to be arm with such an
expectation!--But it cannot be that he expect it, whatever other may
do.--it be plain he cannot, by the fear he tell you all he shall have to
see I. if his hope be so audacious, he could not fear so much.
indeed, he have this hope; and justly found too. but his fear arise
from his reverence, as I tell you before.
his reverence!--his unworthiness!--'tis so apparent, that even he himself
see it, as well as every body else. hence his offer to purchase I!
hence it be, that settlement be to make up for acknowledge want of
merit!
his unworthiness, say you!--Not so fast, my dear. do not this look
like set a high value upon yourself?--we all have exalt notion of
your merit, Niece; but nevertheless, it would not be wrong, if you be
to arrogate less to yourself; though more be to be your due than your
friend attribute to you.
I be sorry, Madam, it should be think arrogance in I, to suppose I be
not worthy of a well man than Mr. Solmes, both as to person and mind:
and as to fortune, I thank God I despise all that can be insist upon in
his favour from so poor a plea.
she tell I, it signify nothing to talk: I know the expectation of
every one.
indeed I do not. it be impossible I could think of such a strange
expectation, upon a compliance make only to shew I would comply in all
that be in my power to comply with.
I might easily, she say, have suppose, that every one think I be
begin to oblige they all, by the kind behaviour of my brother and
sister to I in the garden, last Sunday; by my sister's visit to I
afterwards in my chamber (although both more stiffly receive by I, than
be either wish or expect); by my uncle Harlowe's affectionate visit
to I the same afternoon, not indeed so very gratefully receive as I
use to receive his favours:--but this he kindly impute to the
displeasure I have conceive at my confinement, and to my intention to
come off by degree, that I might keep myself in countenance for my past
opposition.
see, my dear, the low cunning of that Sunday-management, which then so
much surprise I! and see the reason why Dr. Lewen be admit to
visit I, yet forbore to enter upon a subject about which I think he
come to talk to me!--For it seem there be no occasion to dispute with
I on the point I be to be suppose to have concede to.--see, also, how
unfairly my brother and sister must have represent their pretended
kindness, when (though the have an end to answer by appear kind) their
antipathy to I seem to have be so strong, that they could not help
insult I by their arm-in-arm lover-like behaviour to each other; as
my sister afterwards likewise do, when she come to borrow my Kempis.
I lift up my hand and eye! I cannot, say I, give this treatment a
name! the end so unlikely to be answer by mean so low! I know whose
the whole be! he that could get my uncle Harlowe to contribute his part,
and to procure the acquiescence of the rest of my friend to it, must
have the power to do any thing with they against I.
again my aunt tell I, that talk and invective, now I have give the
expectation, would signify nothing. she hop I would not shew every
one, that they have be too forward in their construction of my desire
to oblige they. she could assure I, that it would be bad for I, if
now I recede, than if I have never advance.
Advanced, Madam! how can you say advance? why, this be a trick upon
I! a poor low trick! pardon I, Madam, I donot say you have a hand in
it.--But, my dear aunt, tell I, will not my mother be present at this
dread interview? will she not so far favour I? be it but to
qualify--
Qualify, my dear, interrupt she--your mother, and your uncle Harlowe
would not be present on this occasion for the world--
o then, Madam, how can they look upon my consent to this interview as an
advance?
my aunt be displeased at this home-push. Miss Clary, say she, there be
no dealing with you. it would be happy for you, and for every body else,
be your obedience as ready as your wit. I will leave you--
not in anger, I hope, Madam, interrupt I--all I mean be, to observe,
that let the meeting issue as it may, and as it must issue, it cannot be
a disappointment to any body.
o Miss! you seem to be a very determined young creature. Mr. Solmes will
be here at your time: and remember once more, that upon the come
afternoon depend upon the peace of your whole family, and your own
happiness.
and so say, down she hurry.
here I will stop. in what way I shall resume, or when, be not leave to I
to conjecture; much less determine. I be excessively uneasy!--no good
news from your mother, I doubt!--i will deposit thus far, for fear of the
bad.
Adieu, my good, rather, my only friend!
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XXXIV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
TUESDAY evening; and continue through the NIGHT.
well, my dear, I be alive, and here! but how long I shall be either here,
or alive, I cannot say. I have a vast deal to write; and perhaps shall
have little time for it. nevertheless, I must tell you how the saucy
Betty again discompose I, when she come up with this Solmes's message;
although, as you will remember from my last, I be in a way before that
want no additional surprises/
Miss! Miss! Miss! cry she, as fast as she could speak, with her arm
spread abroad, and all her finger distend, and hold up, will you be
pleased to walk down into your own parlour?--there be every body, I will
assure you in full congregation!--and there be Mr. Solmes, as fine as a
lord, with a charming white peruke, fine laced shirt and ruffle, coat
trim with silver, and a waistcoat standing on end with lace!--quite
handsome, believe me!--You never see such an alteration!--ah! Miss,
shake her head, 'tis pity you have say so much against he! but you
will know how to come off for all that!--i hope it will not be too late!
Impertinence! say I--Wert thou bid to come up in this flutter way?--
and I take up my fan, and fan myself.
bless I! say she, how soon these fine young lady will be put into
flusterations!--I mean not either to offend or frighten you, I be sure.--
every body there, do you say?--Who do you call every body?
why, Miss, hold out her left palm open, and with a flourish, and a
saucy leer, pat it with the fore finger of the other, at every
mention person, there be your papa!--there be your mamma!--there be
your uncle harlowe!--there be your uncle Antony!--your aunt hervey!--my
young lady!--and my young master!--and Mr. Solmes, with the air of a
great courtier, stand up, because he name you:--Mrs. Betty, say he,
[then the ape of a wench bow and scrap, as awkwardly as I suppose the
person do whom she endeavour to imitate,] pray give my humble service
to Miss, and tell she, I wait her command.
be not this a wicked wench?--i tremble so, I could hardly stand. I be
spiteful enough to say, that her young mistress, I suppose, bid she put
on these air, to frighten I out of a capacity of behave so calmly as
should procure I my uncle' compassion.
what a way do you put yourself in, Miss, say the insolent!--come, dear
Madam, take up my fan, which I have lay down, and approach I with
it, fan, shall i--
none of thy impertinence!--but say you, all my friend be below with
he? and be I to appear before they all?
I cannot tell if theywill stay when you come. I think they seem to be
move when Mr. Solmes give I his orders.--but what answer shall I carry
to the 'squire?
say, I cannot go!--but yet when 'tis over, 'tis over!--Say, Iwill wait upon
--I'll attend--i'll come presently--say anything; I care not what--but
give I my fan, and fetch I a glass of water--
she go, and I fan myself all the time; for I be in a flame; and
hem, and struggle with myself all I could; and, when she return,
drink my water; and find no hope presently of a quieter heart, I send
she down, and follow she with precipitation; tremble so, that, have I
not hurry, I question if I could have get down at all.--oh my dear,
what a poor, passive machine be the body when the mind be disorder!
there be two door to my parlour, as I use to call it. as I enter
one, my friend hurry out the other. I just see the gown of my sister,
the last who slide away. my uncle Antony go out with they: but he staid
not long, as you shall hear; and they all remain in the next parlour, a
wainscot partition only part the two. I remember they both in one:
but they be separate in favour of us girl, for each to receive her
visitor in at her pleasure.
Mr. Solmes approach I as soon as I enter, cringe to the ground, a
visible confusion in every feature of his face. after half a dozen
choake-up Madams,--he be very sorry--he be very much concerned--it be
his misfortune--and there he stop, be unable presently to complete
a sentence.
this give I a little more presence of mind. cowardice in a foe beget
courage in one's self--I see that plainly now--yet perhaps, at bottom,
the new-make bravo be a great coward than the other.
I turn from he, and seat myself in one of the fireside chair,
fan myself. I have since recollect, that I must have look very
saucily. could I have have any thought of the man, I should have
despise myself for it. but what can be say in the case of an aversion
so perfectly sincere?
he hem five or six time, as I have do above; and these produce a
sentence--that I could not but see his confusion. this sentence produce
two or three more. I believe my aunt have be his tutoress; for it be
his awe, his reverence for so superlative a Lady [I assure you!] and he
hop--he hop--three time he hop, before he tell I what--at last it
come out, that I be too generous (generosity, he say, be my character)
to despise he for such--for such--for such--true token of his love.
I do indeed see you under some confusion, Sir; and this give I hope,
that although I have be compel, as I may call it, to give way to
this interview, it may be attend with happy effect than I have
apprehend from it.
he have hem himself into more courage.
you could not, Madam, imagine any creature so blind to your merit, and
so little attract by they, as easily to forego the interest and
approbation he be honour with by your worthy family, while he have any
hope give he, that one day he might, by his perseverance and zeal,
expect your favour.
I be but too much aware, Sir, that it be upon the interest and
approbation you mention, that you build such hope. it be impossible
otherwise, that a man, who have any regard for his own happiness, would
persevere against such declaration as I have make, and think myself
oblige to make, in justice to you, as well as to myself.
he have see many instance, he tell I, and have hear of more, where
lady have seem as averse, and yet have be induce, some by motif of
compassion, other by persuasion of friend, to change their mind; and
have be very happy afterwards: and he hop this might be the case here.
I have no notion, Sir, of compliment, in an article of such importance as
this: yet I be sorry to be oblige to speak my mind so plainly as I be
go to do.--know then, that I have invincible objection, Sir, to your
address. I have avow they with an earnestness that I believe be
without example: and why?--because I believe it be without example that
any young creature, circumstance as I be, be ever treat as I have
be treat on your account.
it be hop, Madam, that your consent may in time be obtain--that be
the hope; and I shall be a miserable man if it cannot.
Better, Sir, give I leave to say, you be miserable by yourself, than
that you should make two so.
you may have hear, Madam, thing to my disadvantage. no man be without
enemy. be pleased to let I know what you have hear, and I will
either own my fault, and amend; or I will convince you that I be basely
bespatter: and once I understand you overheard something that I should
say, that give you offence: unguardedly, perhaps; but nothing but what
shewed my value, and that I would persist so long as I have hope.
I have indeed hear many thing to your disadvantage:--and I be far from
be pleased with what I overheard fall from your lip: but as you be
not any thing to I, and never could be, it be not for I to be
concerned about the one or the other.
I be sorry, Madam, to hear this. I be sure you should not tell I of my
fault, that I would be unwilling to correct in myself.
then, Sir, correct this fault--do not wish to have a young creature
compel in the most material article of her life, for the sake of
motif she despise; and in behalf of a person she cannot value: one
that have, in her own right, sufficient to set she above all your offer,
and a spirit that crave no more than what it have, to make itself easy
and happy.
I donot see, Madam, how you would be happy, if I be to discontinue my
address: for--
that be nothing to you, Sir, interrupt I: do you but withdraw your
pretension: and if it will be think fit to start up another man for my
punishment, the blame will not lie at your door. you will be entitle to
my thank, and most heartily will I thank you.
he pause, and seem a little at a loss: and I be go to give he
still strong and more personal instance of my plain-dealing; when in
come my uncle Antony.
so, Niece, so!--sitte in state like a queen, give audience! haughty
audience!--mr. solme, why stand you thus humbly?--why this distance,
man? I hope to see you upon a more intimate footing before we part.
I arise, as soon as he enter--and approach he with a bend knee: let
I, Sir, reverence my uncle, whom I have not for so long time seen!--let
I, Sir, bespeak your favour and compassion.
you will have the favour of every body, Niece, when you know how to
deserve it.
if ever I deserve it, I deserve it now.--i have be hardly used!--i
have make proposal that ought to be accept, and such as would not have
be ask of I. what have I do, that I must be banish and confine
thus disgracefully? that I must not be allow to have any free-will in
an article that concern my present and future happiness?--
Miss Clary, reply my uncle, you have have your will in every thing till
now; and this make your parent' will sit so heavy upon you.
my will, Sir! be pleased to allow I to ask, what be my will till now,
but my father's will, and yours and my uncle Harlowe's will?--Has it not
be my pride to obey and oblige?--i never ask a favour, that I do not
first sit down and consider, if it be fit to be grant. and now, to
shew my obedience, have I not offer to live single?--have I not offer
to divest myself of my grandfather's bounty, and to cast myself upon my
father's! and that to be withdraw, whenever I disoblige he? why, dear,
good Sir, be I to be make unhappy in a point so concern my happiness?
your grandfather's estate be not wish from you. you be not desire to
live a single life. you know our motif, and we guess at your. and,
let I tell you, well as we love you, we should much soon choose to
follow you to the grave, than that yours should take place.
I will engage never to marry any man, without my father's consent, and
your, Sir, and every body's. do I ever give you cause to doubt my
word?--And here I will take the solemn oath that can be offer me--
that be the matrimonial one, interrupt he, with a big voice--and to
this gentleman.--It shall, it shall, cousin Clary!--And the more you
oppose it, the bad it shall be for you.
this, and before the man, who seem to assume courage upon it, highly
provoke I.
then, Sir, you shall soon follow I to the grave indeed.--I will
undergo the cruel death--I will even consent to enter into that awful
vault of my ancestor, and have that bricke up upon I, rather than
consent to be miserable for life. and, Mr. Solmes, turn to he, take
notice of what I say: this or any death, I will soon undergo [that will
quickly be over] than be your, and for ever unhappy!
my uncle be in a terrible rage upon this. he take Mr. Solmes by the
hand, shock as the man seem to be, and draw he to the window--Don't
be surprised, Mr. Solmes, donot be concern at this. we know, and rapt
out a sad oath, what woman will say in their wrath: the wind be not more
boisterous, nor more changeable; and again he swear to that.--If you
think it worthwhile to wait for such an ungrateful girl as this, Iwill
engage shewill veer about; Iwill engage she shall. and a third time
violently swear to it.
then come up to I (who have throw myself, very much disorder by my
vehemence, into the most distant window) as if he would have beat I; his
face violently work, his hand clinch, and his tooth set--yes, yes,
yes, you shall, Cousin Clary, be Mr. Solmes's wife; we will see that you
shall; and this in one week at farthest.--And then a fourth time he
confirm it!--poor gentleman! how he swear!
I be sorry, Sir, say I, to see you in such a passion. all this, I be
but too sensible, be owe to my brother's instigation; who would not
himself give the instance of duty that be seek to be exact from I.
it be good for I to withdraw. I shall but provoke you far, I fear:
for although I would gladly obey you if I could, yet this be a point
determine with I; and I cannot so much as wish to get over it.
how could I avoid make these strong declaration, the man in presence?
I be go out at the door I come in at; the gentleman look upon one
another, as if refer to each other what to do, or whether to engage
my stay, or suffer I to go; and whom should I meet at the door but my
brother, who have hear all that have pass!
he bolt upon I so unexpectedly, that I be surprised. he take my
hand, and grasp it with violence: return, pretty Miss, say he; return,
if you please. you shall not yet be bricke up. your instigate
brother shall save you from that!--o thou fall angel, say he, peer
up to my downcast face--such a sweetness here!--and such an obstinacy
there! tap my neck--o thou true woman--though so young!--But you
shall not have your rake: remember that; in a loud whisper, as if he
would be decently indecent before the man. you shall be redeem, and
this worthy gentleman, raise his voice, will be so good as to redeem
you from ruin--and hereafter you will bless he, or have reason to bless
he, for his condescension; that be the brutal brother's word!
he have lead I up to meet Mr. Solmes, whose hand he take, as he hold mine.
here, Sir, say he, take the rebel daughter's hand: I give it you now:
she shall confirm the gift in a week's time; or will have neither father,
mother, nor uncle, to boast of.
I snatch my hand away.
how now, miss!--
and how now, sir!--what right have you to dispose of my hand?--if you
govern every body else, you shall not govern I; especially in a point
so immediately relative to myself, and in which you neither have, nor
ever shall have, any thing to do.
I would have break from he; but he hold my hand too fast.
let I go, Sir!--Why be I thus treated?--you design, I doubt not, with
your unmanly griping, to hurt I, as you do: but again I ask, wherefore
be it that I be to be thus treat by you?
he toss my hand from he with a whirl, that pain my very shoulder. I
weep, and hold my other hand to the part.
Mr. Solmes blame he. so do my uncle.
he have no patience, he say, with such a perverse one; and to think of
the reflection upon himself, before he enter. he have only give I
back the hand I have not deserve he should touch. it be one of my art
to pretend to be so pained.
Mr. Solmes say, he would soon give up all his hope of I, than that I
should be use unkindly.--and he offer to plead in my behalf to they
both; and apply himself with a bow, as if for my approbation of his
interposition.
interpose not, Mr. Solmes, say I, to save I from my brother's violence.
I cannot wish to owe an obligation to a man whose ungenerous perseverance
be the occasion of that violence, and of all my disgraceful suffering.
how generous in you, Mr. Solmes, say my brother, to interpose so kindly
in behalf of such an immovable spirit! I beg of you to persist in your
address--the unnatural brother call it address!--for all our family's
sake, and for her sake too, if you love she, persist!--let we save she,
if possible, from ruin herself. look at her person! [and he gaze at
I, from head to foot, point at I, as he refer to Mr. Solmes,]
think of her fine qualities!--all the world confess they, and we all
glory in she till now. she be worth saving; and, after two or three
more struggle, she will be your, and take my word for it, will reward
your patience. talk not, therefore, of give up your hope, for a
little whine folly. she have enter upon a parade, which she know not
how to quit with a female grace. you have only her pride and her
obstinacy to encounter: and depend upon it, you will be as happy a man
in a fortnight, as a married man can be.
you have hear I say, my dear, that my brother have always take a
liberty to reflect upon our sex, and upon matrimony!--He would not, if he
do not think it wit to do so!--just as poor Mr. Wyerley, and other,
whom we both know, profane and ridicule scripture; and all to evince
their pretension to the same pernicious talent, and to have it think
they be too wise to be religious.
Mr. Solmes, with a self-satisfy air, presumptuously say, he would
suffer every thing, to oblige my family, and to save I: and doubt not
to be amply reward, could he be so happy as to succeed at last.
Mr. Solmes, say I, if you have any regard for your own happiness, (mine
be out of the question with you, you have not generosity enough to make
that any part of your scheme,) prosecute no father your address, as my
brother call it. it be but too just to tell you, that I could not bring
my heart so much as to think of you, without the utmost disapprobation,
before I be use as I have been:--and can you think I be such a slave,
such a poor slave, as to be bring to change my mind by the violent
usage I have meet with?
and you, Sir, turn to my brother, if you think that meekness always
indicate tameness; and that there be no magnanimity without bluster; own
yourself mistaken for once: for you shall have reason to judge from
henceforth, that a generous mind be not to be force; and that--
no more, say the imperious wretch, I charge you, lift up his hand
and eye. then turn to my uncle, do you hear, Sir? this be your once
faultless niece! this be your favourite!
Mr. Solmes look as if he know not what to think of the matter; and have
I be leave alone with he, I see plainly I could have get rid of he
easily enough.
my uncle come to I, look up also to my face, and down to my foot: and
be it possible this can be you? all this violence from you, Miss Clary?
yes, it be possible, Sir--and, I will presume to say, this vehemence on
my side be but the natural consequence of the usage I have meet with, and
the rudeness I be treat with, even in your presence, by a brother, who
have no more right to controul I, than I have to controul he.
this usage, cousin Clary, be not till all other mean be try with
you.
try! to what end, Sir?--Do I contend for any thing more than a mere
negative? you may, Sir, [turn to Mr. Solmes,] possibly you may be
induce the rather to persevere thus ungenerously, as the usage I have
meet with for your sake, and what you have now see offer to I by my
brother, will shew you what I can bear, be my evil destiny ever to make
I your.
Lord, Madam, cry solme, [all this time distort into twenty different
attitude, as my brother and my uncle be bless themselves, and
speak only to each other by their eye, and by their working feature;
Lord, Madam,] what a construction be this!
a fair construction, Sir, interrupt I: for he that can see a person,
whom he pretend to value, thus treat, and approve of it, must be
capable of treat she thus himself. and that you do approve of it, be
evident by your declare perseverance, when you know I be confine,
banish, and insult, in order to make I consent to be what I never
can be: and this, let I tell you, as I have often tell other, not from
motif of obstinacy, but aversion.
excuse I, Sir, turn to my uncle--to you, as to my father's brother, I
owe duty. I beg your pardon, but my brother; he shall not constrain I.
--and [turn to the unnatural wretch--I will call he wretch] knit your
brow, Sir, and frown all you will, I will ask you, would you, in my
case, make the sacrifice I be willing to make, to obtain every one's
favour? if not, what right have you to treat I thus; and to procure I
to be treat as I have be for so long a time past?
I have put myself by this time into great disorder: they be silent, and
seem by their look to want to talk to one another (walk about in
violent disorder too) between while. I sit down fan myself, (as it
happen, against the glass,) and I could perceive my colour go and come;
and be sick to the very heart, and apprehensive of fainting, I rung.
Betty come in. I call for a glass of water, and drink it: but nobody
mind I. I hear my brother pronounce the word, art! female Art! to
solme; which, together with the apprehension that he would not be
welcome, I suppose keep he back. else I could see the man be affect.
and (still fear I should faint) I arise, and take hold of Betty's
arm, let I hold by you, Betty, say I: let I withdraw. and move with
tremble foot towards the door, and then turn about, and make a
courtesy to my uncle--permit I, Sir, say I, to withdraw.
Whither go you, Niece? say my uncle: we have not do with you yet. I
charge you depart not. Mr. Solmes have something to open to you, that
will astonish you--and you shall hear it.
only, Sir, by your leave, for a few minute into the air. I will return,
if you command it. I will hear all that I be to hear; that it may be
over now and for ever.--You will go with I, Betty?
and so, without any farth prohibition, I retire into the garden; and
there cast myself upon the first seat, and throw Betty's apron over
my face, lean against her side, my hand between her, I give way to a
violent burst of grief, or passion, or both; which, as it seem, save
my heart from break, for I be sensible of an immediate relief.
I have already give you specimen of Mrs. Betty's impertinence. I shall
not, therefore, trouble you with more: for the wench, notwithstanding
this my distress, take great liberty with I, after she see I a little
recover, and as I walk far into the garden; insomuch that I be
oblige to silence she by an absolute prohibition of say another word
to I; and then she drop behind I sullen and gloomy.
it be near an hour before I be send for in again. the messenger be my
cousin Dolly Hervey, who, with an eye of compassion and respect, (for
Miss Hervey always love I, and call herself my scholar, as you know,)
tell my, my company be desire.
Betty leave we.
who command my attendance, Miss? say I--have you not be in tear, my
dear?
who can forbid tear? say she.
why, what be the matter, cousin dolly?--sure, nobody be entitle to weep
in this family, but I!
yes, I be, Madam, say she, because I love you.
I kiss she: and be it for I, my sweet Cousin, that you shed tears?--
there never be love lose between we: but tell I, what be design to be
do with I, that I have this kind instance of your compassion for I?
you must take no notice of what I tell you, say the dear girl: but my
mamma have be weep for you, too, with I; but durst not let any body
see it: o my dolly, say my mamma, there never be so set a malice in man
as in your cousin James Harlowe. they will ruin the flower and ornament
of their family.
as how, Miss Dolly?--Did she not explain herself?--as how, my dear?
yes; she say, Mr. Solmes would have give up his claim to you; for he
say, you hat he, and there be no hope; and your mamma be willing
he should; and to have you take at your word, to renounce Mr. Lovelace
and to live single. my mamma be for it too; for they hear all that
pass between you and uncle Antony, and cousin James; say, it be
impossible to think of prevail upon you to have Mr. Solmes. Uncle
Harlowe seem in the same way of thinking; at least, my mamma say he
do not say any thing to the contrary. but your papa be immovable, and
be angry at your mamma and mine upon it.--and hereupon your brother,
your sister, and my uncle Antony, join in, and change the scene
entirely. in short, she say, that Mr. Solmes have great matter engage
to he. he own, that you be the fine young lady in England, and he
would be content to be but little beloved, if he could not, after
marriage, engage your heart, for the sake of have the honour to call
you his but for one twelvemonth--I suppose he would break your heart the
next--for he be a cruel-hearted man, I be sure.
my friend may break my heart, cousin dolly; but Mr. Solmes will never
have it in his power to break it.
I do not know that, Miss: you will have good luck to avoid have he, by
what I can find; for my mamma say, they be all now of one mind, herself
except; and she be force to be silent, your papa and brother be both
so outrageous.
I be get above mind my brother, cousin Dolly:--he be but my brother.
but to my father I owe duty and obedience, if I could comply.
we be apt to be fond of any body that will side with we, when oppress
or provoke. I always love my cousin dolly; but now she endear
herself to I ten time more, by her soothe concern for I. I ask
what she would do, be she in my case?
without hesitation, she reply, have Mr. Lovelace out of hand, and take
up her own estate, if she be I; and there would be an end to it.--And
Mr. Lovelace, she say, be a fine gentleman:--mr. solme be not worthy
to buckle his shoe.
Miss Hervey tell I far, that her mother be desire to come to I,
to fetch I in; but she excuse herself. I should have all my friend,
she say, she believe, sit in judgment upon I.
I wish it have be so. but, as I have be tell since, neither my father
for my mother would trust themselves with see I: the one it seem for
passion sake; my mother for tender consideration.
by this time we enter the house. Miss accompany I into the parlour,
and leave I, as a person devote, I then think.
nobody be there. I sit down, and have leisure to weep; reflect upon
what my cousin dolly have tell I.
they be all in my sister's parlour adjoining: for I hear a confused
mixture of voice, some louder than other, which drown the more
compassionate accent.
female accent I could distinguish the drown one to be. o my dear!
what a hard-hearted sex be the other! child of the same parent, how
come they by their cruelty?--do they get it by travel?--do they get it by
conversation with one another?--or how do they get it?--Yet my sister,
too, be as hard-hearted as any of they. but this may be no exception
neither: for she have be think to be masculine in her air and her
spirit. she have then, perhaps, a soul of the other sex in a body of
our. and so, for the honour of our own, will I judge of every woman for
the future, who imitate the rougher manner of man, act unbeseeming
the gentleness of her own sex.
forgive I, my dear friend, for break into my story by these
reflection. be I rapidly to pursue my narration, without think,
without reflect, I believe I should hardly be able to keep in my right
mind: since vehemence and passion would then be always uppermost; but
while I think as I write, I cool, and my hurry of spirit be allay.
I believe I be about a quarter of an hour enjoy my own comfortless
contemplation, before any body come in to I; for they seem to be in
full debate. my aunt look in first; o my dear, say she, be you
there? and withdraw hastily to apprize they of it.
and then (as agree upon I suppose) in come my uncle Antony, credit
Mr. Solmes with the word, let I lead you in, my dear friend, have
hold of his hand; while the new-make beau awkwardly follow, but more
edgingly, as I may say, set his foot mincingly, to avoid treading
upon his leader's heel. excuse I, my dear, this seem levity; but
those we do not love, appear in every thing ungraceful to we.
I stand up. my uncle look very surly.--sit down!--sit down, Girl, say
he.--and draw a chair near I, he place his dear friend in it,
whether he would or not, I have take my seat. and my uncle sit on the
other side of I.
well, Niece, take my hand, we shall have very little more to say to you
than we have already say, as to the subject that be so distasteful to
you--unless, indeed, you have well consider of the matter--and first
let I know if you have?
the matter want no consideration, Sir.
very well, very well, Madam! say my uncle, withdraw his hand from
mine: could I ever have think of this from you?
for God's sake, dear Madam, say Mr. Solmes, fold his hand--and
there he stop.
for God's sake, what, Sir?--How come God's sake, and your sake, I pray
you, to be the same?
this silence he. my uncle could only be angry; and that he be before.
well, well, well, Mr. Solmes, say my uncle, no more of supplication.
you have not confidence enough to expect a woman's favour.
he then be pleased to hint what great thing he have design to do for
I; and that it be more for my sake, after he return from the Indies,
than for the sake of any other of the family, that he have resolve to
live a single life.--but now, conclude he, that the perverse girl
despise all the great thing it be once as much in my will, as it be
in my power, to do for she, I will change my measure.
I tell he, that I most sincerely thank he for all his kind intention
to I: but that I be willing to resign all claim to any other of his
favour than kind look and kind word.
he look about he this way and that.
Mr. Solmes look pitifully down.
but both be silent, I be sorry, I add, that I have too much reason
to say a very harsh thing, as I might be think; which be, that if he
would but be pleased to convince my brother and sister, that he be
absolutely determined to alter his generous purpose towards I, it might
possibly procure I well treatment from both, than I be otherwise
likely to have.
my uncle be very much displeased. but he have not the opportunity to
express his displeasure, as he seem prepare to do; for in come my
brother in exceed great wrath; and call I several vile name. his
success hitherto, in his device against I, have set he above keep
even decent measure.
be this my spiteful construction? he ask--be this the interpretation
I put upon his brotherly care of I, and concern for I, in order to
prevent my ruining myself?
it be, indeed it be, say I: I know no other way to account for your late
behaviour to I: and before your face, I repeat my request to my uncle,
and I will make it to my other uncle whenever I be permit to see he,
that they will confer all their favour upon you, and upon my sister; and
only make I happy (it be all I wish for!) in their kind look, and kind
word.
how they all gaze upon one another!--but could I be less peremptory
before the man?
and, as to your care and concern for I, Sir, turn to my brother; once
more I desire it not. you be but my brother. my father and mother, I
bless God, be both live; and be they not, you have give I abundant
reason to say, that you be the very last person I would wish to have any
concern for I.
how, Niece! and be a brother, an only brother, of so little
consideration with you, as this come to? and ought he to have no
concern for his sister's honour, and the family's honour.
my honour, Sir!--I desire none of his concern for that! it never be
endanger till it have his undesired concern!--forgive I, Sir--but when
my brother know how to act like a brother, or behave like a gentleman,
he may deserve more consideration from I than it be possible for I now
to think he do.
I think my brother would have beat I upon this: but my uncle stand
between we.
violent girl, however, he call I--who, say he, who would have think
it of she?
then be Mr. Solmes tell, that I be unworthy of his pursuit.
but Mr. Solmes warmly take my part: he could not bear, he say, that I
should be treat so roughly.
and so very much do he exert himself on this occasion, and so patiently
be his warmth receive by my brother, that I begin to suspect, that it
be a contrivance to make I think myself oblige to he; and that this
might perhaps be one end of the press-for interview.
the very suspicion of this low artifice, violent as I be think to be
before, put I still more out of patience; and my uncle and my brother
again praise his wonderful generosity, and his noble return of good
for evil, you be a happy man, Mr. Solmes, say I, that you can so easily
confer obligation upon a whole family, except upon one ungrateful person
of it, whom you seem to intend most to oblige; but who be make unhappy
by your favour, desire not to owe to you any protection from the
violence of a brother.
then be I a rude, an ungrateful, and unworthy creature.
I own it all--all, all you can call I, or think I, Brother, do I own.
I own my unworthiness with regard to this gentleman. I take your word
for his abundant merit, which I have neither leisure nor inclination to
examine into--it may perhaps be as great as your own--but yet I cannot
thank he for his great mediation: for who see not, look at my uncle,
that this be give himself a merit with every body at my expense?
then turn to my brother, who seem surprised into silence by my
warmth, I must also acknowledge, Sir, the favour of your superabundant
care for I. but I discharge you of it; at least, while I have the
happiness of nearer and dearer relation. you have give I no reason to
think well of your prudence, than of my own. I be independent of you,
Sir, though I never desire to be so of my father: and although I wish for
the good opinion of my uncle, it be all I wish for from they: and this,
Sir, I repeat, to make you and my sister easy.
instantly almost come in Betty, in a great hurry, look at I as
spitefully as if she be my sister: Sir, say she to my brother, my
master desire to speak with you this moment at the door.
he go to that which lead into my sister's parlour; and this sentence I
hear thunder from the mouth of one who have a right to all my
reverence: Son James, let the rebel be this moment carry away to my
brother'--this very moment--she shall not stay one hour more under my
roof!
I tremble; I be ready to sink. yet, not know what I do, or say, I
fly to the door, and would have open it: but my brother pull it to,
and hold it close by the key--o my papa!--my dear Papa! say I, fall
upon my knee, at the door--admit your child to your presence!--let I
but plead my cause at your feet!--Oh! reprobate not thus your distressed
daughter!
my uncle put his handkerchief to his eye. Mr. Solmes make a still more
grievous face than he have before. but my brother's marble heart be
untouched.
I will not stir from my knee, continue I, without admission; at this
door I beg it!--oh! let it be the door of mercy! and open it to I,
honour Sir, I beseech you!--but this once, this once! although you be
afterwards to shut it against I for ever!
the door be endeavour to be open on the inside, which make my
brother let go the key on a sudden; and I press against it, (all the
time remain on my knee,) fall flat on my face into the other parlour;
however without hurt myself. but every body be go, except Betty,
who I suppose be the person that endeavour to open the door. she
help to raise I up; and when I be on my foot, I look round that
apartment, and see nobody there, re-enter the other, lean upon
she; and then throw myself into the chair which I have sit in before; and
my eye overflow, to my great relief: while my uncle Antony, my
brother, and Mr. Solmes, leave I, and go to my other relation.
what pass among they, I know not: but my brother come in by the time I
have tolerably recover myself, with a settled and haughty gloom upon his
brow--your father and mother command you instantly to prepare for your
uncle Antony's. you need not be solicitous about what you shall take
with you: you may give Betty your key--take they, Betty, if the perverse
one have they about she, and carry they to her mother. she will take care
to send every thing after you that you shall want--but another night you
will not be permit to stay in this house.
I donot choose to give my key to any body, except to my mother, and into
her own hands.--you see how much I be disorder. it may cost I my
life, to be hurry away so suddenly. I beg to be indulge till next
Monday at least.
that will not be grant you. so prepare for this very very night. and
give up your key. give they to I, Miss. Iwill carry they to your
mother.
excuse I, Brother. indeed I willnot.
indeed you must. have you any thing you be afraid should be see by
your mother?
not if I be permit to attend she.
Iwill make a report accordingly.
he go out.
in come Miss Dolly Hervey: I be sorry, Madam, to be the messenger--but
your mamma insist upon your send up all the key of your cabinet,
library, and drawer.
tell my mother, that I yield they up to her command: tell she, I make no
condition with my mother: but if she find nothing she shall disapprove
of, I beg that she will permit I to tarry here a few day longer.--try,
my dolly, [the dear girl sob with grief;] try if your gentleness
cannot prevail for I.
she weep still more, and say, it be sad, very sad, to see matter thus
carry!
she take the key, and wrap her arm about I; and beg I to excuse
she for her message; and would have say more; but Betty's presence awe
she, as I see.
donot pity I, my dear, say I. it will be impute to you as a fault.
you see who be by.
the insolent wench scornfully smile: one young lady pity another in
thing of this nature, look promise in the young, I must need say.
I bid her begone from my presence.
she would most gladly go, she say, be she not to stay about I by my
mother's order.
it soon appear for what she staid; for I offer to go up stair to my
apartment when my cousin go from I with the key, she tell I she be
command (to her very great regret, she must own) to desire I not to go
up at present.
such a bold face, as she, I tell she, should not hinder I.
she instantly ring the bell, and in come my brother, meet I at the
door.
return, return, Miss--no go up yet.
I go in again, and throw myself upon the window-seat, weep bitterly.
shall I give you the particular of a ridiculously-spiteful conversation
that pass between my brother and I, in the time that he (with Betty)
be in office to keep I in the parlour while my closet be searching!--
but I think I will not. it can answer no good end.
I desire several time, while he staid, to have leave to retire to my
apartment; but be deny. the search, I suppose, be not over.
Bella be one of those employ in it. they could not have a more
diligent searcher. how happy it be they be disappoint!
but when my sister could not find the cunning creature's paper, I be to
stand another visit from Mr. Solmes--precede now by my aunt Hervey,
solely against her will, I could see that; accompany by my uncle
Antony, in order to keep she steady, I suppose.
but be a little heavy (for it be now past two in the morning) I will
lie down in my clothe, to indulge the kind summon, if it will be
indulge.
three O'CLOCK, WEDNESDAY morning.
I could not sleep--only doze away one half-hour.
my aunt Hervey accost I thus:--o my dear child, what trouble do you
give to your parent, and to every body!--i wonder at you!
I be sorry for it, Madam.
sorry for it, child!--Why then so very obstinate?--come, sit down, my
dear. I will sit next to you; take my hand.
my uncle place Mr. Solmes on the other side of I: himself over-against
I, almost close to I. be I not finely beset, my dear?
your brother, child, say my aunt, be too passionate--his zeal for your
welfare push he on a little too vehemently.
very true, say my uncle: but no more of this. we would now be glad to
see if milder mean will do with you--though, indeed, they be try
before.
I ask my aunt, if it be necessary, that the gentleman should be
present?
there be a reason that he should, say my aunt, as you will hear by-and
by.--but I must tell you, first, that, think you be a little too
angrily treat by your brother, your mother desire I to try what
gentler mean would do upon a spirit so generous as we use to think
your.
nothing can be do, Madam, I must presume to say, if this gentleman's
address be the end.
she look upon my uncle, who bite his lip; and look upon Mr. Solmes,
who rub his cheek; and shake her head, good, dear creature, say
she, be calm. let I ask you, if something would have be do, have you
be more gently use, than you seem to think you have be?
no, Madam, I cannot say it would, in this gentleman's favour. you know,
Madam, you know, Sir, to my uncle, I ever value myself upon my
sincerity: and once indeed have the happiness to be value for it.
my uncle take Mr. Solmes aside. I hear he say, whispering, she must,
she shall, still be yours.--we'll see, whowill conquer, parent or child,
uncle or niece. I doubt not to be witness to all this be get over,
and many a good-humour jest make of this high phrensy!
I be heartily vex.
though we cannot find out, continue he, yet we guess, who put she upon
this obstinate behaviour. it be not natural to she, man. nor would I
concern myself so much about she, but that I know what I say to be true,
and intend to do great thing for she.
I will hourly pray for that happy time, whisper as audibly Mr. Solmes.
I never will revive the remembrance of what be now so painful to I.
well, but, Niece, I be to tell you, say my aunt, that the send up of
the key, without make any condition, have work for you what nothing
else could have do. that, and the not find any thing that could
give they umbrage, together with Mr. Solmes's interposition--
O Madam, let I not owe an obligation to Mr. Solmes. I cannot repay it,
except by my thank; and those only on condition that he will decline his
suit. to my thank, Sir, [turn to he,] if you have a heart capable
of humanity, if you have any esteem for I for my own sake, I beseech you
to entitle yourself!--i beseech you, do!--
O Madam, cry he, believe, believe, believe I, it be impossible. while
you be single, I will hope. while that hope be encourage by so many
worthy friend, I must persevere. I must not slight they, Madam, because
you slight I.
I answer he only with a look; but it be of high disdain; and turn
from him,--but what favour, dear Madam, [to my aunt,] have the instance of
duty you mention procure I?
your mother and Mr. Solmes, reply my aunt, have prevail, that your
request to stay here till Monday next shall be grant, if you will
promise to go cheerfully then.
let I but choose my own visiter, and I will go to my uncle's house with
pleasure.
well, Niece, say my aunt, we must wave this subject, I find. we will
now proceed to another, which will require your utmost attention. it
will give you the reason why Mr. Solmes's presence be requisite--
Ay, say my uncle, and shew you what sort of a man somebody be. Mr.
Solmes, pray favour us, in the first place, with the letter you receive
from your anonymous friend.
I will, Sir. and out he pull a letter-case, and take out a letter,
it be write in answer to one, send to the person. it be superscribe,
to Roger Solmes, Esq. it begin thus: honour sir--
I beg your pardon, Sir, say I: but what, pray, be the intent of read
this letter to I?
to let you know what a vile man you be think to have set your heart
upon, say my uncle, in an audible whisper.
if, Sir, it be suspect, that I have set my heart upon any other, why be
Mr. Solmes to give himself any further trouble about I?
only hear, Niece, say my aunt; only hear what Mr. Solmes have to read and
to say to you on this head.
if, Madam, Mr. Solmes will be pleased to declare, that he have no view to
serve, no end to promote, for himself, I will hear any thing he shall
read. but if the contrary, you must allow I to say, that it will abate
with I a great deal of the weight of whatever he shall produce.
hear it but read, Niece, say my aunt--
hear it read, say my uncle. you be so ready to take part with--
with any body, Sir, that be accuse anonymously, and from interested
motif.
he begin to read; and there seem to be a heavy load of charge in this
letter against the poor criminal: but I stop the reading of it, and
say, it will not be my fault, if this vilify man be not as indifferent
to I, as one whom I never see. if he be otherwise at present, which I
neither own, nor deny, it proceed from the strange method take to
prevent it. do not let one cause unite he and I, and we shall not be
united. if my offer to live single be accept, he shall be no more to
I than this gentleman.
still--Proceed, Mr. Solmes--hear it out, Niece, be my uncle's cry.
but to what purpose, Sir! say I--have not Mr. Solmes a view in this?
and, besides, can any thing bad be say of Mr. Lovelace, than I have
hear say for several month past?
but this, say my uncle, and what Mr. Solmes can tell you besides,
amount to the full proof--
be the unhappy man, then, so freely treat in his character before,
without full proof? I beseech you, Sir, give I not too good an opinion
of Mr. Lovelace; as I may have, if such pain be take to make he
guilty, by one who mean not his reformation by it; nor to do good, if I
may presume to say so in this case, to any body but himself.
I see very plainly, girl, say my uncle, your prepossession, your fond
prepossession, for the person of a man without moral.
indeed, my dear, say my aunt, you too much justify all your
apprehension. surprising! that a young creature of virtue and honour
should thus esteem a man of a quite opposite character!
Dear Madam, do not conclude against I too hastily. I believe Mr.
Lovelace be far from be so good as he ought to be: but if every man's
private life be search into by prejudiced people, set on for that
purpose, I know not whose reputation would be safe. I love a virtuous
character, as much in man as in woman. I think it be requisite, and as
meritorious, in the one as in the other. and, if leave to myself, I
would prefer a person of such a character to royalty without it.
why then, say my uncle--
give I leave, Sir--but I may venture to say, that many of those who have
escape censure, have not merit applause.
permit I to observe far, that Mr. Solmes himself may not be
absolutely faultless. I never head of his virtue. some vice I have
hear of--excuse I, Mr. Solmes, I speak to your face--the text about
cast the first stone afford an excellent lesson.
he look down; but be silent.
Mr. Lovelace may have vice you have not. you may have other, which he
have not. I speak not this to defend he, or to accuse you. no man be
bad, no one be good, in every thing. Mr. Lovelace, for example, be say
to be implacable, and to hate my friend: that do not make I value he
the more: but give I leave to say, that they hate he as much. Mr.
Solmes have his antipathy, likewise; very strong one, and those to his
own relation; which I donot find to be the other's fault; for he live
well with his--yet he may have as bad:--worse, pardon I, he cannot have,
in my poor opinion: for what must be the man, who hat his own flesh?
you know not, Madam;
you know not, Niece; all in one breath.
you know not, Clary;
I may not, nor do I desire to know Mr. Solmes's reason. it concern not
I to know they: but the world, even the impartial part of it, accuse
he. if the world be unjust or rash, in one man's case, why may it not
be so in another's? thatbe all I mean by it. nor can there by a great
sign of want of merit, than where a man seek to pull down another's
character, in order to build up his own.
the poor man's face be all this time overspread with confusion, twisted,
as it be, and all awry, neither mouth nor nose stand in the middle
of it. he look as if he be ready to cry: and have he be capable of
pity I, I have certainly try to pity he.
they all three gaze upon one another in silence.
my aunt, I see (at least I think so) look as if she would have be
glad she might have appear to approve of what I say. she but feebly
blame I, when she speak, for not hear what Mr. Solmes have to say.
he himself seem not now very earnest to be hear. my uncle say, there
be no talk to I. and I should have absolutely silence both
gentleman, have not my brother come in again to their assistance.
this be the strange speech he make at his entrance, his eye flame
with anger; this prating girl, have strike you all dumb, I perceive.
Persevere, however, Mr. Solmes. I have hear every word she have say:
and I know of no other method of be even with she, than after she be
your, to make she as sensible of your power, as she now make you of her
insolence.
Fie, cousin Harlowe! say my aunt--could I have think a brother would
have say this, to a gentleman, of a sister?
I must tell you, Madam, say he, that you give the rebel courage. you
yourself seem to favour too much the arrogance of her sex in she;
otherwise she durst not have thus stop her uncle's mouth by
reflection upon he; as well as deny to hear a gentleman tell she the
danger she be in from a libertine, whose protection, as she plainly
hint, she intend to claim against her family.
stop my uncle's mouth, by reflection upon he, Sir! say I, how can
that be! how dare you to make such an application as this!
my aunt weep at his reflection upon her.--cousin, say she to he, if
this be the thank I have for my trouble, I have do: your father would
not treat I thus--and I will say, that the hint you give be an
unbrotherly one.
not more unbrotherly than all the rest of his conduct to I, of late,
Madam, say I. I see by this speciman of his violence, how every body
have be bring into his measure. have I any the least apprehension of
ever be in Mr. Solmes's power, this might have affect I. but you
see, Sir, to Mr. Solmes, what a conduct be think necessary to enable
you to arrive at your ungenerous end. you see how my brother court for
you.
I disclaim Mr. Harlowe's violence, Madam, with all my soul. I will never
remind you--
Silence, worthy Sir, say I; I will take care you never shall have the
opportunity.
Less violence, Clary, say my uncle. Cousin James, you be as much to
blame as your sister.
in then come my sister. Brother, say she, you keep not your promise.
you be think to be to blame within, as well as here. be not Mr.
Solmes's generosity and affection to the girl well know, what you say
would have be inexcusable. my father desire to speak with you; and
with you, Mr. Solmes, if you please.
they all four withdraw into the next apartment.
I stand silent, as not know presently how to take this intervention of
my sister's. but she leave I not long at a loss--o thou perverse thing,
say she [poke out her angry face at I, when they be all go, but
speak spitefully low]--what trouble do you give to we all!
you and my brother, Bella, say I, give trouble to yourself; yet
neither you nor he have any business to concern yourself about I.
she throw out some spiteful expression, still in a low voice, as if she
choose not to be hear without; and I think it well to oblige she to
raise her tone a little, if I could. if I could, do I say? it be easy
to make a passionate spirit answer all one's view upon it.
she accordingly flame out in a raise tone: and this bring my cousin
dolly in to we. Miss Harlowe, your company be desire.
I will come presently, cousin dolly.
but again provoke a severity from I which she could not bear, and
call I name! in once more come dolly, with another message, that
her company be desire.
not mine, I doubt, Miss Dolly, say I.
the sweet-temper girl burst out into tear, and shake her head.
go in before I, child, say Bella, [vex to see her concern for I,]
with thy sharp face like a new moon: what dost thou cry for? be it to
make thy keen face look still keener?
I believe Bella be blame, too, when she go in; for I hear she say,
the creature be so provoking, there be no keep a resolution.
Mr. Solmes, after a little while, come in again by himself, to take leave
of I: full of scrape and compliment; but too well tutored and
encourage, to give I hope of his decline his suit. he beg I not
to impute to he any of the severe thing to which he have be a
sorrowful witness. he besought my compassion, as he call it.
he say, the result be, that he still have hope give he; and, although
discourage by I, he be resolve to persevere, while I remain single.
--And such long and such painful service he talk of, as never before
be hear of.
I tell he in the strong manner, what he have to trust to.
yet still he determine to persist.--while I be no man's else, he must
hope.
what! say I, will you still persist, when I declare, as I do now, that
my affection be engaged?--and let my brother make the most of it.
he know my principle, and adore I for they. he doubt not, that it
be in his power to make I happy: and he be sure I would not want the
will to be so.
I assure he, that be I to be carry to my uncle's, it should answer
no end; for I would never see he; nor receive a line from he; nor hear
a word in his favour, whoever be the person who should mention he to
I.
he be sorry for it. he must be miserable, be I to hold in that mind.
but he doubt not, that I might be induce by my father and uncle to
change it--
never, never, he might depend upon it.
it be richly worth his patience, and the trial.
at my expense?--at the price of all my happiness, Sir?
he hop I should be induce to think otherwise.
and then would he have run into his fortune, his settlement, his
affection--vowing, that never man love a woman with so sincere a passion
as he love I.
I stop he, as to the first part of his speech: and to the second, of
the sincerity of his passion, what then, Sir, say I, be your love to
one, who must assure you, that never young creature look upon man with
a more sincere disapprobation, than I look upon you? and tell I, what
argument can you urge, that this true declaration answer not before-
hand?
Dearest Madam, what can I say?--On my knee I beg--
and down the ungraceful wretch drop on his knee.
let I not kneel in vain, Madam: let I not be thus despised.--and he
look most odiously sorrowful.
I have kneel too, Mr. Solmes: often have I kneel: and I will kneel
again--even to you, Sir, will I kneel, if there be so much merit in
kneeling; provide you will not be the implement of my cruel brother's
undeserved persecution.
if all the service, even to worship you, during my whole life--you,
Madam, invoke and expect mercy; yet shew none--
be I to be cruel to myself, to shew mercy to you; take my estate, Sir,
with all my heart, since you be such a favourite in this house!--only
leave I myself--the mercy you ask for, do you shew to other.
if you mean to my relation, Madam--unworthy as they be, all shall be
do that you shall prescribe.
who, I, Sir, to find you bowel you naturally have not? I to purchase
their happiness by the forfeiture of my own? what I ask you for, be
mercy to myself: that, since you seem to have some power over my
relation, you will use it in my behalf. tell they, that you see I
cannot conquer my aversion to you: tell they, if you be a wise man, that
you too much value your own happiness, to risk it against such a
determined antipathy: tell they that I be unworthy of your offer: and
that in mercy to yourself, as well as to I, you will not prosecute a
suit so impossible to be grant.
I will risque all consequence, say the fell wretch, rise, with a
countenance whiten over, as if with malice, his hollow eye flash
fire, and bite his under lip, to shew he could be manly. your hatred,
Madam, shall be no objection with I: and I doubt not in a few day to
have it in my power to shew you--
you have it in your power, sir--
he come well off--to shew you more generosity than, noble as you be say
to be to other, you shew to I.
the man's face become his anger: it seem form to express the passion.
at that instant, again in come my brother--Sister, Sister, Sister, say
he, with his tooth set, act on the termagant part you have so newly
assume--most wonderfully well do it become you. it be but a short
one, however. Tyraness in your turn, accuse other of your own guilt--
but leave she, leaver she, Mr. Solmes: her time be short. youwill find
her humble and mortify enough very quickly. then, how like a little
tame fool will she look, with her conscience upbraid she, and beg
of you [with a whining voice, the barbarous brother speak] to forgive and
forget!
More he say, as he fly out, with a glowing face, upon Shorey's come
in to recall he on his violence.
I remove from chair to chair, excessively fright and disturb at this
brutal treatment.
the man attempt to excuse himself, as be sorry for my brother's
passion.
leave I, leave I, Sir, fan--or I shall faint. and indeed I think
I should.
he recommend himself to my favour with an air of assurance; augmented,
as I think, by a distress so visible in I; for he even snatch my
trembling, my struggle hand; and ravish it to his odious mouth.
I fling from he with high disdain: and he withdraw, bow and cringing;
self-gratify, and enjoy, as I think, the confusion he see I in.
the wretch be now, methink, before I; and now I see he awkwardly
stride backward, as he retire, till the edge of the open door, which
he run against, remember he to turn his welcome back upon I.
upon his withdrawing, Betty bring I word, that I be permit to go
up to my own chamber: and be bid to consider of every thing: for my time
be short. nevertheless, she believe I might be permit to stay till
Saturday.
she tell I, that although my brother and sister be blame for be
so hasty with I, yet when they make their report, and my uncle Antony
his, of my provocation, they be all more determined than ever in Mr.
Solmes's favour.
the wretch himself, she tell I, pretend to be more in love with I
than before; and to be rather delighted than discourage with the
conversation that pass between we. he run on, she say, in rapture,
about the grace wherewith I should dignify his board; and the like sort
of stuff, either of his saying, or of her making.
she close all with a now be your time, Miss, to submit with a grace, and
to make your own term with him:--else, I can tell you, be I Mr.
Solmes, it should be bad for you: and who, Miss, of our sex, proceed
the saucy creature, would admire a rakish gentleman, when she might be
admire by a sober one to the end of the chapter?
she make this further speech to I on quit my chamber--you have have
amazing good luck, Miss. I must tell you, to keep your writing
conceal so cunningly. you must need think I know that you be always
at your pen: and as you endeavour to hide that knowledge from I, I do
not think myself oblige to keep your secret. but I love not to
aggravate. I have rather reconcile by much. peace-making be my talent,
and ever be. and have I be as much your foe, as you imagine, you have
not perhaps be here now. but this, however, I do not say to make a
merit with you, Miss: for, truly, it will be the well for you the
soon every thing be over with you. and well for I, and for every
one else; thatbe certain. yet one hint I must conclude with; that your
pen and ink (soon as you be to go away) will not be long in your power,
I do assure you, Miss. and then, have lose that amusement, it will be
see, how a mind so active as yours will be able to employ itself.
this hint alarm I so much, that I shall instantly begin to conceal, in
different place, pen, ink, and paper; and to deposit some in the ivy
summer-house, if I can find a safe place there; and, at the bad, I have
get a pencil of black, and another of red lead, which I use in my
drawing; and my pattern shall serve for paper, if I have no other.
how lucky it be, that I have get away my paper! they make a strict
search for they; that I can see, by the disorderly manner they have leave
all thing in: for you know that I be such an observer of method, that I
can go to a bit of ribband, or lace, or edging, blindfold. the same in
my book; which they have strangely disorder and mismatch; to look
behind they, and in some of they, I suppose. my clothe too be rumple
not a little. no place have escape they. to your hint, I thank you, be
they indebted for their disappointment.
the pen, through heaviness and fatigue, dropt out of my finger, at the
word indebte. I resume it, to finish the sentence; and to tell you,
that I be,
your for ever oblige and affectionate
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XXXV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
WEDNESDAY, ELEVEN O'CLOCK, APRIL 5.
I must write as I have opportunity; make use of my conceal store:
for my pen and ink (all of each that they could find) be take from
I; as I shall tell you about more particularly by and by.
about an hour ago, I deposit my long letter to you; as also, in the
usual place, a billet to Mr. Lovelace, lest his impatience should put he
upon some rashness; signify, in four line, 'that the interview be
over; and that I hop my steady refusal of Mr. Solmes would discourage
any further application to I in his favour.'
although I be unable (through the fatigue I have undergo, and by reason
of sit up all night, to write to you, which make I lie long than
ordinary this morning) to deposit my letter to you soon, yet I hope you
will have it in such good time, as that you will be able to send I an
answer to it this night, or in the morning early; which, if ever so
short, will inform I, whether I may depend upon your mother's indulgence
or not. this it behove I to know as soon as possible; for they be
resolve to hurry I away on Saturday next at farth; perhaps to-morrow.
I will now inform you of all that have happen previous to their taking
away my pen and ink, as well as of the manner in which that act of
violence be commit; and this as briefly as I can.
my aunt, who (as well as Mr. Solmes, and my two uncle) live here, I
think, come up to I, and say, she would fain have I hear what Mr.
Solmes have to say of Mr. Lovelace--only that I may be apprize of some
thing, that would convince I what a vile man he be, and what a wretched
husband he must make. I might give they what degree of credit I please;
and take they with abatement for Mr. Solmes's interestedness, if I
think fit. but it might be of use to I, be it but to question Mr.
Lovelace indirectly upon some of they, that relate to myself.
I be indifferent, I say, about what he could say of I; and I be sure
it could not be to my disadvantage; and as he have no reason to impute to
I the forwardness which my unkind friend have so causelessly tax I
with.
she say, that he give himself high air on account of his family; and
speak as despicably of our as if an alliance with we be beneath he.
I reply, that he be a very unworthy man, if it be true, to speak
slightingly of a family, which be as good as his own, 'bat that it
be not ally to the peerage: that the dignity itself, I think,
convey more shame than honour to descendant, who have not merit to
adorn, as well as to be adorn by it: that my brother's absurd pride,
indeed, which make he every where declare, he would never marry but to
quality, give a disgraceful preference against our: but that be I to
be assure, that Mr. Lovelace be capable of so mean a pride as to insult
we or value himself on such an accidental advantage, I should think as
despicably of his sense, as every body else do of his moral.
she insist upon it, that he have take such liberty, it would be but
common justice (so much hat as he be by all our family, and so much
inveigh against in all company by they) to inquire into the
provocation he have to say what be impute to he; and whether the value
some of my friend put upon the rich they possess (throw perhaps
contempt upon every other advantage, and even discredit their own
pretension to family, in order to depreciate his) might not provoke he
to like contempt. upon the whole, Madam, say I, can you say, that the
inveteracy lie not as much on our side, as on his? can he say any thing
of we more disrespectful than we say of him?--And as to the suggestion,
so often repeat, that he will make a bad husband, be it possible for
he to use a wife bad than I be use; particularly by my brother and
sister?
ah, Niece! ah, my dear! how firmly have this wicked man attach you!
perhaps not, Madam. but really great care should be take by father and
mother, when they would have their daughter of their mind in these
particular, not to say thing that shall necessitate the child, in
honour and generosity, to take part with the man her friend be averse
to. but, wave all this, as I have offer to renounce he for ever, I
see now why he should be mention to I, nor why I should be wish to
hear any thing about he.
well, but still, my dear, there can be no harm to let Mr. Solmes tell you
what Mr. Lovelace have say of you. severely as you have treat Mr.
Solmes, he be fond of attend you once more: he beg to be hear on
this head.
if it be proper for I to hear it, madam--
it be, eagerly interrupt she, very proper.
have what he have say of I, Madam, convince you of Mr. Lovelace's
baseness?
it have, my dear: and that you ought to abhor he for it.
then, dear Madam, be pleased to let I hear it from your mouth: there be
no need that I should see Mr. Solmes, when it will have double the weight
from you. what, Madam, have the man dare to say of I?
my aunt be quite at a loss.
at last, well, say she, I see how you be attach. I be sorry for it,
Miss. for I do assure you, it will signify nothing. you must be Mrs.
Solmes; and that in a very few day.
if consent of heart, and assent of voice, be necessary to a marriage, I
be sure I never can, nor ever will, be married to Mr. Solmes. and what
will any of my relation be answerable for, if they force my hand into
his, and hold it there till the service be read; I perhaps insensible,
and in fit, all the time!
what a romantic picture of a forced marriage have you draw, Niece! some
people would say, you have give a fine description of your own
obstinacy, child.
my brother and sister would: but you, Madam, distinguish, I be sure,
between obstinacy and aversion.
suppose aversion may owe its rise to real obstinacy, my dear.
I know my own heart, Madam. I wish you do.
well, but see Mr. Solmes once more, Niece. it will oblige and make for
you more than you imagine.
what should I see he for, Madam?--Is the man fond of hear I declare
my aversion to him?--Is he desirous of have I more and more incense my
friend against myself?--o my cunning, my ambitious brother!
ah, my dear! with a look of pity, as if she understand the meaning of my
exclamation--but must that necessarily be the case?
it must, Madam, if they will take offence at I for declare my
steadfast detestation of Mr. Solmes, as a husband.
Mr. Solmes be to be pity, say she. he adore you. he long to see
you once more. he love you the well for your cruel usage of he
yesterday. he be in rapture about you.
ugly creature, think I!--He in rapture!
what a cruel wretch must he be, say I, who can enjoy the distress to
which he so largely contributes!--But I see, I see, Madam, that I be
consider as an animal to be bait, to make sport for my brother and
sister, and Mr. Solmes. they be all, all of they, wanton in their
cruelty.--I, Madam, see the man! the man so incapable of pity!--indeed I
will not see he, if I can help it--indeed I will not.
what a construction do your lively wit put upon the admiration Mr.
Solmes express of you!--passionate as you be yesterday, and
contemptuously as you treat he, he dot upon you for the very
severity by which he suffer. he be not so ungenerous a man as you think
he: nor have he an unfeele heart.--Let I prevail upon you, my dear,
(as your father and mother expect it of you,) to see he once more, and
hear what he have to say to you.
how can I consent to see he again, when yesterday's interview be
interpret by you, Madam, as well as by every other, as an encouragement
to he? when I myself declare, that if I see he a second time by my own
consent, it might be so take? and when I be determined never to
encourage he?
you might spare your reflection upon I, Miss. I have no thank either
from one side or the other.
and away she fling.
Dearest Madam! say I, follow she to the door--
but she would not hear I far; and her sudden break from I
occasion a hurry to some mean listener; as the slipping of a foot
from the landing-place on the stair discover to I.
I have scarcely recover myself from this attack, when up come Betty--
Miss, say she, your company be desire below-stair in your own parlour.
by whom, Betty?
how can I tell, Miss?--perhaps by your sister, perhaps by your brother--I
know they willnot' come up stair to your apartment again.
be Mr. Solmes go, Betty?
I believe he be, Miss--would you have he send for back? say the bold
creature.
down I go: and to whom should I be send for, but to my brother and Mr.
Solmes! the latter standing sneaking behind the door, so that I see he
not, till I be mockingly lead by the hand into the room by my brother.
and then I start as if I have behold a ghost.
you be to sit down, Clary.
and what then, Brother?
why then, you be to put off that scornful look, and hear what Mr. Solmes
have to say to you.
send down for to be bait again, think I!
Madam, say Mr. Solmes, as if in haste to speak, lest he should not have
an opportunity give he, [and indeed he judge right,] Mr. Lovelace be a
declare marriage hater, and have a design upon your honour, if ever--
Base accuser! say I, in a passion, snatch my hand from my brother,
who be insolently motion to give it to Mr. Solmes; he have not!--he
dare not!--but you have, if endeavour to force a free mind be to
dishonour it!
o thou violent creature! say my brother--but not go yet--for I be
rush away.
what mean you, Sir, [struggle vehemently to get away,] to detain I
thus against my will?
you shall not go, violence; clasp his unbrotherly arm about I.
then let not Mr. Solmes stay.--why hold you I thus? he shall not for
your own sake, if I can help it, see how barbarously a brother can treat
a sister who deserve not evil treatment.
and I struggle so vehemently to get from he, that he be force to quit
my hand; which he do with these word--begone then, fury!--how strong be
will!--there be no hold she.
and up I fly to my chamber, and lock myself in, tremble and out of
breath.
in less than a quarter of an hour, up come Betty. I let she in upon she
tapping, and ask (half out of breath too) for admittance.
the Lord have mercy upon we! say she.--what a confusion of a house be
this! [hurry up and down, fan herself with her handkerchief,]
such angry master and mistresses!--such an obstinate young lady!--such
a humble lover!--such enraged uncles!--such--o dear!--dear! what a topsy-
turvy house be this!--and all for what, trow?--only because a young lady
may be happy, and will not?--only because a young lady will have a
husband, and will not have a husband? what hurlyburlie be here, where
all use to be peace and quietness!
thus she run on to herself; while I sit as patiently as I could (be
assure that her errand be not design to be a welcome one to I) to
observe when her soliloquy would end.
at last, turn to I--I must do as I be bid. I cannot help it--don't be
angry with I, Miss. but I must carry down your pen and ink: and that
this moment.
by whose order?
by your papa's and mamma's.
how shall I know that?
she offer to go to my closet: I stept in before she: touch it, if you
dare.
up come my cousin dolly--Madam!--Madam! say the poor weeping, good
natured creature, in broken sentence--you must--indeed you must--deliver
to Betty--or to I--your pen and ink.
must I, my sweet Cousin? then I will to you; but not to this bold body.
and so I give my standish to she.
I be sorry, very sorry, say she, Miss, to be the messenger: but your
papa will not have you in the same house with he: he be resolve you
shall be carry away to-morrow, or Saturday at farth. and therefore
your pen and ink be take away, that you may give nobody notice of it.
and away go the dear girl, very sorrowful, carry down with her my
standish, and all its furniture, and a little parcel of pen beside,
which have be see when the great search be make, she be bid to ask
for.
as it happen, I have not diminish it, have hide half a dozen crow
quill in as many different place. it be lucky; for I doubt not they
have number how many be in the parcel.
Betty run on, tell I, that my mother be now as much incense against
I as any body--that my doom be fix--that my violent behaviour have not
leave one to plead for I--that Mr. Solmes bite his lip, and mutter, and
seem to have more in his head, than could come out at his mouth; that
be her phrase.
and yet she also hint to I, that the cruel wretch take pleasure in
see I; although so much to my disgust--and so want to see I again.
--Must he not be a savage, my dear?
the wench go on--that my uncle Harlowe say, that now he give I up--
that he pity Mr. Solmes--yet hop he would not think of this to my
detriment hereafter: that my uncle Antony be of opinion, that I ought to
smart for it: and, for her part--and then, as one of the family, she give
her opinion of the same side.
as I have no other way of hear any thing that be say or intend
below, I bear sometimes more patiently than I otherwise should do with
her impertinence. and indeed she seem to be in all my brother's and
sister's counsel.
Miss Hervey come up again, and demand an half-pint ink-bottle which
they have see in my closet.
I give it she without hesitation.
if they have no suspicion of my be able to write, they will perhaps
let I stay long than otherwise they would.
this, my dear, be now my situation.
all my dependence, all my hope, be in your mother's favour. but for
that, I know not what I might do: for who can tell what will come next?
letter xxxvi
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
WEDNESDAY, FOUR O'CLOCK in the AFTERNOON
I be just return from deposit the letter I so lately finish, and
such of Mr. Lovelace's letter as I have not send you. my long letter I
find remain there--so you will have both together.
I be convince, methink, it be not with you.--but your servant cannot
always be at leisure. however, I will deposit as fast as I write. I
must keep nothing by I now; and when I write, lock myself in, that I may
not be surprised now they think I have no pen and ink.
I find in the usual place another letter from this diligent man: and, by
its content, a confirmation that nothing pass in this house but he
know it; and that almost as soon as it pass. for this letter must
have be write before he could have receive my billet; and deposit,
I suppose, when that be take away; yet he compliment I in it upon
assert myself (as he call it) on that occasion to my uncle and to Mr.
Solmes.
'he assure I, however, that they be more and more determined to subdue
I.
'he send I the compliment of his family; and acquaint I with their
earnest desire to see I amongst they. most vehemently do he press for
my quit this house, while it be in my power to get away: and again
crave leave to order his uncle's chariot-and-six to attend my command
at the stile lead to the coppice adjoining to the paddock.
'settlement to my own will he again offer. Lord M. and Lady Sarah and
Lady Betty to be guarantee of his honour and justice. but, if I choose
not to go to either of those lady, nor yet to make he the happy of
man so soon as it be nevertheless his hope that I will, he urge I to
withdraw to my own house, and to accept of Lord M. for my guardian and
protector till my cousin Morden arrive. he can contrive, he say, to
give I easy possession of it, and will fill it with his female relation
on the first invitation from I; and Mrs. Norton, or Miss Howe, may be
undoubtedly prevail upon to be with I for a time. there can be no
pretence for litigation, he say, when I be once in it. nor, if I choose
to have it so, will he appear to visit I; nor presume to mention
marriage to I till all be quiet and easy; till every method I shall
prescribe for a reconciliation with my friend be try; till my cousin
come; till such settlement be draw as he shall approve of for I; and
that I have unexceptionable proof of his own good behaviour.'
as to the disgrace a person of my character may be apprehensive of upon
quit my father's house, he observe (too truly I doubt) 'that the
treatment I meet with be in every one's mouth: yet, he say, that the
public voice be in my favour. my friend themselves, he say, expect
that I will do myself what he call, this justice: why else do they
confine I? he urge, that, thus treat, the independence I have a
right to will be my sufficient excuse, go but from their house to my
own, if I choose that measure; or in order to take possession of my own,
if I do not: that all the disgrace I can receive, they have already give
I: that his concern and his family's concern in my honour, will be equal
to my own, if he may be so happy ever to call I his: and he presume, he
say, to aver, that no family can well supply the loss of my own
friend to I than his, in whatever way I shall do they the honour to
accept of his and their protection.
'but he repeat, that, in all event, he will oppose my be carry to
my uncle's; be well assure, that I shall be lose to he for ever, if
once I enter into that house.' he tell I, 'that my brother and sister,
and Mr. Solmes, design to be there to receive I: that my father and
mother will not come near I till the ceremony be actually over: and that
then they will appear, in order to try to reconcile I to my odious
husband, by urge upon I the obligation I shall be suppose to be
under from a double duty.'
how, my dear, be I drive on one side, and invite on the other!--this
last intimation be but a too probable one. all the step they take seem
to tend to this! and, indeed, they have declare almost as much.
he own, 'that he have already take his measure upon this intelligence:
--but that he be so desirous for my sake (I must suppose, he say, that
he owe they no forbearance for their own) to avoid come to
extremity, that he have suffer a person, whom they do not suspect, to
acquaint they with his resolution, as if come at by accident, if they
persist in their design to carry I by violence to my uncle's; in hope,
that they may be induce from the fear of mischief which may ensue, to
change their measure: and yet he be aware, that he have expose himself
to the great risque by have cause this intimation to be give
they; since, if he cannot benefit himself by their fear, there be no
doubt but they will doubly guard themselves against he upon it.'
what a dangerous enterpriser, however, be this man!
'he beg a few line from I by way of answer to this letter, either this
evening, or to-morrow morning. if he be not so favoured, he shall
conclude, from what he know of the fix determination of my relation,
that I shall be under a close restraint than before: and he shall be
oblige to take his measure accord to that presumption.'
you will see by this abstract, as well by his letter precede this, (for
both run in the same strain,) how strangely forward the difficulty of my
situation have bring he in his declaration and proposal; and in his
threatening too: which, but for that, I would not take from he.
something, however, I must speedily resolve upon, or it will be out of my
power to help myself.
now I think of it, I will enclose his letter, (so might have spar the
abstract of it,) that you may the well judge of all his proposal, and
intelligence; and les it should fall into other hand. I cannot forgive
the content, although I be at a loss what answer to return.*
* she accordingly enclose Mr. Lovelace's letter. but as the most
material content of it be give in her abstract, it be omit.
I cannot bear the thought of throw myself upon the protection of his
friends:--but I will not examine his proposal closely till I hear from
you. indeed, I have no eligible hope, but in your mother's goodness
Hers be a protection I could more reputably fly to, than to that of any
other person: and from hers should be ready to return to my father's (for
the breach then would not be irreparable, as it would be, if I flee to
his family): to return, I repeat, on such term as shall secure but my
negative; not my independence: I do not aim at that (so shall lay your
mother under the less difficulty); though I have a right to be put into
possession of my grandfather's estate, if I be to insist upon it:--such
a right, I mean, as my brother exert in the bid, that I should ever
think myself free from my father's reasonable controul, whatever right
my grandfather's will have give I! he, good gentleman, leave I that
estate, as a reward of my duty, and not to set I above it, as have be
justly hint to I: and this reflection make I more fearful of not
answer the intention of so valuable a bequest.--oh! that my friend
know but my heart!--would but think of it as they use to do!--For once
more, I say, if it deceive I not, it be not alter, although theirs
be!
would but your mother permit you to send her chariot, or chaise, to the
bye-place where Mr. Lovelace propose Lord M.'s shall come, (provoke,
intimidate, and apprehensive, as I be,) I would not hesitate a moment
what to do. place I any where, as I have say before--in a cot, in a
garret; any where--disguise as a servant--or let I pass as a servant's
sister--so that I may but escape Mr. Solmes on one hand, and the disgrace
of refuge with the family of a man at enmity with my own, on the other;
and I shall be in some measure happy!--should your good mother refuse I,
what refuge, or whose, can I fly to?--dearest creature, advise your
distressed friend.
***
I break off here--I be so excessively uneasy, that I durst not trust
myself with my own reflection. I therefore go down to the garden, to
try to calm my mind, by shift the scene. I take but one turn upon the
filbert-walk, when Betty come to I. here, Miss, be your papa--here be
your uncle Antony--here be my young master--and my young mistress, come
to take a walk in the garden; and your papa send I to see where you
be, for fear he should meet you.
I strike into an oblique path, and get behind the yew-hedge, see my
sister appear; and there conceal myself till they be go past I.
my mother, it seem be not well. my poor mother keep her chamber--
should she be bad, I should have an additional unhappiness, in
apprehension that my reputed undutifulness have touch her heart.
you cannot imagine what my emotion be behind the yew-hedge, on see
my father so near I. I be glad to look at he through the hedge as he
pass by: but I tremble in every joint, when I hear he utter these
word: Son James, to you, and to you Bella, and to you, Brother, do I
wholly commit this matter. that I be mean, I cannot doubt. and yet,
why be I so affected; since I may be say to have be give up to the
cruelty of my brother and sister for many day past?
***
while my father remain in the garden, I send my dutiful compliment to
my mother, with inquiry after her health, by Shorey, whom I meet
accidentally upon the stair; for none of the servant, except my
gaoleress, dare to throw themselves in my way. I have the mortification
of such a return, as make I repent my message, though not my concern for
her health. 'let she not inquire after the disorder she occasion,' be
her harsh answer. 'I will not receive any compliment from she.'
very, very hard, my dear! indeed it be very hard.
***
I have the pleasure to hear that my mother be already well. a colicky
disorder, to which she be too subject. it be hop it be go off--God
send it may!--every evil that happen in this house be owe to I!
this good news be tell I, with a circumstance very unacceptable; for
Betty say, she have order to let I know, that my garden-walk and
poultry-visit be suspect; and that both will be prohibit, if I
stay here till Saturday or Monday.
possibly this be say by order, to make I go with less reluctance to my
uncle's.
my mother bid she say, if I expostulate about these order, and about my
pen and ink, 'that reading be more to the purpose, at present, than
write: that by the one, I might be teach my duty; that the other,
consider whom I be believe to write to, only stiffen my will: that
my needle-work have well be pursue than my airing; which be
observe to be take in all weather.'
so, my dear, if I do not resolve upon something soon, I shall neither be
able to avoid the intend evil, nor have it in my power to correspond
with you.
***
WEDNESDAY NIGHT.
all be in a hurry below-stair. Betty be in and out like a spy.
something be work, I know not what. I be really a good deal
disorder in body as well as in mind. indeed I be quite heart-sick.
I will go down, though 'tis almost dark, on pretence of get a little
air and composure. Robert have my two former, I hope, before now: and I
will deposit this, with Lovelace's enclose, if I can, for fear of
another search.
I know not what I shall do!--All be so strangely busy!--door clapt to--
go out of one apartment, hurryingly, as I may say, into another.
Betty in her alarming way, star, as if of fright importance; twice
with I in half an hour; call down in haste by Shorey the last time;
leave I with still more meaning in her look and gesture--yet
possibly nothing in all this worthy of my apprehensions--
here again come the creature, with her deep-draw affected sigh, and
her o dear's! o dear's!
***
more dark hint throw out by the saucy creature. but she will not
explain herself. 'suppose this pretty business end in murder! she say.
I may rue my opposition as long as I live, for aught she know. parent
will not be baffle out of their child by imprudent gentleman; nor be
it fit they should. it may come home to I when I least expect it.'
these be the gloomy and perplexing hint this impertinent throw out.
probably they arise from the information Mr. Lovelace say he have
secretly permit they to have (from this vile double-faced agent, I
suppose!) of his resolution to prevent my be carry to my uncle's.
how justly, if so, may this exasperate them!--how am I drive to and fro,
like a feather in the wind, at the pleasure of the rash, the selfish, the
headstrong! and when I be as averse to the proceeding of the one, as I
be to those of the other! for although I be induce to carry on this
unhappy correspondence, as I think I ought to call it, in hope to
prevent mischief; yet indiscreet measure be fall upon by the rash
man, before I, who be so much concerned in the event of the present
contention, can be consult: and between his violence on one hand, and
that of my relation on the other, I find myself in danger from both.
o my dear! what be worldly wisdom but the height of folly!--I, the
mean, at least young, of my father's family, to thrust myself in
the gap between such uncontroulable spirits!--to the intercept perhaps
of the design of Providence, which may intend to make those hostile
spirit their own punishers.--if so, what presumption!--indee, my dear
friend, I be afraid I have think myself of too much consequence. but,
however this be, it be good, when calamitie befal we, that we should
look into ourselves, and fear.
if I be prevent deposit this and the enclose, (as I intend to try
to do, late as it be,) I will add to it as occasion shall offer. mean
time, believe I to be
your ever-affectionate and grateful
CL. HARLOWE.
under the superscription, write with a pencil, after she go down.
'my two former be not yet take away--I be surprised--I hope you be
well--I hope all be right betwixt your mother and you.'
LETTER XXXVII
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY MORNING, APRIL 9.
I have your three letter. never be there a creature more impatient on
the most interesting uncertainty than I be, to know the event of the
interview between you and solme.
it behove I to account to my dear friend, in her present unhappy
situation, for every thing that may have the least appearance of
negligence or remissness on my part. I send Robin in the morning early,
in hope of a deposit. he loiter about the place till near ten to no
purpose; and then come away; my mother have give he a letter to carry
to Mr. Hunt's, which he be to deliver before three, when only, in the
day-time, that gentleman be at home; and to bring back an answer to it.
Mr. Hunt's house, you know, lie wide from Harlowe-place. Robin but just
save his time; and return not till it be too late to send he again.
I only could direct he to set out before day this morning; and if he get
any letter, to ride as for his life to bring it to I.
I lay by myself: a most uneasy night I have through impatience; and be
discompose with it, lie long than usual. just as I be rise, in came
Kitty, from Robin, with your three letter. I be not a quarter dress;
and only slipt on my morning sack; proceed no far till I have read
they all through, long as they be: and yet I often stop to rave aloud
(though by myself) at the devilish people you have to deal with.
how my heart rise at they all! how poorly do they design to trick you
into an encouragement of Solmes, from the extort interview!--I be very,
very angry at your aunt hervey--to give up her own judgment so tamely!--
and, not content to do so, to become such an active instrument in their
hands!--but it be so like the world!--so like my mother too!--next to her
own child, there be not any body live she value so much as you:--Yet
it be--why should we embroil ourselves, Nancy, with the affair of other
people?
other people!--how I hate the poor word, where friendship be concern,
and where the protection to be give may be of so much consequence to a
friend, and of so little detriment to one's self?
I be delighted with your spirit, however. I expect it not from you
nor do they, I be sure. nor would you, perhaps, have exert it, if
Lovelace's intelligence of Solmes's nursery-office have not set you up.
I wonder not that the wretch be say to love you the well for it. what
an honour would it be to he to have such a wife? and he can be even
with you when you be so. he must indeed be a savage, as you say.--yet
he be less to blame for his perseverance, than those of your own family,
whom most you reverence for theirs.
it be well, as I have often say, that I have not such provocation and
trial; I should perhaps long ago have take your cousin Dolly's advice--
yet dare I not to touch that key.--I shall always love the good girl for
her tenderness to you.
I know not what to say of Lovelace; nor what to think of his promise,
nor of his proposal to you. 'tis certain that you be highly esteemed
by all his family. the lady be person of unblemished honour. my
Lord M. be also (as man and peer go) a man of honour. I could tell what
to advise any other person in the world to do but you. so much expect
from you!--such a shin light!--your quit your father's house, and
throw yourself into the protection of a family, however honourable,
that have a man in it, whose person, part, declaration, and pretension,
will be think to have engage your warm esteem;--methink I be
rather for advise that you should get privately to London; and not to
let either he, or any body else but I, know where you be, till your
cousin Morden come.
as to go to your uncle's, that you must not do, if you can help it.
nor must you have solme, thatbe certain: not only because of his
unworthiness in every respect, but because of the aversion you have so
openly avow to he; which every body know and talk of; as they do of
your approbation of the other. for your reputation sake therefore, as
well as to prevent mischief, you must either live single, or have
Lovelace.
if you think of go to London, let I know; and I hope you will have
time to allow I a further concert as to the manner of your get away,
and thither, and how to procure proper lodging for you.
to obtain this time, you must palliate a little, and come into some
seem compromise, if you cannot do otherwise. drive as you be
drive, it will be strange if you be not oblige to part with a few of
your admirable punctilio's.
you will observe from what I have write, that I have not succeed with
my mother.
I be extremely mortified and disappointed. we have have very strong
debate upon it. but, besides the narrow argument of embroil
ourselves with other people's affair, as above-mention, she will have
it, that it be your duty to comply. she say, she be always of opinion
that daughter should implicitly submit to the will of their parent in
the great article of marriage; and that she govern herself accordingly
in marry my father; who at first be more the choice of her parent
than her own.
this be what she argue in behalf of her favourite Hickman, as well as
for solme in your case.
I must not doubt, but my mother always govern herself by this principle
--because she say she do. I have likewise another reason to believe
it; which you shall have, though it may not become I to give it--that
they do not live so happily together, as one would hope people might do
who marry prefer each other at the time to the rest of the world.
somebody shall fare never the well for this double-mean policy of my
mother, I do assure you. such a retrospection in her argument to he,
and to his address, it be but fit that he should suffer for my
mortification in fail to carry a point upon which I have set my whole
heart.
think, my dear, if in any way I can serve you. if you allow of it, I
protest I will go off privately with you, and we will live and die
together. think of it. improve upon my hint, and command I.
a little interruption.--what be breakfast to the subject I be upon?
***
London, I be tell, be the good hiding-place in the world. I have write
nothing but what I will stand in to at the word of command. woman love
to engage in knight-errantry, now-and-then, as well as to encourage it in
the man. but in your case, what I propose will not seem to have anything
of that nature in it. it will enable I to perform what be no more than
a duty in serve and comfort a dear and worthy friend, who labour
under undeserved oppression: and you will ennoble, as I may say, your
Anna Howe, if you allow she to be your companion in affliction.
I will engage, my dear, we shall not be in town together one month,
before we surmount all difficulty; and this without be beholden to
any man-fellow for their protection.
I must repeat what I have often say, that the author of your
persecution would not have presume to set on foot their selfish scheme
against you, have they not depend upon the gentleness of your spirit;
though now, have go so far, and have engage Old AUTHORITY in it,
[chide I if you will!] neither he nor they know how to recede.
when they find you out of their reach, and know that I be with you,
youwill see how theywill pull in their odious horn.
I think, however, that you should have write to your cousin Morden, the
moment they have begin to treat you disgracefully.
I shall be impatient to hear whether they will attempt to carry you to
your uncle's. I remember, that Lord M.'s dismiss bailiff report of
Lovelace, that he have six or seven companion as bad as himself; and that
the country be always glad when they leave it.* he actually have, as I
hear, such a knot of they about he now. and, depend upon it, he will
not suffer they quietly to carry you to your uncle's: and whose must you
be, if he succeed in take you from they?
* see Vol.I. Letter IV.
I tremble for you but upon suppose what may be the consequence of a
conflict upon this occasion. Lovelace owe some of they vengeance. this
give I a double concern, that my mother should refuse her consent to
the protection I have set my heart upon procure for you.
my mother will not breakfast without I. a quarrel have its conveniencie
sometimes. yet too much love, I think, be as bad as too little.
***
we have just now have another pull. upon my word, she be excessively--
what shall I say?--unpersuadable--I must let she off with that soft word.
who be the old Greek, that say, he govern Athens; his wife, he; and
his son, she?
it be not my mother's fault [I be write to you, you know] that she do
not govern my father. but I be but a daughter!--Yet I think I be not
quite so powerless when I be set upon carry a point, as I find myself
to be.
Adieu, my dear!--happier time must come--and that quickly too.--The
string cannot long continue to be thus overstrain. they must break or
be relax. in either way, the certainty must be preferable to the
suspense.
one word more:
I think in my conscience you must take one of these two alternative;
either to consent to let we go to London together privately; [in which
case, I will procure a vehicle, and meet you at your appointment at the
stile to which Lovelace propose to bring his uncle's chariot;] or, to
put yourself into the protection of Lord M. and the lady of his family.
you have another, indeed; and that be, if you be absolutely resolve
against Solmes, to meet and marry Lovelace directly.
Whichsoever of these you make choice of, you will have this plea, both to
yourself, and to the world, that you be conclude by the same uniform
principle that have govern your whole conduct, ever since the contention
between Lovelace and your brother have be on foot: that be to say, that
you have choose a less evil, in hope to prevent a great.
Adieu! and Heaven direct for the good my beloved creature, pray
her
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XXXVIII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY, APRIL 6.
I thank you, my dear friend, for the pain you have take in
accounting so affectionately for my paper not be take away
yesterday; and for the kind protection you would have procure for
I, if you could.
this kind protection be what I wish for: but my wish, raise at
first by your love, be rather govern by my despair of other refuge
[have before cast about, and not be able to determine, what I ought
to do, and what I could do, in a situation so unhappy] than by a
reasonable hope: for why indeed should any body embroil themselves for
other, when they can avoid it?
all my consolation be, as I have frequently say, that I have not, by my
own inadvertence or folly, bring myself into this sad situation. if I
have, I should not have dare to look up to any body with the expectation
of protection or assistance, nor to you for excuse of the trouble I give
you. but nevertheless we should not be angry at a person's not do
that for ourselves, or for our friend, which she think she ought not to
do; and which she have it in her option either to do, or to let it alone.
much less have you a right to be displeased with so prudent a mother, for
not engage herself so warmly in my favour, as you wish she would. if
my own aunt can give I up, and that against her judgment, as I may
presume to say; and if my father and mother, and uncle, who once love
I so well, can join so strenuously against I; can I expect, or ought
you, the protection of your mother, in opposition to they?
indeed, my dear love, [permit I to be very serious,] I be afraid I be
single out (either for my own fault, or for the fault of my family,
or perhaps for the fault of both) to be a very unhappy creature!--
signally unhappy! for see you not how irresistible the wave of
affliction come tumble down upon I?
we have be till within these few week, every one of we, too happy. no
cross, no vexation, but what we give ourselves from the pamperedness,
as I may call it, of our own will. surround by our heap and store,
hoard up as fast as acquire, we have seem to think ourselves out of
the reach of the bolt of adverse fate. I be the pride of all my
friend, proud myself of their pride, and glory in my standing. who
know what the justice of Heaven may inflict, in order to convince we,
that we be not out of the reach of misfortune; and to reduce we to a
well reliance, than what we have hitherto presumptuously make?
I should have be very little the well for the conversation-visit
with the good Dr. Lewen use to honour I with, and for the principle
work (as I may say) into my early mind by my pious Mrs. Norton,
found on her reverend father's experience, as well as on her own, if I
could not thus retrospect and argue, in such a strange situation as we
be in. strange, I may well call it; for donot you see, my dear, that we
seem all to be impel, as it be, by a perverse fate, which none of we
be able to resist?--and yet all arise (with a strong appearance of
self-punishment) from ourselves? do not my parent see the hopeful
child, from whom they expect a perpetuity of worldly happiness to
their branching family, now grow up to answer the till now distant hope,
set their angry face against each other, pull up by the root, as
I may say, that hope which be ready to be carry into a probable
certainty?
your partial love will be ready to acquit I of capital and intentional
faults:--but oh, my dear! my calamity have humble I enough to make I
turn my gaudy eye inward; to make I look into myself.--And what have I
discover there?--why, my dear friend, more secret pride and vanity than
I could have think have lain in my unexamined heart.
if I be to be single out to be the punisher of myself and family, who so
lately be the pride of it, pray for I, my dear, that I may not be leave
wholly to myself; and that I may be enable to support my character, so
as to be justly acquit of wilful and premeditated fault. the will of
Providence be resign to in the rest: as that lead, let I patiently
and unrepiningly follow!--i shall not live always!--May but my closing
scene be happy!
but I will not oppress you, my dear friend, with further reflection
of this sort. I will take they all into myself. surely I have a mind
that have room for they. my affliction be too sharp to last long. the
crisis be at hand. happy time you bid I hope for. I will hope.
***
but yet, I cannot be but impatient at time, to find myself thus drive,
and my character so depreciated and sink, that be all the future to be
happy, I should be ashamed to shew my face in public, or to look up. and
all by the instigation of a selfish brother, and envious sister--
but let I stop: let I reflect!--Are not these suggestion the
suggestion of the secret pride I have be censure? then, already so
impatient! but this moment so resign, so much well dispose for
reflection! yet 'tis hard, 'tis very hard, to subdue an embitter
spirit!--in the instant of its trial too!--O my cruel brother!--but now
it rise again.--I will lay down a pen I be so little able to govern.--
and I will try to subdue an impatience, which (if my affliction be send
I for corrective end) may otherwise lead I into still more punishable
errors.--
***
I will return to a subject, which I cannot fly from for ten minute
together--call upon especially, as I be, by your three alternative
state in the conclusion of your last.
as to the first; to wit, your advice for I to escape to London--let I
tell you, that the other hint or proposal which accompany it perfectly
frighten I--surely, my dear, (happy as you be, and indulgently treat
as your mother treat you,) you cannot mean what you propose! what a
wretch must I be, if, for one moment only, I could lend an ear to such a
proposal as this!--I, to be the occasion of make such a mother's
(perhaps shorten) life unhappy to the last hour of it!--Ennoble you, my
dear creature! how must such an enterprise (the rashness public, the
motif, be they excusable, private) debase you!--but I will not dwell
upon the subject--for your own sake I will not.
as to your second alternative, to put myself into the protection of Lord
M. and of the lady of that family, I own to you, (as I believe I have
own before,) that although to do this would be the same thing in the
eye of the world as put myself into Mr. Lovelace's protection, yet I
think I would do it rather than be Mr. Solmes's wife, if there be
evidently no other way to avoid be so.
Mr. Lovelace, you have see, propose to contrive a way to put I into
possession of my own house; and he tell I, that he will soon fill it
with the lady of his family, as my visiters;--upon my invitation,
however, to they. a very inconsiderate proposal I think it to be, and
upon which I cannot explain myself to he. what an exertion of
independency do it chalk out for I! how, be I to attend to he,
(and not to the natural consequence to which the following of his advice
would lead I,) might I be draw by gentle word into the penetration of
the most violent acts!--for how could I gain possession, but either by
legal litigation, which, be I inclined to have recourse to it, (as I
never can be,) must take up time; or by forcibly turn out the person
whom my father have place there, to look after the garden, the house,
and the furniture--person entirely attach to himself, and who, as I
know, have be lately instruct by my brother?
your third alternative, to meet and marry Mr. Lovelace directly; a man
with whose moral I be far from be satisfy--a step, that could not
be take with the least hope of ever obtain pardon from or
reconciliation with any of my friend; and against which a thousand
objection rise in my mind--that be not to be think of.
what appear to I, upon the full deliberation, the most eligible, if
I must be thus drive, be the escaping to London. but I would forfeit
all my hope of happiness in this life, rather than you should go away
with I, as you rashly, though with the kind intention, propose. if
I could get safely thither, and be private, methink I might remain
absolutely independent of Mr. Lovelace, and at liberty either to make
proposal to my friend, or, should they renounce I, (and I have no other
or well way,) to make term with he; suppose my cousin Morden, on
his arrival, be to join with my other relation. but they would then
perhaps indulge I in my choice of a single life, on give he up: the
renew to they this offer, when at my own liberty, will at least
convince they, that I be in earnest when I make it first: and, upon my
word, I would stand to it, dear as you seem to think, when you be
disposed to rally I, it would cost I, to stand to it.
if, my dear, you can procure a vehicle for we both, you can perhaps
procure one for I singly: but can it be do without embroil yourself
with your mother, or she with our family?--be it coach, chariot, chaise,
wagon, or horse, I matter not, provide you appear not to have a hand in
my withdrawing. only, in case it be one of the two latter, I believe I
must desire you to get I an ordinary gown and coat, or habit, of some
servant; have no concert with any of our own: the more ordinary the
well. they must be thrust on in the wood-house; where I can put they
on; and then slide down from the bank, that separate the wood-yard from
the green lane.
but, alas! my dear, this, even this alternative, be not without
difficulty, which, to a spirit so little enterprising as mine, seem in
a manner insuperable. these be my reflection upon it.
I be afraid, in the first place, that I shall not have time for the
requisite preparation for an escape.
should I be either detect in those preparation, or pursue and
overtaken in my flight, and so bring back, then would they think
themselves doubly warrant to compel I to have their solme: and,
conscious of an intend fault, perhaps, I should be the less able to
contend with they.
but be I even to get safely to London, I know nobody there but by name;
and those the tradesman to our family; who, no doubt, would be the first
write to and engage to find I out. and should Mr. Lovelace discover
where I be, and he and my brother meet, what mischief might ensue
between they, whether I be willing or not to return to Harlowe-place!
but suppose I could remain there conceal, to what might my youth, my
sex, and unacquaintedness of the way of that great, wicked town, expose
me!--I should hardly dare to go to church for fear of be discover.
People would wonder how I live. who know but I might pass for a kept
mistress; and that, although nobody come to I, yet, that every time I
go out, it might be imagine to be in pursuance of some assignation?
you, my dear, who alone would know where to direct to I, would be
watch in all your step, and in all your message; and your mother, at
present not highly pleased with our correspondence, would then have
reason to be more displeased: and might not difference follow between
she and you, that would make I very unhappy, be I to know they? and
this the more likely, as you take it so unaccountably (and, give I leave
to say, so ungenerously) into your head, to revenge yourself upon the
innocent Mr. Hickman, for all the displeasure your mother give you.
be Lovelace to find out my place of abode, that would be the same thing
in the eye of the world as if I have actually go off with he: for would
he, do you think, be prevail upon to forbear visit I? and then his
unhappy character (a foolish man!) would be no credit to any young
creature desirous of concealment. indeed the world, let I escape
whither, and to whomsoever I could, would conclude he to be the
contriver of it.
these be the difficulty which arise to I on revolve this scheme;
which, nevertheless, might appear surmountable to a more enterprising
spirit in my circumstance. if you, my dear, think they surmountable in
any one of the case put, [and to be sure I can take no course, but what
must have some difficulty in it,] be pleased to let I know your free and
full thought upon it.
have you, my dear friend, be marry, then should I have have no doubt
but that you and Mr. Hickman would have afford an asylum to a poor
creature more than half lose in her own apprehension for want of one kind
protect friend!
you say I should have write to my cousin Morden the moment I be
treat disgracefully: but could I have believe that my friend would
not have soften by degree when they see my antipathy to their Solmes?
I have thought indeed several time of writing to my cousin: but by the
time an answer could have come, I imagine all would have be over, as
if it have never be: so from day to day, from week to week, I hop on:
and, after all, I might as reasonably fear (as I have heretofore say)
that my cousin would be bring to side against I, as that some of those
I have name would.
and then to appeal a cousin [I must have write with warmth to engage
he] against a father; this be not a desirable thing to set about. then
I have not, you know, one soul on my side; my mother herself against I.
to be sure my cousin would have suspend his judgment till he could have
arrive. he might not have be in haste to come, hop the malady
would cure itself: but have he write, his letter probably would have
run in the qualifying style; to persuade I to submit, or they only to
relax. have his letter be more on my side than on theirs, they would
not have regard they: nor perhaps himself, have he come and be an
advocate for I: for you see how strangely determined they be; how they
have over-awed or get in every body; so that no one dare open their lip
in my behalf. and you have hear that my brother push his measure
with the more violence, that all may be over with I before my cousin's
expect arrival.
but you tell I, that, in order to gain time, I must palliate; that I
must seem to compromise with my friend: but how palliate? how seem to
compromise? you would not have I endeavour to make they believe, that I
will consent to what I never intend to consent to! you would not have
I to gain time, with a view to deceive!
to do evil, that good may come of it, be forbid: and shall I do evil,
yet know not whether good may come of it or not?
forbid it, heaven! that Clarissa Harlowe should have it in her thought to
serve, or even to save herself at the expense of her sincerity, and by a
study deceit!
and be there, after all, no way to escape one great evil, but by plunge
myself into another?--what an ill-fat creature be i!--pray for I, my
dear nancy!--my mind be at present so much disturbed, that I can
hardly pray for myself.
LETTER XXXIX
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY NIGHT.
this alarming hurry I mention under my date of last night, and Betty's
saucy dark hint, come out to be owe to what I guess they be; that
be to say, to the private intimation Mr. Lovelace contrive our family
should have of his insolent resolution [insolent I must call it] to
prevent my be carry to my uncle's.
I see at the time that it be as wrong with respect to answer his own
view, as it be insolent: for, could he think, as Betty (I suppose from
her better) justly observe, that parent would be insult out of their
right to dispose of their own child, by a violent man, whom they hate;
and who could have no pretension to dispute that right with they, unless
what he have from she who have none over herself? and how must this
insolence of his, aggravate as my brother be able to aggravate it,
exasperate they against I?
the rash man have indeed so far gain his point, as to intimidate they
from attempt to carry I away: but he have put they upon a surer and a
more desperate measure: and this have drive I also into one as
desperate; the consequence of which, although he could not foresee it,*
may perhaps too well answer his great end, little as he deserve to have
it answer.
* she be mistake in this. Mr. Lovelace do foresee this consequence.
all his contrivance lead to it, and the whole family, as he boast,
unknown to themselves, be but so many puppet dance by his wire. see
Vol.I. Letter XXXI.
in short, I have do, as far as I know, the most rash thing that ever I
do in my life.
but let I give you the motive, and then the action will follow of
course.
about six o'clock this evening, my aunt (who stay here all night, on my
account, no doubt) come up and tap at my door; for I be write; and
have lock myself in. I open it; and she enter, thus deliver
herself:
I come once more to visit you, my dear; but sorely against my will;
because it be to impart to you matter of the utmost concern to you, and
to the whole family.
what, Madam, be now to be do with I? say I, wholly attentive.
you will not be hurry away to your uncle's, child; let that comfort
you.--they see your aversion to go.--you will not be oblige to go to
your uncle Antony's.
how you revive I, Madam! this be a cordial to my heart!
I little think, my dear, what be to follow this suppose
condescension.
and then I run over with blessing for this good news, (and she permit
I so to do, by her silence); congratulate myself, that I think my
father could not resolve to carry thing to the last extremity.--
Hold, Niece, say she, at last--you must not give yourself too much joy
upon the occasion neither.--don't be surprised, my dear.--why look you
upon I, child, with so affect an earnestness?--but you must be Mrs.
Solmes, for all that.
I be dumb.
she then tell I, that they have undoubted information, that a certain
desperate ruffian (I must excuse she that word, she say) have prepare
armed man to way-lay my brother and uncle, and seize I, and carry I
off.--surely, she say, I be not consent to a violence that might be
follow by murder on one side or the other; perhaps on both.
I be still silent.
that therefore my father (still more exasperate than before) have change
his resolution as to my go to my uncle's; and be determine next
Tuesday to set out thither himself with my mother; and that (for it be
to no purpose to conceal a resolution so soon to be put into execution)--
I must not dispute it any long--on Wednesday I must give my hand--as
they would have I.
she proceed, that order be already give for a license: that the
ceremony be to be perform in my own chamber, in presence of all my
friend, except of my father and mother; who would not return, nor see
I, till all be over, and till they have a good account of my behaviour.
the very intelligence, my dear!--the very intelligence this, which
Lovelace give I!
I be still dumb--only sigh, as if my heart would break.
she go on, comfort I, as she think. 'she lay before I the
merit of obedience; and tell I, that if it be my desire that my
Norton should be present at the ceremony, it would be comply with: that
the pleasure I should receive from reconcile al my friend to I, and
in their congratulation upon it, must need overbalance, with such a one
as I, the difference of person, however preferable I might think the
one man to the other: that love be a fleeting thing, little well than
a name, where mortality and virtue do not distinguish the object of it:
that a choice make by its dictate be seldom happy; at least not durably
so: nor be it to be wonder at, when it naturally exalt the object
above its merit, and make the lover blind to fault, that be visible
to every body else: so that when a near intimacy stript it of its
imaginary perfection, it leave frequently both party surprise, that
they could be so grossly cheat; and that then the indifference become
strong than the love ever be. that a woman give a man great
advantage, and inspire he with great vanity, when she avow her love
for he, and preference of he; and be generally requite with insolence
and contempt: whereas the confessedly-oblige man, it be probable, would
be all reverence and gratitude'--and I cannot tell what.
'you, my dear, say she, believe you shall be unhappy, if you have Mr.
Solmes: your parent think the contrary; and that you will be undoubtedly
so, be you to have Mr. Lovelace, whose moral be unquestionably bad:
suppose it be your sad lot to consider, what great consolation you will
have on one hand, if you pursue your parent' advice, that you do so;
what mortification on the other, that by follow your own, you have
nobody to blame but yourself.'
this, you remember, my dear, be an argument enforce upon I by Mrs.
Norton.
these and other observation which she make be worthy of my aunt
hervey's good sense and experience, and apply to almost any young
creature who stand in opposition to her parent' will, but one who have
offer to make the sacrifice I have offer to make, ought to have have
their due weight. but although it be easy to answer some of they in my
own particular case; yet have over and over, to my mother, before my
confinement, and to my brother and sister, and even to my aunt Hervey,
since, say what I must now have repeat, I be so much mortified and
afflict at the cruel tiding she bring I, that however attentive I
be to what she say, I have neither power nor will to answer one word;
and, have she not stop of herself, she might have go on an hour
long, without interruption from I.
observe this, and that I only sit weeping, my handkerchief cover my
face, and my bosom heaving ready to burst; what! no answer, my dear?--why
so much silent grief? you know I have always love you. you know, that
I have no interest in the affair. you would not permit Mr. Solmes to
acquaint you with some thing which would have set your heart against Mr.
Lovelace. shall I tell you some of the matter charge against him?--
shall I, my dear?
still I answer only by my tear and sigh.
well, child, you shall be tell these thing afterwards, when you will be
in a well state of mind to hear they; and then you will rejoice in the
escape you will have have. it will be some excuse, then, for you to plead
for your behaviour to Mr. Solmes, that you could not have believe Mr.
Lovelace have be so very vile a man.
my heart flutter with impatience and anger at be so plainly talk
to as the wife of this man; but yet I then choose to be silent. if I have
speak, it would have be with vehemence.
strange, my dear, such silence!--your concern be infinitely more on this
side the day, than it will be on the other.--but let I ask you, and do
not be displeased, will you choose to see what generous stipulation for
you there be in the settlements?--you have knowledge beyond your years--
give the writing a perusal: do, my dear: they be engross, and ready
for signing, and have be for some time. excuse I, my love--I mean not
to disorder you:--your father would oblige I to bring they up, and to
leave they with you. he command you to read they. but to read they,
Niece--since they be engross, and be before you make they absolutely
hopeless.
and then, to my great terror, she draw some parchment form she
handkerchief, which she have keep, (unobserve by I,) under her apron;
and rise, put they in the opposite window. have she produce a serpent,
I could not have be more frightened.
oh! my dear Aunt, turn away my face, and hold out my hand, hide
from my eye those horrid parchments!--Let I conjure you to tell I--by
all the tenderness of near relationship, and upon your honour, and by
your love for I, say, be they absolutely resolve, that, come what
will, I must be that man's?
my dear, you must have Mr. Solmes: indeed you must.
indeed I never will!--this, as I have say over and over, be not
originally my father's will.--indeed I never will--and that be all I will
say!
it be your father's will now, reply my aunt: and, consider how all
the family be threaten by Mr. Lovelace, and the resolution he have
certainly take to force you out of their hand, I cannot but say they
be in the right, not to be bully out of their child.
well, Madam, then nothing remain for I to say. I be make desperate. I
care not what become of I.
your piety, and your prudence, my dear, and Mr. Lovelace's immoral
character, together with his daring insult, and threatening, which
ought to incense you, as much as any body, be every one's dependence.
we be sure the time will come, when youwill think very differently of the
step your friend take to disappoint a man who have make himself so
justly obnoxious to they all.
she withdraw; leave I full of grief and indignation:--and as much out
of humour with Mr. Lovelace as with any body; who, by his conceited
contrivance, have make thing bad for I than before; deprive I of
the hope I have of gain time to receive your advice, and private
assistance to get to town; and leave I not other advice, in all
appearance, than either to throw myself upon his family, or to be make
miserable for ever with Mr. Solmes. but I be still resolve to avoid
both these evil, if possible.
I sound Betty, in the first place, (whom my aunt send up, not think
it proper, as Betty tell I, that I should be leave by myself, and who, I
find, know their design,) whether it be not probable that they would
forbear, at my earn entreaty, to push matter to the threaten
extremity.
but she confirm all my aunt say; rejoice (as she say they all do)
that Mr. Lovelace have give they so good a pretence to save I from he
now, and for ever.
she run on about equipage bespeak; talk of my brother's and sister's
exultation that now the whole family would soon be reconcile to each
other: of the servant' joy upon it: of the expect license: of a visit
to be pay I by Dr. Lewen, or another clergyman, whom they name not to
she; which be to crown the work: and of other preparation, so
particular, as make I dread that they design to surprise I into a
still near day than Wednesday.
these thing make I excessively uneasy. I know not what to resolve
upon.
at one time, what have I to do, think I, but to throw myself at once
into the protection of Lady Betty Lawrance?--But then, in resentment of
his fine contrivance, which have so abominably disconcert I, I soon
resolve to the contrary: and at last conclude to ask the favour of
another half-hour's conversation with my aunt.
I send Betty to she with my request.
she come.
I put it to she, in the most earnest manner, to tell I, whether I might
not obtain the favour of a fortnight's respite?
she assure I, it would not be grant.
would a week? surely a week would?
she believe a week might, if I would promise two thing: the first, upon
my honour, not to write a line out of the house, in that week: for it be
still suspect, she say, that I find mean to write to somebody. and,
secondly, to marry Mr. Solmes, at the expiration of it.
impossible! impossible! I say with a passion--what! might not I be
oblige with one week, without such a horrid condition as the last?
she would go down, she say, that she might not seem of her own head to
put upon I what I think a hardship so great.
she go down: and come up again.
do I want, be the answer, to give the vilest of man an opportunity to
put his murderous scheme into execution?--it be time for they to put an
end to my obstinacy (they be tired out with I) and to his hope at
once. and an end should be put on Tuesday or Wednesday next, at
furth; unless I would give my honour to comply with the condition upon
which my aunt have be so good as to allow I a long time.
I even stamp with impatience!--i call upon she to witness, that I be
guiltless of the consequence of this compulsion; this barbarous
compulsion, I call it; let that consequence be what it would.
my aunt chide I in a high strain than ever she do before.
while I, in a half phrensy, insist upon see my father; such usage, I
say, set I above fear. I would rejoice to owe my death to he, as I
do my life.
I do go down half way of the stair, resolve to throw myself at his
foot wherever he was.--My aunt be fright. she own, that she fear
for my head.--indeed I be in a perfect phrensy for a few minute--but
hear my brother's voice, as talk to somebody in my sister's
apartment just by, I stopt; and hear the barbarous designer say,
speak to my sister, this work charmingly, my dear Arabella!
it do! it do! say she, in an exulting accent.
let we keep it up, say my brother.--the villain be catch in his own
trap!--Now must she be what we would have she be.
do you keep my father to it; Iwill take care of my mother, say Bella.
never fear, say he!--and a laugh of congratulation to each other, and
derision of I (as I make it out) quite turn my frantic humour into a
vindictive one.
my aunt then just come down to I, and take my hand lead I up; and
try to sooth I.
my raving be turn into sullenness.
she preach patience and obedience to I.
I be silent.
at last she desire I to assure she, that I would offer no violence to
myself.
God, I say, have give I more grace, I hop, than to permit I to be
guilty of so horrid a rashness, I be his creature, and not my own.
she then take leave of I; and I insist upon she take down with she
the odious parchment.
see I in so ill an humour, and very earnest that she should take they
with she, she take they; but say, that my father should not know that
she do: and hop I would well consider of the matter, and be calm
next time they be offer to my perusal.
I revolve after she be go all that my brother and sister have say. I
dwelt upon their triumphing over I; and find rise in my mind a rancour
that be new to I; and which I could not withstand.--and put every
thing together, dread the near day, what could I do?--am I in any
manner excusable for what I do do?--if I shall be condemn by the
world, who know not my provocation, may I be acquit by you?--If not,
I be unhappy indeed!--for this I do.
have shake off the impertinent Betty, I write to Mr. Lovelace, to let
he know, 'that all that be threaten at my uncle Antony's, be
intend to be execute here. that I have come to a resolution to throw
myself upon the protection of either of his two aunt, who would afford
it I--in short, that by endeavour to obtain leave on Monday to dine
in the ivy summer-house, I would, if possible, meet he without the
garden-door, at two, three, four, or five o'clock on Monday afternoon, as
I should be able. that in the mean time he should acquaint I, whether I
might hope for either of those lady' protection: and if I might, I
absolutely insist that he should leave I with either, and go to London
himself, or remain at Lord M.'s; nor offer to visit I, till I be
satisfied that nothing could be do with my friend in an amicable way;
and that I could not obtain possession of my own estate, and leave to
live upon it: and particularly, that he should not hint marriage to I,
till I consent to hear he upon that subject.--i add, that if he
could prevail upon one of the Misses Montague to favour I with her
company on the road, it would make I abundantly more easy in the
thought of carry into effect a resolution which I have not come to,
although so driven, but with the utmost reluctance and concern; and which
would throw such a slur upon my reputation in the eye of the world, as
perhaps I should never be able to wipe off.'
this be the purport of what I write; and down into the garden I slide
with it in the dark, which at another time I should not have have the
courage to do; and deposit it, and come up again unknown to any body.
my mind so dreadfully misgave I when I return, that, to divert in some
measure my increase uneasiness, I have recourse to my private pen; and
in a very short time run this length.
and now, that I be come to this part, my uneasy reflection begin again
to pour in upon I. yet what can I do?--I believe I shall take it back
again the first thing in the morning--yet what can I do?
and who know but they may have a still early day in their intention,
than that which will too soon come?
I hope to deposit this early in the morning for you, as I shall return
from resume my letter, if I do resume it as my inward mind bid I.
although it be now near two o'clock, I have a good mind to slide down
once more, in order to take back my letter. our door be always lock
and bar up at eleven; but the seat of the less hall-window being
almost even with the ground without, and the shutter not difficult to
open, I could easily get out.
yet why should I be thus uneasy, since, should the letter go, I can but
hear what Mr. Lovelace say to it? his aunt live at too great a
distance for he to have an immediate answer from they; so I can scruple
go to they till I have invitation. I can insist upon one of his
cousin meet I in the chariot; and may he not be able to obtain that
favour from either of they. twenty thing may happen to afford I a
suspension at least: why should I be so very uneasy?--when likewise I can
take back my letter early, before it be probable he will have the thought
of find it there. yet he own he spend three part of his day, and
have do for this fortnight past, in loitering about sometimes in one
disguise, sometimes in another, besides the attendance give by his
trusty servant when he himself be not in waiting, as he call it.
but these strange forebodings!--Yet I can, if you advise, cause the
chariot he shall bring with he, to carry I directly to town, whither in
my London scheme, if you be to approve it, I have propose to go: and
this will save you the trouble of procure for I a vehicle; as well as
prevent any suspicion from your mother of your contribute to my escape.
but, solicitous of your advice, and approbation too, if I can have it, I
will put an end to this letter.
Adieu, my dear friend, adieu!
LETTER XL
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
FRIDAY MORNING, seven O'CLOCK, APRIL 7.
my aunt Hervey, who be a very early riser, be walk in the garden
(Betty attend she, as I see from my window this morning) when I arise:
for after such a train of fatigue and restless night, I have unhappily
overslept myself: so all I durst venture upon, be, to step down to my
poultry-yard, and deposit mine of yesterday, and last night. and I be
just come up; for she be still in the garden. this prevent I from
go to resume my letter, as I think still to do; and hope it will not
be too late.
I say, I have unhappily overslept myself: I go to bed about half an
hour after two. I tell the quarter till five; after which I dropt
asleep, and awake not till past six, and then in great terror, from a
dream, which have make such an impression upon I, that, slightly as I
think of dream, I cannot help take this opportunity to relate it to
you.
'methought my brother, my uncle Antony, and Mr. Solmes, have form a plot
to destroy Mr. Lovelace; who discover it, and believe I have a hand
in it, turn all his rage against I. I think he make they all fly to
foreign part upon it; and afterwards seize upon I, carry I into a
church-yard; and there, notwithstanding, all my prayer and tear, and
protestation of innocence, stab I to the heart, and then tumble I
into a deep grave ready dug, among two or three half-dissolve carcase;
throw in the dirt and earth upon I with his hand, and trample it
down with his foot.'
I awake in a cold sweat, trembling, and in agony; and still the
frightful image raise by it remain upon my memory.
but why should I, who have such real evil to contend with, regard
imaginary one? this, no doubt, be owe to my disturbed imagination;
huddle together wildly all the frightful idea which my aunt's
communication and discourse, my letter to Mr. Lovelace, my own
uneasiness upon it, and the apprehension of the dread Wednesday,
furnish I with.
***
eight O'CLOCK.
the man, my dear, have get the letter!--what a strange diligence! I wish
he mean I well, that he take so much pains!--Yet, to be ingenuous, I
must own, that I should be displeased if he take less--I wish, however,
he have be an hundred mile off!--what an advantage have I give he
over I!
now the letter be out of my power, I have more uneasiness and regret than
I have before. for, till now, I have a doubt, whether it should or should
not go: and now I think it ought not to have go. and yet be there any
other way than to do as I have do, if I would avoid Solmes? but what a
giddy creature shall I be think, if I pursue the course to which this
letter must lead I?
my dear friend, tell I, have I do wrong?--Yet do not say I have, if
you think it; for should all the world besides condemn I, I shall have
some comfort, if you do not. the first time I ever besought you to
flatter I. that, of itself, be an indication that I have do wrong,
and be afraid of hear the truth--o tell I (but yet do not tell I) if
I have do wrong!
***
FRIDAY, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.
my aunt have make I another visit. she begin what she have to say with
let I know that my friend be all persuade that I still correspond
with Mr. Lovelace; as be plain, she say, by hint and menace he throw
out, which shew that he be apprize of several thing that have pass
between my relation and I, sometimes within a very little while after
they have happen.
although I approve not of the method he stoop to take to come at his
intelligence, yet it be not prudent in I to clear myself by the ruin of
the corrupted servant, (although his vileness have neither my connivance
nor approbation,) since my do so might occasion the detection of my
own correspondence; and so frustrate all the hope I have to avoid this
solme. yet it be not at all likely, that this very agent of Mr.
Lovelace act a double part between my brother and he: how else can our
family know (so soon too) his menace upon the passage they hint at?
I assure my aunt, that I be too much ashamed of the treatment I meet
with (and that from every one's sake as well as for my own) to acquaint
Mr. Lovelace with the particular of that treatment, even be the mean
of correspond with he afford I: that I have reason to think, that
if he be to know of it from I, we must be upon such term, that he
would not scruple make some visit, which would give I great
apprehension. they all know, I say, that I have no communication with
any of my father's servant, except my sister's Betty Barnes: for
although I have a good opinion of they all, and believe, if leave to their
own inclination, that they would be glad to serve I; yet, find by
their shy behaviour, that they be under particular direction, I have
forborn, ever since my Hannah have be so disgracefully dismiss, so
much as to speak to any of they, for fear I should be the occasion of
their lose their place too. they must, therefore, account among
themselves for the intelligence Mr. Lovelace meet with, since neither my
brother nor sister, (as Betty have frequently, in praise of their open
heart, inform I,) nor perhaps their favourite Mr. Solmes, be all
careful before whom they speak, when they have any thing to throw out
against he, or even against I, whom they take great pride to join with
he on this occasion.
it be but too natural, my aunt say, for my friend to suppose that he
have his intelligence (part of it at least) from I; who, think
yourself hardly treat, might complain of it, if not to he, to Miss
Howe; which, perhaps, might be the same thing; for they know Miss Howe
speak as freely of they, as they could do of Mr. Lovelace; and must have
the particular she speak of from somebody who know what be do here.
that this determine my father to bring the whole matter to a speedy
issue, lest fatal consequence should ensue.
I perceive you be go to speak with warmth, proceed she: [and so I
be] for my own part I be sure, you would not write any thing, if you do
write, to inflame so violent a spirit.--But this be not the end of my
present visit.
you cannot, my dear, but be convince, that your father will be obey.
the more you contend against his will, the more he think himself oblige
to assert his authority. your mother desire I to tell you, that if you
will give she the least hope of a dutiful compliance, she will be
willing to see you in her closet just now, while your father be go to
take a walk in the garden.
astonishing perseverance! say I--I be tired with make declaration and
with pleading on this subject; and have hop, that my resolution be
so well know, I should not have be far urge upon it.
you mistake the purport of my present visit, Miss: [look gravely]--
Heretofore you have be desire and pray to obey and oblige your
friend. Entreaty be at an end: they give it up. now it be resolve
upon, that your father's will be to be obey; as it be fit it should.
some thing be lay at your door, as if you concur with Lovelace's
threaten violence to carry you off, which your mother will not believe.
she will tell you her own good opinion of you. she will tell you how
much she still love you; and what she expect of you on the approach
occasion. but yet, that she may not be expose to an opposition which
would the more provoke she, she desire that you will first assure she
that you go down with a resolution to do that with a grace which must be
do with or without a grace. and besides, she want to give you some
advice how to proceed in order to reconcile yourself to your father, and
to every body else. will you go down, Miss Clary, or will you not?
I say, I should think myself happy, could I be admit to my mother's
presence, after so long a banishment from it; but that I could not wish
it upon those term.
and this be your answer, Niece?
it must be my answer, Madam. come what may, I never will have Mr.
Solmes. it be cruel to press this matter so often upon me.--I never will
have that man.
down she go with displeasure. I could not help it. I be quite tired
with so many attempt, all to the same purpose. I be amazed that they
be not!--so little variation! and no concession on either side!
I will go down and deposit this; for Betty have see I have be write.
the saucy creature take a napkin, and dipt it in water, and with a
fleering air, here, Miss; hold the wet corner to I.
whatbe that for? say I.
only, Miss, one of the finger of your right-hand, if you please to look
at it.
it be inky.
I give she a look; but say nothing.
but, lest I should have another search, I will close here.
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER xli
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
FRIDAY, one O'CLOCK.
I have a letter from Mr. Lovelace, full of transport, vow, and
promise. I will send it to you enclose. youwill see how 'he engage in
it for Lady Betty's protection, and for Miss Charlotte Montague's
accompany I. I have nothing to do, but to persevere, he say, and
prepare to receive the personal congratulation of his whole family.'
but youwill see how he presume upon my be his, as the consequence of
throw myself into that lady's protection.
'the chariot and six be to be ready at the place he mention. youwill see
as to the slur upon my reputation, about which I be so apprehensive, how
boldly he argue.' generously enough, indeed, be I to be his; and have
give he to believe that I would.--But that I have not do.
how one step bring on another with this encroach sex; how soon a
young creature, who give a man the least encouragement, be carry
beyond her intention, and out of her own power! you would imagine, by
what he write, that I have give he reason to think that my aversion to
Mr. Solmes be all owe to my favour for he.
the dreadful thing be, that compare what he write from his
intelligencer of what be design against I (though he seem not to know
the threaten day) with what my aunt and Betty assure I of, there can
be no hope for I, but that I must be Solmes's wife, if I stay here.
I have well have go to my uncle Antony's at this rate. I should have
gain time, at least, by it. this be the fruit of his fine
contrivance!
'what we be to do, and how good he be to be: how I be to direct all his
future step.' all this shews, as I say before, that he be sure of I.
however, I have reply to the follow effect: 'that although I have
give he room to expect that I would put myself into the protection of
one of the lady of his family; yet as I have three day to come,
between this and Monday, and as I still hope that my friend will relent,
or that Mr. Solmes will give up a point they will find impossible to
carry; I shall not look upon myself as absolutely bind by the
appointment: and expect therefore, if I recede, that I shall not again be
call to account for it by he. that I think it necessary to acquaint
he, that if my throw myself upon Lady Betty Lawrance's protection, as
he propose, he understand, that I mean directly to put myself into his
power, he be very much mistaken: for that there be many point in which I
must be satisfy; several matter to be adjust, even after I have leave
this house, (if I do leave it,) before I can think of give he any
particular encouragement: that in the first place he must expect that I
will do my utmost to procure my father's reconciliation and approbation
of my future step; and that I will govern myself entirely by his
command, in every reasonable point, as much as if I have not leave his
house: that if he imagine I shall not reserve to myself this liberty,
but that my withdrawing be to give he any advantage which he would not
otherwise have have; I be determined to stay where I be, and abide the
event, in hope that my friend will still accept of my reiterate
promise never to marry he, or any body else, without their consent.
this I will deposit as soon as I can. and as he think thing be near
their crisis, I dare say it will not be long before I have an answer to
it.
FRIDAY, FOUR O'CLOCK.
I be really ill. I be use to make the good of any little accident
that befel I, for fear of make my then affectionate friend uneasy:
but now I shall make the bad of my indisposition, in hope to obtain
a suspension of the threaten evil of Wednesday next. and if I do
obtain it, will postpone my appointment with Mr. Lovelace.
Betty have tell they that I be very much indisposed. but I have no pity
from any body.
I believe I be become the object of every one's aversion; and that they
would all be glad if I be dead. indeed I believe it. 'what ail the
perverse creature?' cry one:--'is she love-sick?' another.
I be in the ivy summer-house, and come out shiver with cold, as if
aguishly affected. Betty observe this, and report it.--'O no matter!
--let her shiver on!--cold cannot hurt she. obstinacy will defend she
from harm. Perverseness be a bracer to a love-sick girl, and more
effectual than the cold bath to make hardy, although the constitution be
ever so tender.'
this be say by a cruel brother, and hear say by the dearer friend of
one, for whom, but a few month ago, every body be apprehensive at the
least blast of wind to which she expose herself!
Betty, it must be own, have an admirable memory on these occasion.
nothing of this nature be lose by her repetition: even the very air with
which she repeat what she hear say, render it unnecessary to ask, who
speak this or that severe thing.
FRIDAY, SIX O'CLOCK.
my aunt, who again stay all night, just leave I. she come to tell I
the result of my friend' deliberation about I. it be this:
next Wednesday morning they be all to be assemble: to wit, my father,
mother, my uncle, herself, and my uncle Hervey; my brother and sister of
course: my good Mrs. Norton be likewise to be admit: and Dr. Lewen be
to be at hand, to exhort I, it seem, if there be occasion: but my aunt
be not certain whether he be to be among they, or to tarry till call
in.
when this awful court be assemble, the poor prisoner be to be bring
in, support by Mrs. Norton; who be to be first tutor to instruct I
in the duty of a child; which it seem I have forget.
nor be the success at all doubt, my aunt say: since it be not believe
that I can be harden enough to withstand the expostulation of so
venerable a judicature, although I have withstand those of several of
they separately. and still the less, as she hint at extraordinary
condescension from my father. but what condescension, even from my
father, can induce I to make such a sacrifice as be expect from I?
yet my spirit will never bear up, I doubt, at such a tribunal--my father
preside in it.
indeed I expect that my trial would not be at an end till he have
admit I into his awful presence.
what be hop from I, she say, be, that I will cheerfully, on Tuesday
night, if not before, sign the article; and so turn the succeed day's
solemn convention into a day of festivity. I be to have the license send
I up, however, and once more the settlement, that I may see how much in
earnest they be.
she far hint, that my father himself would bring up the settlement
for I to sign.
o my dear! what a trial will this be!--how shall I be able to refuse my
father the writing of my name?--to my father, from whose presence I have
be so long banished!--he commanding and entreating, perhaps, in a
breath!--how shall I be able to refuse this to my father?
they be sure, she say, something be work on Mr. Lovelace's part, and
perhaps on mine: and my father would soon follow to the grave, than see
I his wife.
I say, I be not well: that the very apprehension of these trial be
already insupportable to I; and would increase upon I, as the time
approach; and I be afraid I should be extremely ill.
they have prepare themselves for such an artifice as that, be my aunt's
unkind word; and she could assure I, it would stand I in no stead.
Artifice! repeat I: and this from my aunt Hervey?
why, my dear, say she, do you think people be fools?--can they not see
how dismally you endeavour to sigh yourself down within-doors?--how you
hang down your sweet face [those be the word she be pleased to use]
upon your bosom?--how you totter, as it be, and hold by this chair, and
by that door post, when you know that any body see you? [this, my dear
Miss Howe, be an aspersion to fasten hypocrisy and contempt upon I: my
brother's or sister's aspersion!--i be not capable of art so low.] but
the moment you be down with your poultry, or advance upon your garden-
walk, and, as you imagine, out of every body's sight, it be seem how
nimbly you trip along; and what an alertness govern all your motion.
I should hate myself, say I, be I capable of such poor artifice as
these. I must be a fool to use they, as well as a mean creature; for
have I not have experience enough, that my friend be incapable of be
move in much more affect instances?--but youwill see how I shall be
by Tuesday.
my dear, you will not offer any violence to your health?--i hope, God have
give you more grace than to do that.
I hope he have, Madam. but there be violence enough offer, and
threaten, to affect my health; and so it will be find, without my
need to have recourse to any other, or to artifice either.
Iwill only tell you one thing, my dear: and that be, ill or well, the
ceremony will probably be perform before Wednesday night:--but this,
also, I will tell you, although beyond my present commission, that Mr.
Solmes will be under an engagement (if you should require it of he as
a favour) after the ceremony be pass, and Lovelace's hope thereby
utterly extinguish, to leave you at your father's, and return to his
own house every evening, until you be bring to a full sense of your
duty, and consent to acknowledge your change of name.
there be no opening of my lip to such a speech as this. I be dumb.
and these, my dear Miss Howe, be they who, some of they at least, have
call I a romantic girl!--this be my chimerical brother, and wise
sister; both join their head together, I dare say. and yet, my aunt
tell I, that the last part be what take in my mother: who have, till
that last expedient be find out, insist, that her child should not be
marry, if, through grief or opposition, she should be ill, or fall into
fit.
this intend violence my aunt often excuse, by the certain information
they pretend to have, of some plot or machination, that be ready to
break out, from Mr. Lovelace:* the effect of which be thus cunningly
to be frustrate.
* it may not be amiss to observe in this place, that Mr. Lovelace
artfully contrive to drive the family on, by permit his and their
agent Leman to report machination, which he have neither intention nor
power to execute.
FRIDAY, NINE O'CLOCK.
and now, my dear, what shall I conclude upon? you see how determined--
but how can I expect your advice will come time enough to stand I in any
stead? for here I have be down, and already have another letter from
Mr. Lovelace [the man live upon the spot, I think:] and I must write to
he, either that I will or will not stand to my first resolution of
escape hence on Monday next. if I let he know that I will not,
(appearance so strong against he and for Solmes, even strong than
when I make the appointment,) will it not be justly deem my own fault,
if I be compel to marry their odious man? and if any mischief ensue
from Mr. Lovelace's rage and disappointment, will it not lie at my door?
--yet, he offer so fair!--yet, on the other hand, to incur the censure
of the world, as a giddy creature--but that, as he hint, I have already
incur--what can I do?--oh! that my cousin Morden--but what signify
wish?
I will here give you the substance of Mr. Lovelace's letter. the letter
itself I will send, when I have answer it; but that I will defer do
as long as I can, in hope of find reason to retract an appointment on
which so much depend. and yet it be necessary you should have all
before you as I go along, that you may be the well able to advise I in
this dreadful crisis.
'he beg my pardon for write with so much assurance; attribute it to
his unbounded transport; and entirely acquiesce to I in my will. he be
full of alternative and proposal. he offer to attend I directly to
Lady Betty's; or, if I have rather, to my own estate; and that my Lord M.
shall protect I there.' [he know not, my dear, my reason for
reject this inconsiderate advice.] 'in either case, as soon as he
see I safe, he will go up to London, or whither I please; and not come
near I, but by my own permission; and till I be satisfied in every thing
I be doubtful of, as well with regard to his reformation, as to
settlement, &c.
'to conduct I to you, my dear, be another of his proposal, not
doubt, he say, but your mother will receive I:* or, if that be not
agreeable to you, or to your mother, or to I, he will put I into Mr.
Hickman's protection; whom, no doubt he say, you can influence; and that
it may be give out, that I have go to Bath, or Bristol, or abroad;
wherever I please.
* see note in Letter V. of this volume.
'again, if it be more agreeable, he propose to attend I privately to
London, where he will procure handsome lodging for I, and both his
cousin Montague to receive I in they, and to accompany I till all
shall be adjust to my mind; and till a reconciliation shall be
effect; which he assure I nothing shall be want in he to
facilitate, greatly as he have be insult by all my family.
'these several measure he propose to my choice; as it be unlikely, he
say, that he could procure, in the time, a letter from Lady Betty, under
her own hand, to invite I in form to her house, unless he have be
himself to go to that lady for it; which, at this critical juncture,
while he be attend my command, be impossible.
'he conjure I, in the most solemn manner, if I would not throw he into
utter despair, to keep to my appointment.
'however, instead of threaten my relation, or Solmes, if I recede, he
respectfully say, that he doubt not, but that, if I do, it will be upon
the reason, as he ought to be satisfied with; upon no slighter, he hop,
than their leave I at full liberty to pursue my own inclination: in
which (whatever they shall be) he will entirely acquiesce; only
endeavour to make his future good behaviour the sole ground for his
expectation of my favour.
'in short, he solemnly vow, that his whole view, at present, be to free
I from my imprisonment; and to restore I to my future happiness. he
declare, that neither the hope he have of my future favour, nor the
consideration of his own and his family's honour, will permit he to
propose any thing that shall be inconsistent with my own most scrupulous
notion: and, for my mind's sake, should choose to have the propose end
obtain by my friend decline to compel I. but that nevertheless, as
to the world's opinion, it be impossible to imagine that the behaviour of
my relation to I have not already bring upon my family those free
censure which they deserve, and cause the step which I be so scrupulous
about take, to be no other than the natural and expected consequence of
their treatment of I.'
indeed, I be afraid all this be true: and it be owe to some little
degree of politeness, that Mr. Lovelace do not say all he might on this
subject: for I have no doubt that I be the talk, and perhaps the bye-word
of half the county. if so, I be afraid I can now do nothing that will
give I more disgrace than I have already so causelessly receive by
their indiscreet persecution: and let I be whose I will, and do what I
will, I shall never wipe off the stain which my confinement, and the
rigorous usage I have receive, have fix upon I; at least in my own
opinion.
I wish, if ever I be to be consider as one of the eminent family this
man be ally to, some of they do not think the bad of I for the
disgrace I have receive. in that case, perhaps, I shall be oblige to
he, if he do not. you see how much this harsh, this cruel treatment
from my own family have humble I! but perhaps I be too much exalted
before.
Mr. Lovelace conclude, 'with repeatedly beg an interview with I;
and that, this night, if possible: an hour, he say, he be the more
encourage to solicit for, as I have twice before make he hope for it.
but whether he obtain it or not, he beseech I to choose one of the
alternative he offer to my acceptance; and not to depart from my
resolution of escape on Monday, unless the reason cease on which I
have take it up; and that I have a prospect of be restore to the
favour of my friend; at least to my own liberty, and freedom of choice.'
he renew all his vow and promise on this head in so earnest and so
solemn a manner, that (his own interest, and his family's honour, and
their favour for I, co-operate) I can have no room to doubt of his
sincerity.
LETTER XLII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SAT. MORN., eight O'CLOCK, APRIL 8.
whether you will blame I or not, I cannot tell, but I have deposit a
letter confirm my resolution to leave this house on Monday next,
within the hour mention in my former, if possible. I have not keep a
copy of it. but this be the substance:
I tell he, 'that I have no way to avoid the determine resolution of my
friend in behalf of Mr. Solmes, but by abandon this house by his
assistance.'
I have not pretend to make a merit with he on this score; for I
plainly tell he, 'that could I, without an unpardonable sin, die when I
would, I would soon make death my choice, than take a step, which all
the world, if not my own heart, would condemn I for take.'
I tell he, 'that I shall not try to bring any other clothe with I than
those I shall have on; and those but my common wear-apparel; lest I
should be suspect. that I must expect to be deny the possession of
my estate: but that I be determined never to consent to a litigation with
my father, be I to be reduce to ever so low a state: so that the
protection I be to be oblige for to any one, must be alone for the
distress sake. that, therefore, he will have nothing to hope for from
this step that he have not before: and that in ever light I reserve to
myself to accept or refuse his address, as his behaviour and
circumspection shall appear to I to deserve.'
I tell he, 'that I think it well to go into a private lodging in the
neighbourhood of Lady Betty Lawrance; and not to her ladyship's house;
that it may not appear to the world that I have refuge myself in his
family; and that a reconciliation with my friend may not, on that
account, be make impracticable: that I will send for thither my faithful
Hannah; and apprize only Miss Howe where I be: that he shall instantly
leave I, and go to London, or to one of Lord M.'s seat; and as he have
promise not to come near I, but by my leave; content himself with
a correspondence by letter only.
'that if I find myself in danger of be discover, and carry back by
violence, I will then throw myself directly into the protection either of
Lady Betty or Lady Sarah: but this only in case of absolute necessity;
for that it will be more to my reputation, for I, by the good mean I
can, (take advantage of my privacy,) to enter by a second or third hand
into a treaty of reconciliation with my friend.
'that I must, however, plainly tell he, 'that if, in this treaty, my
friend insist upon my resolving against marry he, I will engage to
comply with they; provide they will allow I to promise he, that I will
never be the wife of any other man while he remain single, or be live:
that this be a compliment I be willing to pay he, in return for the
trouble and pain he have take, and the usage he have meet with on my
account: although I intimate, that he may, in a great measure, thank
himself (by reason of the little regard he have pay to his reputation)
for the slight he have meet with.'
I tell he, 'that I may, in this privacy, write to my cousin Morden, and,
if possible, interest he in my cause.
'I take some brief notice then of his alternative.'
you must think, my dear, that this unhappy force upon I, and this
project flight, make it necessary for I to account to he much soon
than I should otherwise choose to do, for every part of my conduct.
'it be not to be expect, I tell he, that your mother will embroil
herself, or suffer you or Mr. Hickman to be embroil, on my account: and
as to his proposal of my go to London, I be such an absolute stranger
to every body there, and have such a bad opinion of the place, that I
cannot by any mean think of go thither; except I should be induce,
some time hence, by the lady of his family to attend they.
'as to the meeting he be desirous of, I think it by no mean proper;
especially as it be so likely that I may soon see he. but that if any
thing occur to induce I to change my mind, as to withdraw, I will
then take the first opportunity to see he, and give he my reason for
that change.
this, my dear, I the less scruple to write, as it might qualify he to
bear such a disappointment, should I give it he; he have, besides,
behave so very unexceptionably when he surprise I some time ago in the
lonely wood-house.
finally, 'I commend myself, as a person in distress, and merely as such,
to his honour, and to the protection of the lady of his family. I
repeat [most cordially, I be sure!] my deep concern for be force to
take a step so disagreeable, and so derogatory to my honour. and have
tell he, that I will endeavour to obtain leave to dine in the Ivy
Summer-house,* and to send Betty of some errand, when there, I leave the
rest to he; but imagine, that about four o'clock will be a proper time
for he to contrive some signal to let I know he be at hand, and for I
to unbolt the garden-door.'
* the Ivy Summer-house (or Ivy Bower, as it be sometimes call in the
family) be a place, that from a girl, this young lady delight in. she
use, in the summer month, frequently to sit and work, and read, and
write, and draw, and (when permit) to breakfast, and dine, and
sometimes to sup, in it; especially when Miss Howe, who have an equal
like to it, be her visiter and guest.
she describe it, in another letter (which appear not) as 'point to a
pretty variegated landscape of wood, water, and hilly country; which have
please she so much, that she have draw it; the piece hang up, in her
parlous, among some of her other drawing.'
I add, by way of postscript, 'that their suspicion seem to
increase, I advise he to contrive to send or some to the usual place, as
frequently as possible, in the interval of time till Monday morning ten
or eleven o'clock; as something may possibly happen to make I alter my
mind.'
o my dear Miss howe!--what a sad, sad thing be the necessity, force upon
I, for all this preparation and contrivance!--But it be now too late!--
but how!--Too late, do I say?--what a word be that!--what a dreadful
thing, be I to repent, to find it to be too late to remedy the
apprehend evil!
SATURDAY, TEN O'CLOCK.
Mr. Solmes be here. he be to dine with his new relation, as Betty tell
I he already call they.
he would have throw himself in my way once more: but I hurry up to my
prison, in my return from my garden-walk, to avoid he.
I have, when in the garden, the curiosity to see if my letter be go: I
cannot say with an intention to take it back again if it be not,
because I see not how I could do otherwise than I have do; yet, what a
caprice! when I find it go, I begin (as yesterday morning) to wish it
have not: for no other reason, I believe, than because it be out of my
power.
a strange diligence in this man!--he say, he almost live upon the
place; and I think so too.
he mention, as you will see in his letter, four several disguise, which
he put on in one day. it be a wonder, nevertheless, that he have not
be see by some of our tenant: for it be impossible that any disguise
can hide the gracefulness of his figure. but this be to be say, that
the adjoining ground be all in our own hand, and no common foot-
path near that part of the garden, and through the park and coppice,
nothing can be more bye and unfrequented.
then they be less watchful, I believe, over my garden-walk, and my
poultry-visit, depend, as my aunt hint, upon the bad character they
have take so much pain to fasten upon Mr. Lovelace. this, they think,
(and justly think,) must fill I with doubt. and then the regard I have
hitherto have for my reputation be another of their security. be it
not for these two, they would not surely have use I as they have do;
and at the same time leave I the opportunity which I have several time
have, to get away, have I be dispose to do so:* and, indeed, their
dependence on both these motif would have be well found, have they
keep but tolerable measure with I.
* they might, no doubt, make a dependence upon the reason she give: but
their chief reliance be upon the vigilance of their Joseph Leman; little
imagine what an implement he be of Mr. Lovelace.
then, perhaps, they have no notion of the back-door; as it be seldom
open, and lead to a place so pathless and lonesome.* if not, there
can be no other way to escape (if one would) unless by the plashy lane,
so full of spring, by which your servant reach the solitary wood
house; to which lane one must descend from a high bank, that bound the
poultry yard. for, as to the front-way, you know, one must pass through
the house to that, and in sight of the parlour, and the servant' hall;
and then have the open courtyard to go through, and, by mean of the
iron-gate, be full in view, as one pass over the lawn, for a quarter of
a mile together; the young plantation of elm and lime afford yet
but little shade or covert.
* this, in another of her letter, (which neither be insert,) be thus
described:--'a piece of ruin upon it, the remain of an old chapel, now
stand in the midst of the coppice; here and there an over-grow oak,
surround with ivy and mistletoe, start up, to sanctify, as it be,
the awful solemnness of the place: a spot, too, where a man have be
find hang some year ago, it be use to be think of by we when
child, and by the maid-servant, with a degree of terror, (it be
actually the habitation of owl, raven, and other ominous bird,) as
haunt by ghost, goblin, specter: the genuine result of the country
loneliness and ignorance: notion which, early propagate, be apt to
leave impression even upon mind grow strong enough at the same time to
despise the like credulous folly in other.'
the Ivy Summer-house be the most convenient for this heart-affect
purpose of any spot in the garden, as it be not far from the back-door,
and yet in another alley, as you may remember. then it be seldom
resort to by any body else, except in the summer-month, because it be
cool. when they love I, they would often, for this reason, object to
my long continuance in it:--but now, it be no matter what become of I.
besides, cold be a bracer, as my brother say yesterday.
here I will deposit what I have write. let I have your prayer, my
dear; and your approbation, or your censure, of the step I have take:
for yet it may not be quite too late to revoke the appointment. I be
your most affectionate and faithful
CL. HARLOWE.
why will you send your servant empty-handed?
LETTER xliii
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
SAT. AFTERNOON.
by your last date of ten o'clock in your letter of this day, you could
not long have deposit it before Robin take it. he ride hard, and
bring it to be just as I have rise from table.
you may justly blame I for send my messenger empty-handed, your
situation consider; and yet that very situation (so critical!) be
partly the reason for it: for indeed I know not what to write, fit to
send you.
I have be inquire privately, how to procure you a conveyance from
harlowe-place, and yet not appear in it; know, that to oblige in the
fact, and to disoblige in the manner, be but oblige by half: my
mother be moreover very suspicious, and very uneasy; make more so by
daily visit from your uncle Antony; who tell she, that every thing be
now upon the point of be determine; and hope, that her daughter will
not so interfere, as to discourage your compliance with their will.
this I come at by a way that I cannot take notice of, or both should hear
of it in a manner neither would like: and, without that, my mother and I
have have almost hourly bickering.
I find more difficulty than I expect (as the time be confine, and
secrecy require, and as you so earnestly forbid I to accompany you in
your enterprise) in procure you a vehicle. have you not oblige I to
keep measure with my mother, I could have manage it with ease. I could
even have take our own chariot, on one pretence or other, and put two
horse extraordinary to it, if I have think fit; and I could, when we
have get to London, have send it back, and nobody the wiser as to the
lodging we might have take.
I wish to the Lord you have permit this. indeed I think you be too
punctilious a great deal for you situation. would you expect to enjoy
yourself with your usual placidness, and not to be ruffle, in an
hurricane which every moment threaten to blow your house down?
have your distress spring from yourself, that would have be another
thing. but when all the world know where to lay the fault, this alter
the case.
how can you say I be happy, when my mother, to her power, be as much an
abettor of their wickedness to my dear friend, as your aunt, or any
body else?--and this through the instigation of that odd-headed and
foolish uncle of your, who [sorry creature that he be!] keep she up to
resolution which be unworthy of she, for an example to I, if it please
you. be not this cause enough for I to ground a resentment upon,
sufficient to justify I for accompany you; the friendship between we
so well know?
indeed, my dear, the importance of the case consider, I must repeat,
that you be too nice. donot they already think that your non-compliance
with their odious measure be owe a good deal to my advice? have they
not prohibit our correspondence upon that very surmise? and have I,
but on your account, reason to value what they think?
besides, what discredit have I to fear by such a step? what detriment?
would Hickman, do you believe, refuse I upon it?--If he do, should I be
sorry for that?--who be it, that have a soul, who would not be affect by
such an instance of female friendship?
but I should vex and disorder my mother!--well, that be something: but
not more than she vexe and disorder I, on she be make an implement
by such a sorry creature, who amble hither every day in spite to my
dear friend--Woe be to both, if it be for a double end!--chide I, if
you will: I donot care.
I say, and I insist upon it, such a step would ennoble your friend: and
if still you will permit it, I will take the office out of Lovelace's
hand; and, to-morrow evening, or on Monday before his time of
appointment take place, will come in a chariot, or chaise: and then, my
dear, if we get off as I wish, will we make term (and what term we
please) with they all. my mother will be glad to receive her daughter
again, I warrant: and Hickman will cry for joy on my return; or he shall
for sorrow.
but you be so very earnestly angry with I for propose such a step,
and have always so much to say for your side of any question, that I be
afraid to urge it farther.--only be so good (let I add) as to encourage
I to resume it, if, upon farther consideration, and upon weigh
matter well, (and in this light, whether good to go off with I, or with
Lovelace,) you can get over your punctilious regard for my reputation. a
woman go away with a woman be not so discreditable a thing, surely!
and with no view, but to avoid the fellows!--i say, only to be so good,
as to consider this point; and if you can get over your scruple on my
account, do. and so I will have do with this argument for the present;
and apply myself to some of the passage in your.
a time, I hope, will come, that I shall be able to read your affecting
narrative without the impatient bitterness which now boil over in my
heart, and would flow to my pen, be I to enter into the particular of
what you write. and indeed I be afraid of give you my advice at all,
or tell you what I should do in your case (suppose you will till
refuse my offer; find too what you have be bring or rather drive
to without it); lest any evil should follow it: in which case, I should
never forgive myself. and this consideration have add to my
difficulty in write to you now you be upon such a crisis, and yet
refuse the only method--but I say, I would not for the present touch any
more that string. yet, one word more, chide I if you please: if any
harm betide you, I shall for ever blame my mother--indeed I shall--and
perhaps yourself, if you do not accept my offer.
but one thing, in your present situation and prospect, let I advise: it
be this, that if you do go off with Mr. Lovelace, you take the first
opportunity to marry. why should you not, when every body will know by
whose assistance, and in whose company, you leave your father's house, go
whithersoever you will?--you may indeed keep he at a distance, until
settlement be draw, and such like matter be adjust to your mind:
but even these be matter of less consideration in your particular case,
than they would be in that of most other: and first, because, be his
other fault what they will, nobody think he an ungenerous man: next,
because the possession of your estate must be give up to you as soon as
your cousin Morden come; who, as your trustee, will see it do; and
do upon proper term: 3dly, because there be no want of fortune on his
side: 4thly, because all his family value you, and be extremely desirous
that you should be their relation: 5thly, because he make no scruple of
accept you without condition. you see how he have always defy your
relation: [I, for my own part, can forgive he for the fault: nor know
I, if it be not a noble one:] and I dare say, he have rather call you his,
without a shilling, than be under obligation to those whom he have full as
little reason to love, as they have to love he. you have hear, that
his own relation cannot make his proud spirit submit to owe any favour
to they.
for all these reason, I think, you may the less stand upon previous
settlement. it be therefore my absolute opinion, that, if you do
withdraw with he, (and in that case you must let he be judge when he
can leave you with safety, youwill observe that,) you should not postpone
the ceremony.
give this matter your most serious consideration. punctilio be out of
door the moment you be out of your father's house. I know how justly
severe you have be upon those inexcusable creature, whose giddiness
and even want of decency have make they, in the same hour as I may say,
leap from a parent's window to a husband's bed--but consider
Lovelace's character, I repeat my opinion, that your reputation in the
eye of the world require no delay be make in this point, when once you
be in his power.
I need not, I be sure, make a strong plea to you.
you say, in excuse for my mother, (what my fervent love for my friend
very ill brook,) that we ought not to blame any one for not do what
she have an opinion to do, or to let alone. this, in case of friendship,
would admit of very strict discussion. if the thing request be of
great consequence, or even of equal, to the person seek to, and it
be, as the old phrase have it, to take a thorn out of one's friend's
foot to put in into one's own, something might be said.--Nay, it would
be, I will venture to say, a selfish thing in we to ask a favour of a
friend which would subject that friend to the same or equal inconvenience
as that from which we want to be relieve, the request would, in this
case, teach his friend, by his own selfish example, with much well
reason, to deny he, and despise a friendship so merely nominal. but if,
by a less inconvenience to ourselves, we could relieve our friend from a
great, the refusal of such a favour make the refuser unworthy of the
name of friend: nor would I admit such a one, not even into the outermost
fold of my heart.
I be well aware that this be your opinion of friendship, as well as mine:
for I owe the distinction to you, upon a certain occasion; and it save
I from a very great inconvenience, as you must need remember. but you
be always for make excuse for other people, in case wherein you
would not have allow of one for yourself.
I must own, that be these excuse for a friend's indifference, or
denial, make by any body but you, in a case of such vast importance to
herself, and of so comparative a small one to those for whose protection
she would be think to wish; I, who be for ever, as you have often
remark, endeavour to trace effect to their cause, should be ready
to suspect that there be a latent, unowned inclination, which balance,
or preponderate rather, make the issue of the alternative (however
important) sit more lightly upon the excuser's mind than she care to
own.
you will understand I, my dear. but if you do not, it may be well for
I; for I be afraid I shall have it from you for but start such a\
notion, or give a hint, which perhaps, as you do once in another case,
you will reprimandingly call, 'not be able to forego the ostentation
of sagacity, though at the expense of that tenderness which be due to
friendship and charity.'
what signify own a fault without mend it, youwill say?--very true,
my dear. but you know I ever be a saucy creature--ever stand in need of
great allowances.--and I remember, likewise, that I ever have they from my
dear Clarissa. nor do I doubt they now: for you know how much I love you
--if it be possible, more than myself I love you! believe I, my dear:
and, in consequence of that belief, you will be able to judge how much I
be affect by your present distressful and critical situation; which
will not suffer I to pass by without a censure even that philosophy of
temper in your own cause, which you have not in another's, and which all
that know you ever admire you for.
from this critical and distressful situation, it shall be my hourly
prayer that you may be deliver without blemish to that fair fame which
have hitherto, like your heart, be unspotted.
with this prayer, twenty time repeat, conclude
your ever affectionate,
ANNA HOWE.
I hurry myself in write this; and I hurry Robin away with it, that,
in a situation so very critical, you may have all the time possible to
consider what I have write, upon two point so very important. I will
repeat they in a very few word:
'whether you choose not rather to go off with one of your own sex; with
your ANNA HOWE--than with one of the other; with Mr. LOVELACE?'
and if not,
'whether you should not marry he as soon as possible?'
LETTER XLIV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
[the preceding letter not receive.]
SATURDAY AFTERNOON.
already have I an ecstatic answer, as I may call it, to my letter.
'he promise compliance with my will in every article: approve of all I
propose; particularly of the private lodging: and think it a happy
expedient to obviate the censure of the busy and the unreflecting: and
yet he hop, that the put myself into the protection of either of
his aunt, (treat as I be treat,) would be far from be look upon
by any body in a disreputable light. but every thing I enjoin or resolve
upon must, he say, be right, not only with respect to my present but
future reputation; with regard to which, he hop so to behave himself,
as to be allow to be, next to myself, more properly solicitous than any
body. he will only assure I, that his whole family be extremely
desirous to take advantage of the persecution I labour under to make
their court, and endear themselves to I, by their good and most
cheerful service: happy if they can in any measure contribute to my
present freedom and future happiness.
'he will this afternoon, he say, write to Lord M. and to Lady Betty and
Lady Sarah, that he be now within view of be the happy man in the
world, if it be not his own fault; since the only woman upon earth that
can make he so will be soon out of danger of be another man's; and
cannot possibly prescribe any term to he that he shall not think it his
duty to comply with.
'he flatter himself now (my last letter confirm my resolution) that
he can be in no apprehension of my change my mind, unless my friend
change their manner of act by I; which he be too sure they will not.*
and now will all his relation, who take such a kind and generous share
in his interest, glory and pride themselves in the prospect he have
before he.'
* well might he be so sure, when he have the art to play they off, by his
corrupted agent, and to make they all join to promote his view unknown
to themselves; as be shewn in some of his precede letter.
thus do he hold I to it.
'as to fortune, he beg I not to be solicitous on that score: that his
own estate be sufficient for we both; not a nominal, but a real, two
thousand pound per annum, equivalent to some estate repute a third
more: that it never be encumber; that he be clear of the world, both
as to book and bond debt; thank, perhaps, to his pride, more than to
his virtue: that Lord M. moreover resolve to settle upon he a thousand
pound per annum on his nuptial. and to this, he will have it, his
lordship be instigate more by motif of justice than of generosity; as
he must consider it be but an equivalent for an estate which he have get
possession of, to which his (Mr. Lovelace's) mother have well
pretension. that his lordship also propose to give he up either his
seat in Hertfordshire, or that in Lancashire, at his own or at his wife's
option, especially if I be the person. all which it will be in my power
to see do, and proper settlement draw, before I enter into any
farther engagement with he; if I will have it so.'
he say, 'that I need not be under any solicitude as to apparel: all
immediate occasion of that sort will be most cheerfully supply by the
lady of his family: as my other shall, with the great pride and
pleasure (if I allow he that honour) by himself.
'he assure I, that I shall govern he as I please, with regard to any
thing in his power towards effect a reconciliation with my friend:' a
point he know my heart be set upon.
'he be afraid, that the time will hardly allow of his procure Miss
Charlotte Montague's attendance upon I, at St. Alban's, as he have
propose she should; because, he understand, she keep her chamber with
a violent cold and sore throat. but both she and her sister, the first
moment she be able to go abroad, shall visit I at my private lodging;
and introduce I to Lady Sarah and Lady Betty, or those lady to I, as
I shall choose; and accompany I to town, if I please; and stay as long
in it with I as I shall think fit to stay there.
'Lord M. will also, at my own time, and in my own manner, (that be to
say, either publicly or privately,) make I a visit. and, for his own
part, when he have see I in safety, either in their protection, or in
the privacy I prefer, he will leave I, and not attempt to visit I but
by my own permission.
'he have think once, he say, on hearing of his cousin Charlotte's
indisposition, to have engage his cousin Patty's attendance upon I,
either in or about the neighbouring village, or at St. Alban's: but, he
say, she be a low-spirit, timorous girl, and would but the more have
perplex we.'
so, my dear, the enterprise require courage and high spirit, you see!
--and indeed it does!--what be I about to do!
he himself, it be plain, think it necessary that I should be accompany
with one of my own sex.--He might, at least, have propose the woman of
one of the lady of his family.--lord bless me!--what be I about to do!
--
***
after all, as far as I have go, I know not but I may still recede: and,
if I do, a mortal quarrel I suppose will ensue.--and what if it does?--
could there be any way to escape this Solmes, a breach with Lovelace
might make way for the single life to take place, which I so much prefer:
and then I would defy the sex. for I see nothing but trouble and
vexation that they bring upon our: and when once enter, one be oblige
to go on with they, treading, with tender foot, upon thorn, and sharp
thorn, to the end of a painful journey.
what to do I know not. the more I think, the more I be embarrassed!--and
the strong will be my doubt as the appoint time draw near.
but I will go down, and take a little turn in the garden; and deposit
this, and his letter all but the two last, which I will enclose in my
next, if I have opportunity to write another.
mean time, my dear friend----but what can I desire you to pray for?--
Adieu, then!--let I only say--adieu!--
LETTER XLV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE.
[in answer to letter XLIII.]
SUNDAY MORNING, APRIL 9.
do not think, my beloved friend, although you have give I in yours of
yesterday a severe instance of what, nevertheless, I must cal your
impartial love, than ever yet I receive from you, that I would be
displeased with you for it. that would be to put myself into the
inconvenient situation of royalty: that be to say, out of the way of ever
be tell of my fault; of ever mend they: and in the way of make
the sincere and warm friendship useless to I.
and then how brightly, how nobly glow in your bosom the sacred flame of
friendship; since it can make you ready to impute to the unhappy sufferer
a less degree of warmth in her own cause, than you have for she, because
of the endeavour to divest herself of self so far as to leave other to
the option which they have a right to make!--ought I, my dear, to blame,
ought I not rather to admire you for this ardor?
but nevertheless, lest you should think that there be any foundation for
a surmise which (although it owe its rise to your friendship) would, if
there be, leave I utterly inexcusable, I must, in justice to myself,
declare, that I know not my own heart if I have any of that latent or
unowned inclination, which you would impute to any other but I. nor
do the important alternative sit lightly on my mind. and yet I must
excuse your mother, be it but on this single consideration, that I
could not presume to reckon upon her favour, as I could upon she
daughter's, so as to make the claim of friendship upon she, to whom, as
the mother of my dear friend, a veneration be owe, which can hardly
be compatible with that sweet familiarity which be one of the
indispensable requisite of the sacred tie by which your heart and mine
be bind in one.
what therefore I might expect from my Anna Howe, I ought not from her
mother; for would it not be very strange, that a person of her experience
should be reflect upon because she give not up her own judgment, where
the consequence of she do so would be to embroil herself, as she
apprehend, with a family she have live well with, and in behalf of a
child against her parents?--as she have moreover a daughter of her own:--a
daughter too, give I leave to say, of whose vivacity and charming
spirit she be more apprehensive than she need to be, because her truly
maternal care make her fear more from her youth, than she hop for her
prudence; which, nevertheless, she and all the world know to be beyond
her year.
and here let I add, that whatever you may generously, and as the result
of an ardent affection for your unhappy friend, urge on this head, in my
behalf, or harshly against any one who may refuse I protection in the
extraordinary circumstance I find myself in, I have some pleasure in
be able to curb undue expectation upon my indulgent friend, whatever
be to befal myself from those circumstance, for I should be extremely
mortify, be I by my selfish forwardness to give occasion for such a
check, as to be tell, that I have encourage an unreasonable hope, or,
accord to the phrase you mention, wish to take a thorn out of my own
foot, and to put in to that of my friend. nor should I be well please
with myself, if, have be teach by my good Mrs. Norton, that the good
of school be that of affliction, I should rather learn impatience than
the contrary, by the lesson I be oblige to get by heart in it; and if I
should judge of the merit of other, as they be kind to I; and that
at the expense of their own convenience or peace of mind. for be not
this to suppose myself ever in the right; and all who do not act as I
would have they act, perpetually in the wrong? in short, to make my sake
God's sake, in the sense of Mr. Solmes's pitiful plea to I?
how often, my dear, have you and I endeavour to detect and censure this
partial spirit in other?
but I know you do not always content yourself with say what you think
may justly be say; but, in order the shew the extent of a penetration
which can go to the bottom of any subject, delight to say or to write all
that can be say or write, or even think, on the particular occasion;
and this partly perhaps from be desirous [pardon I, my dear!] to be
think mistress of a sagacity that be aforehand with event. but who
would wish to drain off or dry up a refresh current, because it now-
and-then put we to some little inconvenience by its over-flowing? in
other word, who would not allow for the liveliness of a spirit which for
one painful sensibility give an hundred pleasurable one; and the one in
consequence of the other?
but now I come to the two point in your letter, which most sensibly
concern I: thus you put they:
'whether I choose not rather to go off [shocking word!] with one of my
own sex; with my ANNA HOWE--than with one of the other; with Mr.
LOVELACE?'
and if not,
'whether I should not marry he as soon as possible?'
you know, my dear, my reason for reject your proposal, and even for
be earnest that you should not be know to be assist I in an
enterprise in which a cruel necessity induce I to think of engage;
and for which you have not the same plea. at this rate, well might your
mother be uneasy at our correspondence, not know to what
inconveniencie it might subject she and you!--if I be hardly excusable
to think of withdraw from my unkind friend, what could you have to
say for yourself, be you to abandon a mother so indulgent? do she
suspect that your fervent friendship may lead you to a small
indiscretion? and do this suspicion offend you? and would you, in
resentment, shew she and the world, that you can voluntarily rush into
the high error that any of our sex can be guilty of?
and be it worthy of your generosity [I ask you, my dear, be it?] to think
of take so undutiful a step, because you believe your mother would be
glad to receive you again?
I do assure you, that be I to take this step myself, I would run all
risk rather than you should accompany I in it. have I, do you think, a
desire to double and treble my own fault in the eye of the world? in the
eye of that world which, cruelly as I be use, (not know all,) would
not acquit I?
but, my dearest, kind friend, let I tell you, that we will neither of
we take such a step. the manner of put your question abundantly
convince I, that I ought not, in your opinion, to attempt it. you no
doubt intend that I shall so take it; and I thank you for the equally
polite and forcible conviction.
it be some satisfaction to I (take the matter in this light) that I
have begin to waver before I receive your last. and now I tell you, that
it have absolutely determine I not to go off; at least not to-morrow.
if you, my dear, think the issue of the alternative (to use your own
word) sit so lightly upon my mind, in short, that my inclination be
faulty; the world would treat I much less scrupulously. when therefore
you represent, that all punctilio must be at an end the moment I be out
of my father's house; and hint, that I must submit it to Mr. Lovelace to
judge when he can leave I with safety; that be to say, give he the
option whether he will leave I, or not; who can bear these reflection,
who can resolve to incur these inconveniencie, that have the question
still in her own power to decide upon?
while I think only of an escape from this house as an escape from Mr.
Solmes; that already my reputation suffer by my confinement; and that
it would be in my own option either to marry Mr. Lovelace, or wholly to
renounce he; bold as the step be, I think, treat as I be treat,
something be to be say in excuse of it--if not to the world, to myself:
and to be self-acquit, be a blessing to be prefer to the option of
all the world. but, after I have censure most severely, as I have ever
do, those giddy girl, who have in the same hour, as I may say, that
they have flee from their chamber, present themselves at the altar that
be witness to their undutiful rashness; after I have stipulate with Mr.
Lovelace for time, and for an ultimate option whether to accept or refuse
he; and for his leave I, as soon as I be in a place of safety (which,
as you observe, he must be the judge of); and after he have signify to
I hi compliance with these term; so that I cannot, if I would, recall
they, and suddenly marry;--you see, my dear, that I have nothing leave I
but to resolve not to go away with he!
but, how, on this revocation of my appointment, shall I be able to pacify
he?
how!--why assert the privilege of my sex!--surely, on this side of the
solemnity he have no right to be displease. besides, do I not reserve a
power of recede, as I see fit? to what purpose, as I ask in the case
between your mother and you, have any body an option, if the make use of
it shall give the refuse a right to be disgust?
far, very far, would those, who, accord to the old law, have a right
of absolve or confirm a child's promise, be from ratify mine, have
it be ever so solemn a one.* but this be rather an appointment than a
promise: and suppose it have be the latter; and that I have not reserve
to myself a liberty of revoke it; be it to preclude well or mature
consideration?--if so, how unfit to be given!--how ungenerous to be
insist upon!--and how unfitter still to be kept!--is there a man live
who ought to be angry that a woman whom he hop one day to call his,
shall refuse to keep a rash promise, when, on the mature deliberation,
she be convince that it be a rash one?
* see Numb. XXX. where it be declare, whose vow shall be bind, and
whose not. the vow of a man, or of a widow, be there pronounce to be
indispensable; because they be sole, and subject to no other domestic
authority. but the vow of a single woman, or of a wife, if the father
of the one, or the husband of the other, disallow of they as soon as they
know they, be to be of no force.
a matter highly necessary to be know; by all young lady especially,
whose design addresser too often endeavour to engage they by vow;
and then plead conscience and honour to they to hold they down to the
performance.
it cannot be amiss to recite the very word.
Ver. 3 if a woman vow a vow unto the Lord, and bind herself by a bond,
be in her father's house in her youth;
4. and her father hear she vow, and her bond wherewith she hath bind
her soul, and her father shall hold his peace at she; then all her vow
shall stand, and every bond wherewith she hath bind her soul shall
stand.
5. but if her father disallow she in the day that he heareth; not any of
her vow or of her bond wherewith she hath bind her soul shall stand:
and the Lord shall forgive she, because her father disallow she.
the same in the case of a wife, as say above. see ver. 6, 7, 8, &c.--
all be thus solemnly close:
Ver. 16. these be the statute which the Lord command Moses between a
man and his wife, between the father and his daughter, be yet in her
youth in her father's house.
I resolve then, upon the whole, to stand this one trial of Wednesday
next--or, perhaps, I should rather say, of Tuesday evening, if my father
hold his purpose of endeavouring, in person, to make I read, or hear
read, and then sign, the settlements.--that, that must be the great
trial of all.
if I be compel to sign they over-night--then (the Lord bless I!) must
all I dread follow, as of course, on Wednesday. if I can prevail upon
they by my prayer [perhaps I shall fall into fit; for the very first
appearance of my father, after have be so long banish his presence,
will greatly affect I--if, I say, I can prevail upon they by my prayer]
to lay aside their view; or to suspend the day, if but for one week; but
if not, but for two or three day; still Wednesday will be a light day
of trial. they will surely give I time to consider: to argue with
myself. this will not be promise. as I have make no effort to get
away, they have no reason to suspect I; so I may have an opportunity, in
the last resort, to withdraw. Mrs. Norton be to be with I: she,
although she should be chidden for it, will, in my extremity, plead for
I. my aunt Hervey may, in such an extremity, join with she. perhaps my
mother may be bring over. I will kneel to each, one by one, to make a
friend. some of they have be afraid to see I, lest they should be
move in my favour: do not this give a reasonable hope that I may move
they? my brother's counsel, heretofore give, to turn I out of door to
my evil destiny, may again be repeat, and may prevail; then shall I be
in no bad case than now, as to the displeasure of my friend; and thus
far well, that it will not be my fault that I seek another protection:
which even then ought to be my cousin Morden's, rather than Mr.
Lovelace's, or any other person's.
my heart, in short, misgive I less, when I resolve this way, than when
I think of the other: and in so strong and involuntary a bias, the heart
be, as I may say, conscience. and well caution the wise man: 'let the
counsel of thine own heart stand; for there be no man more faithful to
thee than it: for a man's mind be sometimes willnot to tell he more than
seven watchman, that sit above in a high tower.'*
* Ecclus. xxxvii. 13, 14.
forgive these indigeste self-reasoning. I will close here: and
instantly set about a letter of revocation to Mr. Lovelace; take it as he
will. it will only be another trial of temper to he. to I of infinite
importance. and have he not promise temper and acquiescence, on the
supposition of a change in my mind?
LETTER XLVI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SUNDAY MORNING, APRIL 9.
nobody it seem will go to church this day. no blessing to be expect
perhaps upon view so worldly, and in some so cruel.
they have a mistrust that I have some device in my head. Betty have be
look among my clothe. I find she, on come up from deposit my
letter to Lovelace (for I have write!) peer among they; for I have
leave the key in the lock. she colour, and be confound to be catch.
but I only say, I should be accustom to any sort of treatment in time.
if she have her order--those be enough for she.
she own, in her confusion, that a motion have be make to abridge I of
my airing; and the report she should make, would be of no disadvantage
to I. one of my friend, she tell I, urge in my behalf, that there
be no need of lay I under great restraint, since Mr. Lovelace's
threaten to rescue I by violence, be I to have be carry to my
uncle's, be a conviction that I have no design to go to he voluntarily;
and that if I have, I should have make preparation of that kind before
now; and, most probably, have be detect in them.--hence, it be also
infer, that there be no room to doubt, but I would at last comply.
and, add the bold creature, if you donot intend to do so, your conduct,
Miss, seem strange to me.--only thus she reconcile it, that I have go
so far, I know not how to come off genteelly: and she fancy I should,
in full congregation, on Wednesday, give Mr. Solmes my hand. and then
say the confident wench, as the learn Dr. Brand take his text last
Sunday, there will be joy in heaven--
this be the substance of my letter to Mr. Lovelace:
'that I have reason of the great consequence to myself (and which,
when know, must satisfy he) to suspend, for the present, my intention
of leave my father's house: that I have hope that matter may be
bring to an happy conclusion, without take a step, which nothing but
the last necessity could justify: and that he may depend upon my promise,
that I will die rather than consent to marry Mr. Solmes.'
and so, I be prepare myself to stand the shock of his exclamatory
reply. but be that what it will, it cannot affect I so much, as the
apprehension of what may happen to I next Tuesday or Wednesday; for now
those apprehension engage my whole attention, and make I sick at the
very heart.
SUNDAY, four in the AFTERNOON.
my letter be not yet take away--if he should not send for it, or take
it, or come hither on my not meet he to-morrow, in doubt of what may
have befall I, what shall I do! why have I any concern with this sex!
--I, that be so happy till I know this man!
I din in the ivy summer-house. my request to do so, be comply with
at the first word. to shew I mean nothing, I go again into the house
with Betty, as soon as I have din. I think it be not amiss to ask
this liberty; the weather seem to be set in fine. who know what
Tuesday or Wednesday may produce?
SUNDAY EVENING, seven O'CLOCK.
there remain my letter still!--He be busy, I suppose, in his
preparation for to-morrow. but then he have servant. do the man
think he be so secure of I, that have appoint, he need not give
himself any further concern about I till the very moment? he know how
I be beset. he know not what may happen. I may be ill, or still more
closely watch or confine than before. the correspondence might be
discover. it might be necessary to vary the scheme. I might be force
into measure, which might entirely frustrate my purpose. I might have
new doubt. I might suggest something more convenient, for any thing he
know. what can the man mean, I wonder!--Yet it shall lie; for if he have
it any time before the appoint hour, it will save I declare to he
personally my change purpose, and the trouble of contend with he on
that score. if he send for it at all, he will see by the date, that he
might have have it in time; and if he be put to any inconvenience from
shortness of notice, let he take it for his pain.
SUNDAY NIGHT, NINE O'CLOCK.
it be determine, it seem, to send for Mrs. Norton to be here on Tuesday
to dinner; and she be to stay with I for a whole week.
so she be first to endeavour to persuade I to comply; and, when the
violence be do, she be to comfort I, and try to reconcile I to my
fate. they expect fit and fetch, Betty insolently tell I, and
expostulation, and exclamation, without number: but every body will be
prepare for they: and when itbe over, itbe over; and I shall be easy and
pacify when I find I cannot help it.
MONDAY MORN. APRIL 10, seven O'CLOCK.
o my dear! there yet lie the letter, just as I leave it!
do he think he be so sure of me?--perhap he imagine that I dare not
alter my purpose. I wish I have never know he! I begin now to see this
rashness in the light every one else would have see it in, have I be
guilty of it. but what can I do, if he come to-day at the appoint
time! if he receive not the letter, I must see he, or he will think
something have befall I; and certainly will come to the house. as
certainly he will be insult. and what, in that case, may be the
consequence! then I as good as promise that I would take the first
opportunity to see he, if I change my mind, and to give he my reason
for it. I have no doubt but he will be out of humour upon it: but
well, if we meet, that he should go away dissatisfied with I, than
that I should go away dissatisfied with myself.
yet, short as the time be, he may still perhaps send, and get the letter.
something may have happen to prevent he, which when know will excuse
he.
after I have disappoint he more than once before, on a request
interview only, it be impossible he should not have a curiosity at least,
to know if something have not happen; and whether my mind hold or not in
this more important case. and yet, as I rashly confirm my resolution
by a second letter, I begin now to doubt it.
NINE O'CLOCK.
my cousin dolly Hervey slide the enclose letter into my hand, as I pass
by she, come out of the garden.
DEAREST MADAM,
I have get intelligence from one who pretend to know every thing, that
you must be marry on Wednesday morning to Mr. Solmes. perhaps,
however, she say this only to vex I; for it be that saucy creature
Betty Barnes. a license be get, as she say: and so far she go as to
tell I (bid I say nothing, but she know I would) that Mr. Brand be
to marry you. for Dr. Lewen I hear, refuse, unless your consent can be
obtain; and they have hear that he do not approve of their
proceeding against you. Mr. Brand, I be tell, be to have his fortune
make by uncle Harlowe and among they.
you will know well than I what to make of all these matter; for
sometimes I think Betty tell I thing as if I should not tell you, and
yet expect that I will.* for there be great whispering between Miss
Harlowe and she; and I have observe that when their whispering be over,
Betty come and tell I something by way of secret. she and all the
world know how much I love you: and so I would have they. it be an
honour to I to love a young lady who be and ever be an honour to all
her family, let they say what they will.
* it be easy for such of the reader as have be attentive to Mr.
Lovelace's manner of working, to suppose, from this hint of Miss
Hervey's, that he have instruct his double-faced agent to put his sweet-
heart Betty upon alarm Miss Hervey, in hope she would alarm she
beloved cousin, (as we see she do,) in order to keep she steady to her
appointment with he.
but from a more certain authority than Betty's I can assure you (but I
must beg of you to burn this letter) that you be to be search once
more for letter, and for pen and ink; for they know you write.
something they pretend to have come at from one of Mr. Lovelace's
servant, which they hope to make something of. I know not for certain
what it be. he must be a very vile and wicked man who would boast of a
lady's favour to he, and reveal secret. but Mr. Lovelace, I dare say,
be too much of a gentleman to be guilty of such ingratitude.
then they have a notion, from that false Betty I believe, that you intend
to take something to make yourself sick; and so they will search for
phial and powder and such like.
if nothing shall be find that will increase their suspicion, you be to
be use more kindly by your papa when you appear before they all, than he
of late have use you.
yet, sick or well, alas! my dear cousin! you must be marry. but your
husband be to go home every night without you, till you be reconcile to
he. and so illness can be no pretence to save you.
they be sure you will make a good wife. so would not I, unless I like
my husband. and Mr. Solmes be always tell they how he will purchase
your love by rich presents.--A syncophant man!--i wish he and Betty
Barnes be to come together; and he would beat she every day.
after what I tell you, I need not advise you to secure every thing you
would not have see.
once more let I beg that you will burn this letter; and, pray, dearest
Madam, do not take any thing that may prejudice your health: for that
will not do. I be
your truly love cousin,
D.H.
***
when I first read my cousin's letter, I be half inclined to resume my
former intention; especially as my countermanding letter be not take
away; and as my heart ache at the thought of the conflict I must expect
to have with he on my refusal. for see he for a few moment I doubt I
must, lest he should take some rash resolution; especially as he have
reason to expect I will see he. but here your word, that all punctilio
be at an end the moment I be out of my father's house, add to the still
more cogent consideration of duty and reputation, determine I once
more against the rash step. and it will be very hard (although no
seasonable fainting, or wish-for fit, should stand my friend) if I
cannot gain one month, or fortnight, or week. and I have still more
hope that I shall prevail for some delay, from my cousin's intimation
that the good Dr. Lewen refuse to give his assistance to their project,
if they have not my consent, and think I cruelly use: since, without
take notice that I be apprize of this, I can plead a scruple of
conscience, and insist upon have that worthy divine's opinion upon it:
in which, enforce as I shall enforce it, my mother will surely second
I: my aunt Hervey, and Mrs. Norton, will support she: the suspension
must follow: and I can but get away afterwards.
but, if they will compel I: if they will give I no time: if nobody will
be move: if it be resolve that the ceremony should be read over my
constrain hand--why then--alas! what then!--i can but--but what? o my
dear! this solme shall never have my vow I be resolve! and I will say
nothing but no, as long as I shall be able to speak. and who will
presume to look upon such an act of violence as a marriage?--it be
impossible, surely, that a father and mother can see such a dreadful
compulsion offer to their child--but if mine should withdraw, and leave
the task to my brother and sister, they will have no mercy.
I be grieve to be drive to have recourse to the follow artifice.
I have give they a clue, by the feather of a pen stick out, where
they will find such of my hidden story, as I intend they shall find.
two or three little essay I have leave easy to be see, of my own
writing.
about a dozen line also of a letter begin to you, in which I express my
hope, (although I say that appearance be against I,) and that my
friend will relent. they know from your mother, by my uncle Antony,
that, some how or other, I now and then get a letter to you. in this
piece of a letter I declare renewedly my firm resolution to give up the
man so obnoxious to my family, on their release I from the address of
the other.
near the essay, I have leave the copy of my letter to Lady Drayton;*
which afford argument suitable to my case, may chance (thus
accidentally to be fall upon) to incline they to favour I.
* see Letters XIII. and XIV.
I have reserve of pen and ink, you may believe; and one or two in the
ivy summer-house; with which I shall amuse myself, in order to lighten,
if possible, those apprehension which more and more affect I, as
Wednesday, the day of trial, approach.
LETTER XLVII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
IVY SUMMER-HOUSE, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.
he have not yet get my letter: and while I be contrive here how to send
my officious gaoleress from I, that I might have time for the intended
interview, and have hit upon an expedient, which I believe would have
do, come my aunt, and furnish I with a much well. she see my
little table cover, preparative to my solitary dinner; and hop, she
tell I, that this would be the last day that my friend would be
deprive of my company at table.
you may believe, my dear, that the thought of meet Mr. Lovelace, for
fear of be discover, together with the content of my cousin Dolly's
letter, give I great and visible emotion. she take notice of they--why
these sigh, why these heaving here? say she, pat my neck--o my
dear Niece, who would have think so much natural sweetness could be so
very unpersuadable?
I could not answer she, and she proceed--I be come, I doubt, upon a
very unwelcome errand. some thing have be tell we yesterday, which
come from the mouth of one of the most desperate and insolent man in the
world, convince your father, and all of we, that you still find mean to
write out of the house. Mr. Lovelace know every thing that be do
here; and that as soon as do; and great mischief be apprehend from
he, which you be as much concerned as any body to prevent. your mother
have also some apprehension concern yourself, which yet she hop be
groundless; but, however, cannot be easy, if she would, unless (while you
remain here in the garden, or in this summer-house) you give she the
opportunity once more of look into your closet, your cabinet and
drawer. it will be the well take, if you give I cheerfully your
key. I hope, my dear, you willnot dispute it. your desire of dining in
this place be the more readily comply with for the sake of such an
opportunity.
I think myself very lucky to be so well prepare by my cousin Dolly's
mean for this search: but yet I artfully make some scruple, and not a
few complaint of this treatment: after which, I not only give she the
key of all, but even officiously empty my pocket before she, and
invite she to put her finger in my stay, that she might be sure I have
no paper there.
this highly oblige she; and she say, she would represent my cheerful
compliance as it deserve, let my brother and sister say what they would.
my mother in particular, she be sure, would rejoice at the opportunity
give she to obviate, as she doubt not would be the case, some
suspicion that be raise against I.
she then hint, that there be method take to come at all Mr.
Lovelace's secret, and even, from his careless communicativeness, at
some secret of mine; it be, she say, his custom, boastingly to prate
to his very servant of his intention, in particular case. she add,
that deep as he be think to be, my brother be as deep as he, and
fairly too hard for he at his own weapon--as one day it would be find.
I know not, I say, the meaning of these dark hint. I think the
cunning she hint at, on both side, call rather for contempt than
applause. I myself might have be put upon artifice which my heart
disdain to practise, have I give way to the resentment, which, I be
bold to say, be much more justifiable than the action that occasion
it: that it be evident to I, from what she have say, that their present
suspicion of I be partly owe to this suppose superior cunning of
my brother, and partly to the consciousness that the usage I meet with
might naturally produce a reason for such suspicion: that it be very
unhappy for I to be make the butt of my brother's wit: that it would
have be more to his praise to have aim at shew a kind heart than a
cunning head: that, nevertheless, I wish he know himself as well as I
imagine I know he; and he would then have less conceit of his
ability: which ability would, in my opinion, be less thought of, if
his power to do ill office be not much great than they.
I be vex. I could not help make this reflection. the dupe the
other, too probably, make of he, through his own spy, deserve it. but
I so little approve of this low art in either, that be I but tolerably
use, the vileness of that man, that Joseph Leman, should be inquire
into.
she be sorry, she say, to find that I think so disparagingly of my
brother. he be a young man both of learning and part.
learn enough, I say, to make he vain of it among we woman: but not
of part sufficient to make his learning valuable either to himself or to
any body else.
she wish, indeed, that he have more good nature: but she fear that I
have too great an opinion of somebody else, to think so well of my brother
as a sister ought: since, between the two, there be a sort of rivalry,
as to ability, that make they hate one another.
Rivalry! Madam, say i.--if that be the case, or whether it be or not, I
wish they both understand, well than either of they seem to do, what it
become gentleman, and man of liberal education, to be, and to do.--
neither of they, then, would glory in what they ought to be ashamed of.
but wave this subject, it be not impossible, I say, that they might
find a little of my writing, and a pen or two, and a little ink, [hat
art!--or rather, hateful the necessity for it!] as I be not permit to
go up to put they out of the way: but if they do, I must be content.
and I assure she, that, take what time they please, I would not go in
to disturb they, but would be either in or near the garden, in this
summer-house, or in the cedar one, or about my poultry-yard, or near the
great cascade, till I be order to return to my prison. with like
cunning I say, I suppose the unkind search would not be make till the
servant have din; because I doubt not that the pert Betty Barnes, who
know all the corner of my apartment and closet, would be employ in it.
she hop, she say, that nothing could be find that would give a handle
against I: for, she would assure I, the motif to the search, on my
mother's part especially, be, that she hop to find reason rather to
acquit than to blame I; and that my father might be induce to see my
to-morrow night, or Wednesday morning, with temper: with tenderness, I
should rather say, say she; for he be resolve to do so, if no new
offence be give.
ah! Madam, say I--
why that Ah! Madam, and shake your head so significantly?
I wish, Madam, that I may not have more reason to dread my father's
continue displeasure, than to hope for his return tenderness.
you donot know, my dear!--things may take a turn--thing may not be so
bad as you fear--
Dearest Madam, have you any consolation to give me?--
why, my dear, it be possible, that you may be more compliable than you
have be.
why raise you my hope, Madam?--Don't let I think my dear aunt hervey
cruel to a niece who truly honour she.
I may tell you more perhaps, say she (but in confidence, absolute
confidence) if the inquiry within come out in your favour. do you know
of any thin above that can be find to your disadvantage?--
some paper they will find, I doubt: but I must take consequence. my
brother and sister will be at hand with their good-natured construction.
I be make desperate, and care not what be find.
I hope, I earnestly hope, that nothing can be find that will impeach
your discretion; and then--but I may say too much--
and away she go, have add to my perplexity.
but I now can think of nothing but this interview.--Would to Heaven it
be over!--to meet to quarrel--but, let he take what measure he will,
I will not stay a moment with he, if he be not quite calm and resign.
donot you see how crooked some of my line be? donot you see how some
of the letter stagger more than others?--that be when this interview be
more in my head than in my subject.
but, after all, should I, ought I to meet he? how have I take it for
grant that I should!--i wish there be time to take your advice. yet
you be so loth to speak quite out--but that I owe, as you own, to the
difficulty of my situation.
I should have mention, that in the course of this conversation I
besought my aunt to stand my friend, and to put in a word for I on my
approach trial; and to endeavour to procure I time for consideration,
if I could obtain nothing else.
she tell I, that, after the ceremony be perform [odious confirmation
of a hint in my cousin Dolly's letter!] I should have what time I please
to reconcile myself to my lot before cohabitation.
this put I out of all patience.
she request of I in her turn, she say, that I would resolve to meet
they all with cheerful duty, and with a spirit of absolute acquiescence.
it be in my power to make they all happy. and how joyful would it be to
she, she say, to see my father, my mother, my uncle, my brother, my
sister, all embrace I with rapture, and fold I in turn to their
fond heart, and congratulate each other on their restore happiness!
her own joy, she say, would probably make her motionless and speechless
for a time: and for she Dolly--the poor girl, who have suffer in the
esteem of some, for her grateful attachment to I, would have every body
love she again.
will you doubt, my dear, that my next trial will be the most affect
that I have yet have?
my aunt set forth all this in so strong a light, and I be so
particularly touch on my cousin Dolly's account, that, impatient as I
be just before, I be greatly move: yet could only shew, by my sigh
and my tear, how desirable such an event would be to I, could it be
bring about upon condition with which it be possible for I to
comply.
here come Betty Barnes with my dinner--
***
the wench be go. the time of meeting be at hand. o that he may not
come!--but should I, or should I not, meet him?--How I question, without
possibility of a timely answer!
Betty, accord to my lead hint to my aunt, boast to I, that she
be to be employ, as she call it, after she have eat her own dinner.
she should be sorry, she tell I, to have I find out. yet 'twould be
all for my good. I should have it in my power to be forgive for all at
once, before Wednesday night. the confident creature then, to stifle a
laugh, put a corner of her apron in her mouth, and go to the door: and
on her return to take away, as I angrily bid she, she beg my excuse--
but--but--and then the saucy creature laugh again, she could not help
it, to think how I have draw myself in by my summer-house dinnering,
since it have give so fine an opportunity, by way of surprise, to look
into all my private hoard. she think something be in the wind, when
my brother come into my dining here so readily. her young master be too
hard for every body. 'Squire Lovelace himself be nothing at all at a
quick thought to her young master.
my aunt mention Mr. Lovelace's boast behaviour to his servant:
perhaps he may be so mean. but as to my brother, he always take a pride
in make himself appear to be a man of part and learn to our own
servant. pride and meanness, I have often think, be as nearly
ally, and as close borderer upon each other, as the poet tell we wit
and madness be.
but why do I trouble you (and myself, at such a crisis) with these
impertinences?--yet I would forget, if I could, the near evil, the
interview; because, my apprehension increase as the hour be at hand,
I should, be my intention to be engross by they, be unfit to see
he, if he do come: and then he will have too much advantage over I,
as he will have seem reason to reproach I with change of resolution.
the upbraider, you know, my dear, be in some sense a superior; while the
upbraided, if with reason upbraid, must make a figure as spiritless as
conscious.
I know that this wretch will, if he can, be his own judge, and mine too.
but the latter he shall not be.
I dare say, we shall be all to piece. but I donot care for that. it
would be hard, if I, who have hold it out so sturdily to my father and
uncle, should not--but he be at the garden-door--
***
I be mistaken!--how many noise unlike, be make like to what one fear!
--Why flutter the fool so!--
***
I will hasten to deposit this. then I will, for the last time, go to the
usual place, in hope to find that he have get my letter. if he have, I
will not meet he. if he have not, I will take it back, and shew he what
I have write. that will break the ice, as I may say, and save I much
circumlocution and reasoning: and a steady adherence to that my write
mind be all that will be necessary.--the interview must be as short as
possible; for should it be discover, it would furnish a new and strong
pretence for the intend evil of Wednesday next.
perhaps I shall not be able to write again one while. perhaps not till I
be the miserable property of that Solmes!--But that shall never, never
be, while I have my sens.
if your servant find nothing from I by Wednesday morning, you may then
conclude that I can neither write to you, nor receive your favour.
in that case, pity and pray for I, my beloved friend; and continue to I
that place in your affection, which be the pride of my life, and the only
comfort leave to
your
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER xlviii
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
ST. ALBAN'S, TUESDAY MORN. past one.
o MY dearest FRIEND!
after what I have resolve upon, as by my former, what shall I write? what
can I? with what consciousness, even by letter, do I approach you?--you
will soon hear (if already you have not hear from the mouth of common
fame) that your Clarissa Harlowe be go off with a man!
I be busy myself to give you the particular at large. the whole
twenty-four hour of each day (to begin at the moment I can fix) shall be
employ in it till it be finish: every one of the hour, I mean, that
will be spar I by this interrupting man, to whom I have make myself so
foolishly accountable for too many of they. rest be depart from I. I
have no call for that: and that have no balm for the wound of my mind. so
youwill have all those hour without interruption till the account be
end.
but will you receive, shall you be permit to receive my letter, after
what I have do?
o my dearest friend!--but I must make the good of it.
I hope that will not be very bad! yet be I convinced that I do a rash
and inexcusable thing in meet he; and all his tenderness, all his
vow, cannot pacify my inward reproach on that account.
the bearer come to you, my dear, for the little parcel of linen which I
send you with far well and more agreeable hope.
send not my letter. send the linen only: except you will favour I with
one line, to tell I you love I still; and that you will suspend your
censure till you have the whole before you. I be the readier to send
thus early, because if you have deposit any thing for I, you may cause
it to be take back, or withhold any thing you have but intend to send.
Adieu, my dearest friend!--I beseech you to love I still--but alas! what
will your mother say?--what will mine?--what my other relations?--and
what my dear Mrs. norton?--and how will my brother and sister triumph!
I cannot at present tell you how, or where, you can direct to I. for
very early shall I leave this place; harass and fatigue to death.
but, when I can do nothing else, constant use have make I able to write.
long, very long, have be all my amusement and pleasure: yet could not
that have be such to I, have I not have you, my good beloved friend, to
write to. once more adieu. pity and pray for
your
CL. HARLOWE.
END of VOL. II
Volume III.
content of VOLUME III
LETTER i. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
be astonish, confound, aghast. repeat her advice to marry Lovelace.
LETTER II. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
give a particular account of her meeting Lovelace; of her vehement
contention with he; and, at last, of her be terrify out of she
predetermine resolution, and trick away. her grief and compunction of
heart upon it. lay all to the fault of correspond with he at first
against paternal prohibition. be incense against he for his artful
dealing with she, and for his selfish love.
LETTER III. Mr. Lovelace to Joseph Leman.--
a letter which lay open the whole of his contrivance to get off
Clarissa.
LETTER IV. Joseph Leman. in answer.
LETTER V. Lovelace to Belford.--
in ecstasy on the success of his contrivance. well as he love
Clarissa, he would show she no mercy, if he think she prefer any man
live to he. will religiously observe the INJUNCTIONS she lay upon
he previous to their meeting.
LETTER VI. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
a recriminate conversation between she and Lovelace. he remind she of
her injunction; and, instead of beseech she to dispense with they,
promise a sacred regard to they. it be not, therefore, in her power, she
tell Miss Howe, to take her advice as to speedy marriage. [a note on
the place, justify her conduct.] be attend by Mrs. Greme, Lord M.'s
housekeeper at the Lawn, who wait on she to her sister sorling, with
whom she consent to lodge. his look offend she. have write to her
sister for her clothe.
LETTER VII. Lovelace to Belford.--
give briefly the particular of his success. describe her person and
dress on her first meet he. extravagant exultation. make Belford
question he on the honour of his design by she: and answer doubtfully.
LETTER viii. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
her sentiment on her narrative. her mother, at the instigation of
Antony Harlowe, forbid their correspondence. Mr. Hickman's zeal to
serve they in it. what her family now pretend, if she have not leave they.
how they take her suppose project flight. offer her money and
clothe. would have she seem to place some little confidence in
Lovelace. her brother and sister will not permit her father and uncle
to cool.
LETTR IX. X. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
advise she to obey her mother, who prohibit their correspondence.
decline to accept her offer of money: and why. Mr. Lovelace not a
polite man. she will be as ready to place a confidence in he, as he
will be to deserve it. yet trick away by he as she be, cannot
immediately treat he with great complaisance. blame she for her
liveliness to her mother. enclose the copy of her letter to her sister.
LETTER XI. Lovelace to Belford.--
Prides himself in his art in the conversation between they. be alarm
at the superiority of her talent. consider opposition and resistance
as a challenge to do his bad. his artful proceeding with Joseph
Leman.
LETTER XII. from the same.--
man need only be know to be rake, he say, to recommend themselves to
the favour of the sex. wish Miss Howe be not so well acquainted with
Clarissa: and why.
LETTER XIII. from the same.--
intend to set old Antony at Mrs. Howe, to prevent the correspondence
between the two young lady. girl, not gold, his predominant passion.
rally Belford on his person and appearance. take humourous notice of
the two daughter of the widow sorling.
LETTER XIV. from the same.--
farther triumph over the Harlowes. similitude of the spider and fly. be
for have separate church as well as separate boarding-school for the
sex. the woman ought to love he, he say: and why. Prides himself that
they do.
LETTER XV. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
Particulars of an angry conference with Lovelace. see she sincerely
displease, he beg the ceremony may immediately pass. he construe her
bashful silence into anger, and vow a sacred regard to her injunction.
LETTER XVI. XVII. XVIII. Lovelace to belford.--
the pleasure of a difficult chace. triumph in the distress and
perplexity he give she by his artful and parading offer of marriage. his
reason for and against do her justice. resolve to try she to the
utmost. the honour of the whole sex concern in the issue of her trial.
Matrimony, he see, be in his power, now she be.
LETTER XIX. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
will not obey her mother in her prohibition of their correspondence: and
why. be charm with her spirit.
LETTER XX. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
know not what she can do with Lovelace. he may thank himself for the
trouble he have have on her account. do she ever, she ask, make he any
promise? do she ever receive he as a lover?
LETTER XXI. XXII. from the same.--
she call upon Lovelace to give she a faithful account of the noise and
voice she hear at the garden-door, which frighten she away with he.
his confession, and dare hint in relation to Solmes, and her brother,
and Betty Barnes. she be terrify.
LETTER XXIII. Lovelace to Belford.--
rejoice in the stupidity of the Harlowes. exult in his capacity for
mischief. the condescension to which he intend to bring the lady.
libertine observation to the disadvantage of woman; which may serve as
caution to the sex.
LETTER XXIV. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
a conversation with Mr. Lovelace wholly agreeable. his promise of
reformation. she remember, to his advantage, his generosity to his
Rosebud and his tenant. write to her aunt hervey.
LETTER XXV. XXVI. Lovelace to Belford.--
his acknowledge vanity. account for his plausible behaviour, and
specious promise and proposal. Apprehensive of the correspondence
between Miss Howe and Clarissa. love to plague he with out-of-the-
way word and phrase.
LETTER XXVII. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
how to judge of Lovelace's suspicious proposal and promise. Hickman
devote to their service. yet she treat he with ridicule.
LETTER XXVIII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
Lovelace complain, she hear, to Mrs. Greme, of she adhere to her
injunction. what mean he by it, she ask, yet forego such
opportunity as he have? she be punish for her vanity in hop to be
an example. blame Miss Howe for her behaviour to Hickman.
LETTER XXIX. from the same.--
warm dialogue with Lovelace. she be displeased with he for his
affectedly-bashful hint of matrimony. mutual recrimination. he look
upon she as his, she say, by a strange sort of obligation, for have
run away with she against her will. yet but touch on the edge of
matrimony neither. she be sick of herself.
LETTER XXX. from the same.--
Mr. Lovelace a perfect Proteus. he now applaud she for that treatment
of he which before he have resent; and communicate to her two letter,
one from Lady Betty Lawrance, the other from Miss Montague. she wonder
he do not produce those letter before, as he must know they would be
highly acceptable to she.
LETTER XXXI. XXXII. XXXIII. XXXIV. from the same.--
the content of the letter from Lady Betty and Miss Montague put
Clarissa in good humour with Mr. Lovelace. he hint at marriage; but
pretend to be afraid of pursue the hint. she be earnest with he to
leave she: and why. he applaud her reasoning. her serious question,
and his ludicrous answer.--He make different proposals.--he offer to
bring Mrs. Norton to she. she be ready to blame herself for her doubt
of he: but give reason for her caution.--he write by her consent to
his friend Doleman, to procure lodging for she in town.
LETTER XXXV. Lovelace to Belford.--
glory in his contrivance. give an advantageous description of
Clarissa's behaviour. exult on her mention London. none but
impudent girl, he say, should run away with a man. his farth view,
plot, and design.
letter xxxvi. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
humourously touch on her reproof in relation to Hickman. observation
on smooth love. Lord M.'s family greatly admire she. approve of her
spirited treatment of Lovelace, and of she go to London. hint at the
narrowness of her own mother. advise she to keep fair with Lovelace.
LETTER XXXVII. xxxviii. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
Wonders not that her brother have weight to make her father
irreconcilable.--copy of Mr. Doleman's answer about London lodging. her
caution in her choice of they. Lovelace have give she five guineas for
Hannah. other instance of his considerateness. not displeased with her
present prospect.
LETTER XXXIX. Lovelace to Belford.--
explain what be mean by Doleman's answer about the lodging. make
Belford object to his scheme, that he may answer the objection. exult.
swell. despise every body. importance of the minutia. More of his
art, view, and contrivance.
LETTER XL. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
Acquaints she with a scheme form by her brother and captain Singleton,
to carry she off. Hickman's silent charity. she despise all his sex,
as well as he. ill term on which her own father and mother live.
extol Clarissa for her domestic good quality. particular of a great
contest with her mother, on their correspondence. have be slapt by she.
observation on manage wife.
LETTER XLI. XLII. xliii. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
a strong remonstrance on her behaviour to her mother; in which she lay
down the duty of child. accuse she of want of generosity to Hickman.
far excuse herself on decline to accept of her money offer.
propose a condition on which Mrs. Howe may see all they write.
LETTER XLIV. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
her mother reject the propose condition. Miss Howe take thankfully
her reprehension: but will continue the correspondence. some excuse
for herself. humourous story of game-chicken.
LETTER XLV. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
Lovelace communicate her brother's and Singleton's project; but treat
it with seem contempt. she ask his advice what to do upon it. this
bring on an offer of marriage from he. how it go off.
LETTER XLVI. Lovelace to Belford.--
he confess his artful intention in the offer of marriage: yet have
like, he say, to have be catch in his own snare.
LETTER XLVII. Joseph Leman to Mr. Lovelace.--
with intelligence of a design form against he by the Harlowes.
Joseph's vile hypocrisy and selfishness.
LETTER XLVIII. Lovelace. in answer.--
Story of Miss Betterton. boast of his treatment of his mistress. the
artful use he make of Joseph's intelligence.
LETTER XLIX. Clarissa to her aunt hervey.--
Complains of her silence. hint at she not have design to go away
with Lovelace. she will open her whole heart to she, if she encourage
she to do so, by the hope of a reconciliation.
LETTER L. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
Observations on Lovelace's meanness, pride, and revenge. politeness not
to be expect from he. she rave at he for the artful manner in which
he urge Clarissa to marry he. advise she how to act in her present
situation.
LETTER LI. Belford to Lovelace.--
become a warm advocate for the lady. give many instructive reason to
enforce his argument in her favour.
LETTER LII. Mrs. Hervey to clarissa.--
a severe and cruel letter in answer to she's, Letter XLIX. it be not
design, she say, absolutely to force she to marry to her dislike.
LETTER LIII. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
her deep regret on this intelligence, for have meet Lovelace. the finer
sensibility make not happy. her fate too visibly in her power. he be
unpolite, cruel, insolent, unwise, a trifl in his own happiness. her
reason why she less like he than ever. her soul his soul's superior.
her fortitude. her prayer.
LETTER LIV. LV. from the same.--
now indeed be her heart break, she say. a solemn curse lay upon she
by her father. her sister's barbarous letter on the occasion.
LETTER LVI. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
a letter full of generous consolation and advice. her friendly vow.
send she fifty guineas in the leaf of a Norris's miscellany.
LETTER LVII. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
a faithful friend the medicine of life. she be just set out for
London. Lovelace have offer marriage to she in so unreserved a manner,
that she wish she have never write with diffidence of he. be sorry
it be not in her power to comply with his earnest solicitation.
return her Norris: and why.
LETTER LVIII. LIX. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
sorry she have return her Norris. wish she have accept of Lovelace's
unreserved offer of marriage. believe herself to have a sneak
kindness for Hickman: and why. she blame Mrs. Harlowe: and why.
in answer to Letter VIII.
Clarissa state the difference in the character of Mr. Lovelace and Mr.
Hickman; and tell she, that her motif for suspend marriage be not
merely ceremonious one. Regrets Mrs. Howebe forbid the
correspondence between they. her dutiful apology for her own mother.
Lesson to child.
LETTER LX. Lovelace to Belford.--
think he shall be inevitably manacle at last. the lady's extreme
illness. her filial piety give her dreadful faith in a father's curse.
she let not Miss Howe know how very ill she be. his vow of marriage
bring she back to life. absolutely in earnest in those vow. [the only
time he be so.] he can now talk of love and marriage without check.
descant upon Belford's letter, No. LI.
LETTER LXI. from the same.--
be set out for London. a struggle with his heart. own it to be a
villain of a heart. a fit of strong, but transitory remorse. if he do
marry, he doubt he shall have a vapourish wife. think it would be
well for both not to marry. his libertine reason. lesson to the
sex.
LETTER LXII. from the same.--
they arrive at Mrs. Sinclair's. Sally Martin and Polly Horton set upon
he. he waver in his good purpose. Dorcas Wykes propose, and
reluctantly accept for a servant, till Hannah can come. Dorcas's
character. he have two great point to carry. what they be.
the history
of
CLARISSA HARLOWE
letter I
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
TUESDAY, NINE O'CLOCK.
I write, because you enjoin I to do so. love you still!--how can I help
it, if I would? you may believe how I stand aghast, your letter
communicate the first news--good God of Heaven and Earth!--But what
shall I say?--i be all impatient for particular.
Lord have mercy upon me!--But can it be?
my mother will indeed be astonished!--how can I tell it her!--it be but
last night (upon some jealousy put into her head by your foolish uncle)
that I assure she, and this upon the strength of your own assurance,
that neither man nor devil would be able to induce you to take a step
that be in the least derogatory to the most punctilious honour.
but, once more, can it be? what woman at this rate!--But, God preserve
you!
let nothing escape you in your letter. direct they for I, however, to
Mrs. Knolly's, till further notice.
***
Observe, my dear, that I donot blame you by all this--your relation only
be in fault!--Yet how you come to change your mind be the surprising
thing.
how to break it to my mother, I know not. yet if she hear it first from
any other, and find I know it before, she will believe it to be my
connivance!--Yet, as I hope to live, I know not how to break it to she.
but this be tease you.--i be sure, without intention.
let I now repeat my former advice--if you be not marry by this time,
be sure delay not the ceremony. since thing be as they be, I wish it
be think that you be privately marry before you go away. if
these man plead AUTHORITY to our pain, when we be their--why should we
not, in such a case as this, make some good out of the hat word, for
our reputation, when we be induce to violate a more natural one?
your brother and sister [that vex I almost as much as any thing!] have
now their end. now, I suppose, will go forward alteration of will, and
such-like spiteful doing.
***
Miss Lloyd and Miss Biddulph this moment send up their name. they be
out of breath, Kitty say, to speak to I--easy to guess their errand;--
I must see my mother, before I see they. I have no way but to shew she
your letter to clear myself. I shall not be able to say a word, till she
have run herself out of her first breath.--forgive I, my dear--surprise
make I write thus. if your messenger do not wait, and be not those
young lady below, I could write it over again, for fear of afflict
you.
I send what you write for. if there be any thing else you want that be
in my power, command without reserve
your ever affectionate
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER II.
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE.
TUESDAY NIGHT.
I think myself oblige to thank you, my dear Miss Howe, for your
condescension, in take notice of a creature who have occasion you so
much scandal.
I be grieve on this account, as much, I verily think, as for the evil
itself.
tell I--but yet I be afraid to know--what your mother say.
I long, and yet I dread, to be tell, what the young lady my companion,
now never more perhaps to be so, say of I.
they cannot, however, say bad of I than I will of myself. self
accusation shall flow in every line of my narrative where I think I be
justly censurable. if any thing can arise from the account I be go to
give you, for extenuation of my fault (for that be all a person can hope
for, who cannot excuse herself) I know I may expect it from your
friendship, though not from the charity of any other: since by this time
I doubt not every mouth be open against I; and all that know Clarissa
Harlowe condemn the fugitive daughter.
after I have deposit my letter to you, write down to the last hour, as
I may say, I return to the ivy summer-house; first take back my
letter from the loose brick: and there I endeavour, as coolly as my
situation would permit, to recollect and lie together several incident
that have pass between my aunt and I; and, compare they with some of
the content of my cousin Dolly's letter, I begin to hope, that I need
not to be so very apprehensive as I have be next Wednesday. and thus I
argue with myself.
'Wednesday cannot possibly be the day they intend, although to intimidate
I they may wish I to think it be: for the settlement be unsigned: nor
have they be offer I to sign. I can choose whether I will or will
not put my hand to they; hard as it will be to refuse if my father and
mother propose, if I make compulsion necessary, to go to my uncle's
themselves in order to be out of the way of my appeal? whereas they
intend to be present on Wednesday. and, however affect to I the
thought of meet they and all my friend in full assembly be, perhaps
it be the very thing I ought to wish for: since my brother and sister have
such an opinion of my interest in they, that they get I exclude from
their presence, as a measure which they think previously necessary to
carry on their design.
'nor have I reason to doubt, but that (as I have before argue with
myself) I shall be able to bring over some of my relation to my party;
and, be bring face to face with my brother, that I shall expose his
malevolence, and of consequence weaken his power.
'then suppose the very bad, challenge the minister as I shall
challenge he, he will not presume to proceed: nor surely will Mr. Solmes
dare to accept my refusing and struggle hand. and finally, if nothing
else will do, nor procure I delay, I can plead scruple of conscience,
and even pretend prior obligation; for, my dear, I have give Mr. Lovelace
room to hope (as you will see in one of my letter in your hand) that I
will be no other man's while he be single, and give I not wilful and
premeditate cause of offence against he; and this in order to rein-in
his resentment on the declare animosity of my brother and uncle to he.
and as I shall appeal, or refer my scruple on this head, to the good Dr.
Lewen, it be impossible but that my mother and aunt (if nobody else) must
be affect with this plea.'
revolve cursorily these thing, I congratulate myself, that I have
resolve against go away with Mr. Lovelace.
I tell you, my dear, that I would not spare myself: and I enumerate these
particular as so many argument to condemn the action I have be so
unhappily betray into. an argument that conclude against I with the
great force, as I must acknowledge, that I be apprehensive, that what
my cousin dolly mention as from Betty, and from my sister who tell she,
that she should tell I, in order to make I desperate, and perhaps to
push I upon some such step as I have be drive to take, as the most
effectual mean to ruin I with my father and uncle.
God forgive I, if I judge too harshly of their views!--but if I do not,
it follow, that they lay a wicked snare for I; and that I have be
catch in it.--and now they triumph, if they can triumph, in the ruin of
a sister, who never wish or intend to hurt they!
as the above kind of reasoning have lessen my apprehension as to the
Wednesday, it add to those I have of meet Mr. Lovelace--now, as it
seem, not only the near, but the heavy evil; principally indeed
because near; for little do I dream (foolish creature that I be, and
every way beset!) of the event prove what it have prove. I expect a
contention with he, 'tis true, as he have not my letter: but I think it
would be very strange, as I mention in one of my former,* if I, who have
so steadily hold out against character so venerable, against authority
so sacred, as I may say, when I think they unreasonably exert, should
not find myself more equal to such a trial as this; especially as I have
so much reason to be displeased with he for not have take away my
letter.
on what a point of time may one's worldly happiness depend! have I but
two hour more to consider of the matter, and to attend to and improve
upon these new light, as I may call they--but even then, perhaps, I
might have give he a meeting.--fool that I be! what have I to do to
give he hope that I would personally acquaint he with the reason for my
change of mind, if I do change it?
o my dear! an oblige temper be a very dangerous temper!--by
endeavour to gratify other, it be evermore disoblige itself!
when the bell ring to call the servant to dinner, Betty come to I and
ask, if I have any command before she go to her; repeat her hint,
that she should be employ; add, that she believe it be expect
that I should not come up till she come down, or till I see my aunt or
Miss Hervey.
I ask she some question about the cascade, which have be out of
order, and lately mend; and express a curiosity to see how it play,
in order to induce she [how cunning to cheat myself, as it prove!] to go
thither, if she find I not where she leave I; it be a part of the
garden most distant from the ivy summer-house.
she could hardly have get into the house when I hear the first signal--O
how my heart fluttered!--but no time be to be lose. I stept to the
garden-door; and see a clear coast, unbolt the already-unlocked door
--and there be he, all impatience, wait for I.
a panic next to fainting seize I when I see he. my heart seem
convulse; and I tremble so, that I should hardly have keep my foot, have
he not support I.
fear nothing, dearest creature, say he--let we hasten away--the chariot
be at hand--and, by this sweet condescension, you have oblige I beyond
expression or return.
recover my spirit a little, as he keep draw I after he, o Mr.
Lovelace, say I, I cannot go with you--indeed I cannot--I write you word
so--let go my hand, and you shall see my letter. it be lain there from
yesterday morning, till within this half-hour. I bid you watch to the
last for a letter from I, lest I should be oblige to revoke the
appointment; and, have you follow the direction, you would have find
it.
I have be watch, my dear life, say he, half out of breath--I have
be watch in every step I take: and my trusty servant have be watch
too, ever since Saturday; and dare not to come near your wall. and here
we shall be discover in a moment.--speed away, my charmer--this be the
moment of your deliverance--if you neglect this opportunity, you can
never have such another.
what be it you mean, Sir?--Let go my hand: for I tell you [struggle
vehemently] that I will soon die than go with you.
good God! say he, with a look of wildness and surprise, what be it I
hear?--but [still draw I after he, as he retreat far from
the door] it be no time to argue--by all thatbe good you must go--surely
you cannot doubt my honour, nor give I cause to question your own.
as you value I, Mr. Lovelace, urge I no far. I come fix and
resolve. let I give you the letter I have write. my further reason
shall follow; and they will convince you that I ought not to go.
nothing, Madam, can convince I--by all thatbe sacred, I will not leave
you. to leave you now, would be to lose you for ever--
be I to be thus compel? interrupt I, with equal indignation and
vehemence.--Let go my hand--I be resolve not to go with you--and I will
convince you that I ought not.
all my friend expect you, Madam--all your own be determine against
you--Wednesday next be the day, the important, perhaps the fatal day!
would you stay to be Solmes's wife?--can this be your determination at
last?
no, never, never will I be that man's--but I will not go with you! [draw
I not thus--how dare you, Sir? I would not have see you, but to tell
you so]. I have not meet you, but for fear you would have be guilty of
some rashness--and, once more, I will not go--what mean you?--striving
with all my force to get from he.
what can have possess my angel, say he [quit my hand, and with a
gentler voice] that after so much ill-usage from your relation; vow so
solemn on my part; an affection so ardent; you stab I with a refusal to
stand by your own appointment?
we have no time to talk, Mr. Lovelace. I will give you my reason at a
well opportunity. I cannot go with you now--and once more urge I no
far--surely, I be not to be compel by every body!
I see how it be, say he, with a dejected but passionate air--what a
severe fate be mine!--at length your spirit be subdued!--Your brother and
sister have prevail; and I must give up all my hope to a wretch so
truly despicable--
once more I tell you, interrupt I, I never will be his--all may end on
Wednesday differently from what you expect--
and it may not!--and then, good heaven!
it be to be their last effort, as I have reason to believe--
and I have reason to believe so too--since if you stay, you will
inevitably be Solmes's wife.
not so, interrupt I--I have oblige they in one point. they will be in
good-humour with I. I shall gain time at least. I be sure I shall. I
have several way to gain time.
and what, Madam, will gain time do? it be plain you have not a hope
beyond that--it be plain you have not, by put all upon that
precarious issue. o my dearest, dear life, let I beseech you not to
run a risque of this consequence. I can convince you that it will be
more than a risque if you go back, that you will on Wednesday next be
Solmes's wife.--prevent, therefore, now that it be in your power to
prevent, the fatal mischief that will follow such a dreadful certainty.
while I have any room for hope, it concern your honour, Mr. Lovelace, as
well as mine, (if you have the value for I you pretend, and wish I to
believe you,) that my conduct in this great point should justify my
prudence.
your prudence, Madam! when have that be questionable? yet what stead
have either your prudence or your duty stand you in, with people so
strangely determine?
and then he pathetically enumerate the different instance of the harsh
treatment I have meet with; impute all to the malice and caprice of a
brother, who set every body against he: and insist, that I have no
other way to bring about a reconciliation with my father and uncle, than
by put myself out of the power of my brother's inveterate malice.
your brother's whole reliance, proceed he, have be upon your easiness
to bear his insult. your whole family will seek to you, when you have
free yourself from this disgraceful oppression. when they know you be
with those who can and will right you, they will give up to you your own
estate. why then, put his arm around I, and again draw I with
a gentle force after he, do you hesitate a moment?--now be the time--fly
with I, then, I beseech you, my dearest creature! trust your persecute
adorer. have we not suffer in the same cause? if any imputation be
cast upon you, give I the honour (as I shall be find to deserve it) to
call you mine; and, when you be so, shall I not be able to protect both
your person and character?
urge I no more, Mr. Lovelace, I conjure you. you yourself have give I
a hint, which I will speak plainer to, than prudence, perhaps, on any
other occasion, would allow. I be convince, that Wednesday next (if I
have time I would give you my reason) be not intend to be the day we
have both so much dread: and if after that day shall be over, I find my
friend determine in Mr. Solmes's favour, I will then contrive some way
to meet you with Miss Howe, who be not your enemy: and when the solemnity
have pass, I shall think that step a duty, which till then will be
criminal to take: since now my father's authority be unimpeached by any
great.
Dearest madam--
Nay, Mr. Lovelace, if you now dispute--if, after this more favourable
declaration, than I have the thought of make, you be not satisfied,
I shall know what to think both of your gratitude and generosity.
the case, Madam, admit not of this alternative. I be all gratitude upon
it. I cannot express how much I should be delighted with the charming
hope you have give I, be you not next Wednesday, if you stay, to be
another man's. think, dearest creature! what an heightening of my
anguish the distant hope you bid I look up to be, take in this light!
depend, depend upon it, I will die soon than be Mr. Solmes's. if you
would have I rely upon your honour, why should you doubt of mine?
I doubt not your honour, Madam; your power be all I doubt. you never,
never can have such another opportunity.--dearest creature, permit me--
and he be again draw I after he.
Whither, Sir, do you draw me?--leave I this moment--do you seek to keep
I till my return shall grow dangerous or impracticable? this moment let
I go, if you would have I think tolerably of you.
my happiness, Madam, both here and hereafter, and the safety of all your
implacable family, depend upon this moment.
to Providence, Mr. Lovelace, and to the law, will I leave the safety of
my friend. you shall not threaten I into a rashness that my heart
condemns!--shall I, to promote your happiness, as you call it, depend
upon future peace of mind?
you trifle with I, my dear life, just as our well prospect begin to
open. the way be clear; just now it be clear; but you may be prevent
in a moment. what be it you doubt?--may I perish eternally, if your will
shall not be a law to I in every thing! all my relation expect you.--
next wednesday!--dear creature! think of next wednesday!--and to what
be it I urge you, but to take a step that soon than any other will
reconcile you to all whom you have most reason to value in your family?
let my judge for myself, Sir. do not you, who blame my friend for
endeavour to compel I, yourself seek to compel. I willnot bear it.
your earnestness give I great apprehension, and great reluctance.
let I go back, then--let I, before it be too late, go back, that it may
not be bad for both--what mean you by this forcible treatment? be it
thus that I be to judge of the entire submission to my will which you
have so often vowed?--unhand I this moment, or I will cry out for help.
I will obey you, my dearest creature!--and quit my hand with a look
full of tender despondency, that, know the violence of his temper,
half-concern I for he. yet I be hasten from he, when, with a
solemn air, look upon his sword, but catch, as it be, his hand
from it, he fold both his arm, as if a sudden thought have recover
he from an intended rashness.
Stay, one moment--but one moment stay, o well belove of my soul!--your
retreat be secure, if you will go: the key lie at the door.--But, O
Madam, next Wednesday, and you be Mr. Solmes's!--Fly I not so eagerly--
hear I but a few word.
when near the garden-door, I stop; and be the more satisfied, as I
see the key there, by which I could let myself in again at pleasure.
but, be uneasy lest I should be miss, I tell he, I could stay no
long. I have already staid too long. I would write to he all my
reason. and depend upon it, Mr. Lovelace, say I [just upon the point
of stoop for the key, in order to return] I will die, rather than have
that man. you know what I have promise, if I find myself in danger.
one word, Madam, however; one word more [approach I, his arm still
fold, as if, I think, he would not be tempt to mischief]. remember
only, that I come at your appointment, to redeem you, at the hazard of my
life, from your gaoler and persecutor, with a resolution, God be my
witness, or may he for ever blast I! [that be his shocking imprecation]
to be a father, uncle, brother, and, as I humbly hop, in your own good
time, a husband to you, all in one. but since I find you be so ready to
cry out for help against I, which must bring down upon I the vengeance
of all your family, I be content to run all risque. I will not ask
you to retreat with I; I will attend you into the garden, and into the
house, if I be not intercept.
Nay, be not surprised, Madam. the help you would have call for, I will
attend you to; for I will face they all: but not as a revenger, if they
provoke I not too much. you shall see what I can far bear for your
sake--and let we both see, if expostulation, and the behaviour of a
gentleman to they, will not procure I the treatment due to a gentleman
from they.
have he offer to draw his sword upon himself, I be prepared to have
despise he for suppose I such a poor novice, as to be intimidate by
an artifice so common. but this resolution, utter with so serious an
air, of accompany I in to my friend, make I gasp with terror.
what mean you, Mr. Lovelace? say I: I beseech you leave I--leave I,
Sir, I beseech you.
excuse I, Madam! I beg you to excuse I. I have long enough skulk
like a thief about these lonely wall--long, too long, have I borne the
insult of your brother, and other of your relation. absence but
heighten malice. I be desperate. I have but this one chance for it;
for be not the day after to-morrow Wednesday? I have encourage
virulence by my tameness.--Yet tame I will still be. you shall see,
Madam, what I will bear for your sake. my sword shall be put sheathe
into your hand [and he offer it to I in the scabbard].--My heart,
if you please, clap one hand upon his breast, shall afford a sheath
for your brother's sword. life be nothing, if I lose you--be pleased,
Madam, to shew I the way into the garden [move toward the door]. I
will attend you, though to my fate!--but too happy, be it what it will,
if I receive it in your presence. lead on, dear creature! [put his
sword into his belt]--you shall see what I can bear for you. and he
stoop and take up the key; and offer it to the lock; but drop it
again, without open the door, upon my earnest expostulation.
what can you mean, Mr. Lovelace?--said I--would you thus expose yourself?
would you thus expose me?--Is this your generosity? be every body to
take advantage thus of the weakness of my temper?
and I weep. I could not help it.
he throw himself upon his knee at my foot--who can bear, say he, [with
an ardour that could not be feign, his own eye glisten,] who can
bear to behold such sweet emotion?--o charmer of my heart, [and,
respectfully still kneel, he take my hand with both his, press it
to his lip,] command I with you, command I from you; in every way I be
implicit to obedience--but I appeal to all you know of your relation'
cruelty to you, their determine malice against I, and as determine
favour to the man you tell I you hate, (and, o Madam, if you do not
hate he, I should hardly think there would be a merit in your
approbation, place it where you would)--i appeal to every thing you know,
to all you have suffer, whether you have not reason to be apprehensive
of that Wednesday, which be my terror!--whether you can possibly have
another opportunity--the chariot ready: my friend with impatience
expect the result of your own appointment: a man whose will shall be
entirely your will, implore you, thus, on his knee, implore you--
to be your own mistress; that be all: nor will I ask for your favour, but
as upon full proof I shall appear to deserve it. Fortune, alliance,
unobjectionable!--O my beloved creature! press my hand once more to
his lip, let not such an opportunity slip. you never, never will have
such another.
I bid he rise. he arise; and I tell he, that be I not thus
unaccountably hurry by his impatience, I doubt not to convince he,
that both he and I have look upon next Wednesday with great
apprehension than be necessary. I be proceed to give he my
reason; but he break in upon me--
have I, Madam, but the shadow of a probability to hope what you hope, I
would be all obedience and resignation. but the license be actually get:
the parson be provide: the pedant Brand be the man. o my dearest
creature, do these preparation mean only a trial?
you know not, Sir, be the bad to be intend, and weak as you think
I, what a spirit I have: you know not what I can do, and how I can
resist when I think myself meanly or unreasonably deal with: nor do you
know what I have already suffer, what I have already bear, know to
whose unbrotherly instigation all be to be ascribed--
I may expect all thing, Madam, interrupt he, from the nobleness of
your mind. but your spirit may fail you. what may not be apprehend
from the invincible temper of a father so positive, to a daughter so
dutiful?--fainting will not save you: they will not, perhaps, be sorry
for such an effect of their barbarity. what will signify expostulation
against a ceremony perform? must not all, the dreadful all follow,
that be torture to my heart but to think of? nobody to appeal to, of
what avail will your resistance be against the consequence of a rite
witness to by the imposer of it, and those your near relation?
I be sure, I say, of procure a delay at least. many way I have to
procure a delay. nothing could be so fatal to we both, as for I now to
be find with he. my apprehension on this score, I tell he, grow too
strong for my heart. I should think very hardly of he, if he seek to
detain I long. but his acquiescence should engage my gratitude.
and then stoop to take up the key to let myself into the garden, he
start, and look as if he have hear somebody near the door, on the
inside; clap his hand on his sword.
this fright I so, that I think I should have sink down at his foot.
but he instantly re-assure I: he think, he say, he have hear a
rustling against the door: but have it be so, the noise would have be
strong. it be only the effect of his apprehension for I.
and then take up the key, he present it to me.--if you will go, Madam
--Yet, I cannot, cannot leave you!--I must enter the garden with you--
forgive I, but I must enter the garden with you.
and will you, will you thus ungenerously, Mr. Lovelace, take advantage of
my fear? of my wish to prevent mischief? I, vain fool, to be
concerned for every one; nobody for I!
Dearest creature! interrupt he, hold my hand, as I tremblingly
offer to put the key to the lock--let I, if you will go, open the
door. but once more, consider, could you possibly obtain that delay
which seem to be your only dependence, whether you may not be close
confine? I know they have already have that in consideration. will you
not, in this case, be prevent from correspond either with Miss Howe,
or with me?--who then shall assist you in your escape, if escape you
would?--from your chamber-window only permit to view the garden you
must not enter into, how will you wish for the opportunity you now have,
if your hatred to Solmes continue!--but alas! that cannot continue. if
you go back, it must be from the impulse of a yielding (which youwill
call, a dutiful) heart, tired and tease out of your own will.
I have no patience, Sir, to be thus constrain. must I never be at
liberty to follow my own judgment? be the consequence what it may, I
will not be thus constrain.
and then, free my hand, I again offer the key to the door.
down the ready kneeler dropt between I and that: and can you, can you,
Madam, once more on my knee let I ask you, look with an indifferent eye
upon the evil that may follow? provoke as I have be, and triumph
over as I shall be, if your brother succeed, my own heart shudder, at
time, at the thought of what must happen: and can yours be unconcerned?
let I beseech you, dearest creature, to consider all these thing; and
lose not this only opportunity. my intelligence--
never, Mr. Lovelace, interrupt I, give so much credit to the word of a
traitor. your base intelligencer be but a servant. he may pretend to
know more than he have ground for, in order to earn the wage of
corruption. you know not what contrivance I can find out.
I be once more offer the key to the lock, when, start from his
knee, with a voice of affrightment, loudly whispering, and as if out of
breath, they be at the door, my beloved creature! and take the key
from I, he flutter with it, as if he would double lock it. and
instantly a voice from within cry out, burst against the door, as if
to break it open, the person repeat his violent push, be you
there?--come up this moment!--this moment!--here they be--here they be
both together!--your pistol this moment!--your gun!--then another push,
and another. he at the same moment draw his sword, and clap it naked
under his arm, take both my tremble hand in his; and draw I
swiftly after he, fly, fly, my charmer; this moment be all you have for
it, say he.--Your brother!--your uncles!--or this solmes!--they will
instantly burst the door--fly, my dear life, if you would not be more
cruelly use than ever--if you would not see two or three murder
commit at your foot, fly, fly, I beseech you.
o lord:--help, help, cry the fool, all in amaze and confusion, fright
beyond the power of controule.
now behind I, now before I, now on this side, now on that, turn I my
affrighted face, in the same moment; expect a furious brother here,
armed servant there, an enraged sister scream, and a father arm
with terror in his countenance more dreadful than even the draw sword
which I see, or those I apprehend. I run as fast as he; yet know not
that I run; my fear add wing to my foot, at the same time that they
take all power of think from I--my fear, which probably would not
have suffer I to know what course to take, have I not have he to urge
and draw I after he: especially as I behold a man, who must have come
out of the door, keep we in his eye, run now towards we; then back
to the garden; beckon and call to other, whom I suppose he see,
although the turning of the wall hinder I from see they; and whom
I imagine to be my brother, my father, and their servant.
thus terrified, I be get out of sight of the door in a very few minute:
and then, although quite breathless between running and apprehension, he
put my arm under his, his draw sword in the other hand, and hurry I
on still fast: my voice, however, contradict my action; crying, no,
no, no, all the while; strain my neck to look back, as long as the
wall of the garden and park be within sight, and till he bring I
to the chariot: where, attend, be two armed servant of his own, and
two of Lord M.'s on horseback.
here I must suspend my relation for a while: for now I be come to this
sad period of it, my indiscretion star I in the face; and my shame and
my grief give I a compunction that be more poignant methink than if I
have a dagger in my heart. to have it to reflect, that I should so
inconsiderately give in to an interview, which, have I know either myself
or he, or in the least consider the circumstance of the case, I might
have suppose would put I into the power of his resolution, and out of
that of my own reason.
for, might I not have believe, that he, who think he have cause to
apprehend that he be on the point of lose a person who have cost he so
much pain and trouble, would not hinder she, if possible, from
return? that he, who know I have promise to give he up for ever, if
insist as a condition of reconciliation, would not endeavour to put it
out of my power to do so? in short, that he, who have artfully forbear
to send for my letter, (for he could not be watch, my dear,) lest he
should find in it a countermand to my appointment, (as I myself could
apprehend, although I profit by the apprehension,) would want a device
to keep I with he till the danger of have our meeting discover
might throw I absolutely into his power, to avoid my own bad usage,
and the mischief which might have ensue (perhaps in my very sight) have
my friend and he meet?
but if it shall come out, that the person within the garden be his
corrupt implement, employ to frighten I away with he, do you think,
my dear, that I shall not have reason to hate he and myself still more?
I hope his heart cannot be so deep and so vile a one: I hope it cannot!
but how come it to pass, that one man could get out at the garden-door,
and no more? how, that that man keep aloof, as it be, and pursue we
not; nor run back to alarm the house? my fright, and my distance, would
not let I be certain; but really this man, as I now recollect, have the
air of that vile Joseph Leman.
o why, why, my dear friends!--but wherefore blame I they, when I have
argue myself into a hope, not improbable, that even the dreadful trial
I be to undergo so soon might turn out well than if I have be
directly carry away from the presence of my once indulgent parent,
who might possibly intend that trial to be the last I should have have?
would to Heaven, that I have stand it, however! then if I have afterwards
do, what now I have be prevail upon, or perhaps foolishly
frightened to do, I should not have be sting so much by inward reproach
as now I be: and this would have be a great evil avoid.
you know, my dear, that your Clarissa's mind be ever above justify
her own failing by those of other. God forgive those of my friend who
have act cruelly by I! but their fault be their own, and not
excuse for mine. and mine begin early: for I ought not to have
correspond with he.
o the vile encroacher! how my indignation, at time, rise at he! thus
to lead a young creature (too much indeed rely upon her own strength)
from evil to evil!--this last evil, although the remote, yet sure
consequence of my first--my prohibit correspondence! by a father early
prohibit.
how much more properly have I act, with regard to that correspondence,
have I, once for all, when he be forbid to visit I, and I to receive
his visit, plead the authority by which I ought to have be bind,
and deny to write to him!--but I think I could proceed, or stop, as I
please. I suppose it concern I, more than any other, to be the
arbitress of the quarrel of unruly spirits.--And now I find my
presumption punish--punish, as other sin frequently be, by itself!
as to this last rashness; now, that it be too late, I plainly see how I
ought to have conduct myself. as he know I have but one way of
transmit to he the knowledge of what befel I; as he know that my
fate be upon a crisis with my friend; and that I have in my letter to
he reserve the liberty of revocation; I should not have be solicitous
whether he have get my letter or not: when he have come, and find I do
not answer to his signal, he would presently have resort to the loose
brick, and there be satisfied, by the date of my letter, that it be
his own fault that he have it not before. but, govern by the same
pragmatical motif which induce I to correspond with he at first, I
be again afraid, truly, with my foolish and busy prescience; and the
disappointment would have throw he into the way of receive fresh
insult from the same person; which might have make he guilty of some
violence to they. and so to save he an apprehend rashness, I rush
into a real one myself. and what vexe I more be, that it be plain to
I now, by all his behaviour, that he have as great a confidence in my
weakness, as I have in my own strength. and so, in a point entirely
relative to my honour, he have triumph; for he have not be mistake in
I, while I have in myself!
tell I, my dear Miss Howe, tell I truly, if your unbiassed heart do
not despise me?--It must! for your mind and mine be ever one; and I
despise myself!--and well I may: for could the giddiest and most
inconsiderate girl in England have do bad than I shall appear to have
do in the eye of the world? since my crime will be know without the
provocation, and without the artifice of the betrayer too; while it
will be a high aggravation, that well thing be expect from I than
from many other.
you charge I to marry the first opportunity--ah! my dear! another of the
bless effect of my folly--thatbe as much in my power now as--as I be
myself!--and can I besides give a sanction immediately to his deluding
arts?--can I avoid be angry with he for trick I thus, as I may
say, (and as I have call it to he,) out of myself?--For compelling I
to take a step so contrary to all my resolution and assurance give to
you; a step so dreadfully inconvenient to myself; so disgraceful and so
grievous (as it must be) to my dear mother, be I to be less regardful
of any other of my family or friends?--you donot know, nor can you
imagine, my dear, how I be mortified!--how much I be sink in my own
opinion! I, that be propose for an example, truly, to others!--o that
I be again in my father's house, steal down with a letter to you;
my heart beat with expectation of find one from you!
***
this be the Wednesday morning I dread so much, that I once think of
it as the day of my doom: but of the Monday, it be plain, I ought to have
be most apprehensive. have I staid, and have the bad I dread
happen, my friend would then have be answerable for the
consequence, if any bad one have followed:--but now, I have only this
consolation leave I (a very poor one, youwill say!) that I have clear
they of blame, and take it all upon myself!
you will not wonder to see this narrative so dismally scrawl. it be
owe to different pen and ink, all bad, and write in snatch of
time; my hand tremble too with fatigue and grief.
I will not add to the length of it, by the particular of his behaviour
to I, and of our conversation at St. Alban's, and since; because those
will come in course in the continuation of my story; which, no doubt, you
will expect from I.
only thus much will I say, that he be extremely respectful (even
obsequiously so) at present, though I be so much dissatisfied with he
and myself that he have hitherto have no great cause to praise my
complaisance to he. indeed, I can hardly, at time, bear the seducer in
my sight.
the lodging I be in be inconvenient. I shall not stay in they: so it
signify nothing to tell you how to direct to I hither. and where my
next may be, as yet I know not.
he know that I be write to you; and have offer to send my letter,
when finish, by a servant of his. but I think I could not be too
cautious, as I be now situate, in have a letter of this importance
convey to you. who know what such a man may do? so very wicked a
contriver! the contrivance, if a contrivance, to get I away, so
insolently mean!--but I hope it be not a contrivance neither!--yet, be
that as it will, I must say, that the good of he, and of my prospect
with he, be bad; and yet, have enrol myself among the too-late
repenter, who shall pity I?
nevertheless, I will dare to hope for a continue interest in your
affection [I shall be miserable indeed if I may not!] and to be
remember in your daily prayer. for neither time nor accident shall
ever make I cease to be
your faithful and affectionate
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER III
MR. LOVELACE, to JOSEPH LEMAN
SAT. APRIL 8.
HONEST JOSEPH,
at length your beloved young lady have consent to free herself from the
cruel treatment she have so long bear. she be to meet I without the
garden-door at about four o'clock on Monday afternoon. I tell you she
have promise to do so. she have confirm her promise. thank Heaven she
have confirm her promise!
I shall have a chariot-and-six ready in the by-road front the private
path to harlowe-paddock; and several of my friend and servant not far
off, arm to protect she, if there be occasion: but every one charge to
avoid mischief. that, you know, have always be my principal care.
all my fear be, that, when she come to the point, the over-niceness of
her principle will make she waver, and want to go back: although she
honour be my honour, you know, and mine be she's. if she should, and
should I be unable to prevail upon she, all your past service will
avail nothing, and she will be lose to I for ever: the prey then of that
cursed Solmes, whose vile stinginess will never permit he to do good to
any of the servant of the family.
I have no doubt of your fidelity, honest Joseph; nor of your zeal to
serve an injure gentleman, and an oppressed young lady. you see by the
confidence I repose in you, that I have not; more particularly, on this
very important occasion, in which your assistance may crown the work:
for, if she waver, a little innocent contrivance will be necessary.
be very mindful, therefore, of the follow direction; take they into
your heart. this will probably be your last trouble, until my beloved
and I be join in holy wedlock: and then we will be sure to take care
of you. you know what I have promise. no man ever reproach I for
breach of word.
these, then, honest Joseph, be they:
Contrive to be in the garden, in disguise, if possible, and unseen by
your young lady. if you find the garden-door unbolt, you will know
that she and I be together, although you should not see she go out at
it. it will be lock, but my key shall be on the ground just without
the door, that you may open it with your's, as it may be needful.
if you hear our voice parley, keep at the door till I cry Hem, hem,
twice: but be watchful for this signal; for I must not hem very loud,
lest she should take it for a signal. perhaps, in struggle to prevail
upon the dear creature, I may have an opportunity to strike the door hard
with my elbow, or heel, to confirm you--then you be to make a violent
burst against the door, as if you would break it open, draw backward
and forward the bolt in a hurry: then, with another push, but with more
noise than strength, lest the lock give way, cry out (as if you see some
of the family) come up, come up, instantly!--here they be! here they
are!--hasten!--this instant! hasten! and mention sword, pistol, gun,
with as terrible a voice as you can cry out with. then shall I prevail
upon she, no doubt, if loth before, to fly. if I cannot, I will enter
the garden with she, and the house too, be the consequence what it will.
but, so affrighted, these be no question but she will fly.
when you think we at a sufficient distance [and I shall raise my voice
urge her swifter flight, that you may guess at that] then open the door
with your key: but you must be sure to open it very cautiously, lest we
should not be far enough off. I would not have she know you have a hand
in this matter, out of my great regard to you.
when you have open the door, take your key out of the lock, and put it
in your pocket: then, stoop for mine, put it in the lock on the
inside, that it may appear as if the door be open by herself, with a
key, which they will suppose to be of my procuring (it be new) and
leave open by we.
they should conclude she be go off by her own consent, that they may
not pursue we: that they may see no hope of tempt she back again. in
either case, mischief might happen, you know.
but you must take notice, that you be only to open the door with your
key, in case none of the family come up to interrupt we, and before we
be quite go: for, if they do, youwill find by what follow, that you
must not open the door at all. let they, on break it open, or by
get over the wall, find my key on the ground, if they will.
if they do not come to interrupt we, and if you, by help of your key,
come out, follow we at a distance; and, with uplifted hand, and wild
impatient gesture, (run backward and forward, for fear you should
come up too near we, and as if you see somebody come to your
assistance,) cry out for help, help, and to hasten. then shall we be soon
at the chariot.
tell the family that you see I enter a chariot with she: a dozen, or
more, man on horseback, attend we; all arm; some with blunderbuss,
as you believe; and that we take quite the contrary way to that we should
take.
you see, honest Joseph, how careful I be, as well as you, to avoid
mischief.
observe to keep at such a distance that she may not discover who you be.
take long stride, to alter your gait; and hold up your head, honest
Joseph; and shewill not know it to be you. man's air and gait be as
various and peculiar as their face. pluck a stake out of one of the
hedge: and tug at it, though it may come easy: this, if she turn back,
will look terrible, and account for your not follow we fast. then,
return with it, shoulder, to brag to the family what you would have
do, could you have overtake we, rather than your young lady should be
carry off by such a---- and you may call I name, and curse I. and
these air will make you look valiant, and in earnest. you see, honest
Joseph, I be always contrive to give you reputation. no man suffer by
serve I.
but, if our parley should last long than I wish; and if any of her
friend miss she before I cry, Hem, hem, twice; then, in order to save
yourself, (which be a very great point with I, I assure you,) make the
same noise as above: but as I direct before, open not the door with
your key. on the contrary, wish for a key with all your heart; but for
fear any of they should by accident have a key about they, keep in
readiness half a dozen little gravel-stone, no big than pea, and
thrust two or three slily into the key-hole; which will hinder their key
from turn round. it be good, you know, Joseph, to provide against
every accident in such an important case, as this. and let this be your
cry, instead of the other, if any of my enemy come in your sight, as
you seem to be try to burst the door open, Sir! Sir! or Madam!
Madam! o Lord, hasten! o Lord, hasten! Mr. Lovelace! Mr. Lovelace!--
and very loud--and that shall quicken I more than it shall those you
call to.--if it be Betty, and only Betty, I shall think bad of your art
of make love* than of your fidelity, if you cannot find a way to amuse
she, and put she upon a false scent.
* see Vol.II. Letter XXIX.
you must tell they that your young lady seem to run as fast off with I
as I with she. this will also confirm to they that all pursuit be in
vain. an end will hereby be put to Solmes's hope: and her friend,
after a while, will be more studious to be reconcile to she than to get
she back. so you will be a happy instrument of great good to all round.
and this will one day be acknowledge by both family. you will then be
every one's favourite; and every good servant, for the future, will be
proud to be liken to honest Joseph Leman.
if she should guess at you, or find you out, I have it already in my head
to write a letter for you to copy,* which, occasionally produce, will
set you right with she.
* see Vol.III. Letter XXI.
this one time be diligent, be careful: this will be the crown of all: and
once more, depend, for a recompense, upon the honour of
your assured friend,
R. LOVELACE.
you need not be so much afraid of go too far with Betty. if you
should make a match with she, she be a very likely creature, though a
vixen, as you say. I have an admirable receipt to cure a termagant wife.
--never fear, Joseph, but thou shalt be master of thine house. if she be
very troublesome, I can teach thee how to break her heart in a
twelvemonth; and honestly too;--or the precept would not be mine.
I enclose a new earnest of my future favour.
LETTER IV
to ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQUIER, his HONNER
SUNDAY MORNING, APRIL 9.
HONNERED SIR,
I must confesse I be infinitely oblige to your Honner's bounty. but
this last command!--it seem so intricket! Lord be merciful to I, how
have I be lead from littel stepps to grate stepps!--and if I should be
find out!--but your Honner say you will take I into your Honner's
sarvise, and protect I, if as I should at any time be find out; and
raise my wage besides; or set I upp in a good inne; which be my
ambishion. and you will be honnerable and kind to my dear young lady,
God love her.--but who can be unkind to she?
I wil do my good I be able, since your Honner will be apt to lose she, as
your Honner say, if I do not; and a man so stingie will be apt to gain
she. but mayhap my deareste young lady will not make all this trubble
needful. if she have promisse, she will stand to it, I dare to say.
I love your Honner for contrive to save mischiff so well. I think
till I know'd your Honner, that you be verry mischevous, and plese your
Honner: but find it to be clene contrary. your Honner, it be plane,
mean mighty well by every body, as far as I see. as I be sure I do
myself; for I be, althoff a very plane man, and all that, a very honnest
one, I thank my God. and have good principel, and have keep my young
lady's pressept always in mind: for she go no where, but save a soul
or two, more or less.
so, commend myself to your Honner's further favour, not forget the
inne, when your Honner shall so please, and good one offer; for plase
be no inherritanse now-a-day. and, I hope, your Honner will not think
I a dishonest man for sarve your Honner agenst my duty, as it may
look; but only as my conshence clear I.
be pleased, howsomever, if it like your Honner, not to call I honest
Joseph, so often. for, althoff I think myself verry honn, and all
that, yet I be touch a littel, for fear I should not do the quite right
thing: and too besides, your Honner have such a fesseshious way with you,
as that I hardly know whether you be in jest or earnest, when your
Honner call I honnest so often.
I be a very plane man, and seldom have writ to such honourable gentleman;
so you will be good enuff to pass by every thing, as I have often say,
and need not now say over again.
as to Mrs. Betty; I tho'te, indeed, she look above I. but she come
on vere well, natheless. I could like she well, iff she be well to
my young lady. but she have too much wit for so plane a man. Natheless,
if she be to angre I, althoff it be a shame to bete a woman, yet I
colde make shift to throe my hat at she, or so, your Honner.
but that same reseit, iff your Honner so please, to cure a shrewish wife.
it would more encurrege to wed, iff so be one know'd it before-hand, as
one may say. so likewise, if one knoe one could honnestly, as your
Honner say, and as of the handy-work of God, in one twelvemonth--
but, I shall grow impertinent to such a grate man.--And hereafter may do
for that, as she turn out: for one mought be loth to part with she,
mayhap, so verry soon too; espessially if she be to make the notable
landlady your Honner put into my head.
Butt wonce moer, beg your Honner's parden, and promisse all
dilligence and exsackness, I reste,
your Honner's dewtiful sarvant to command,
JOSEPH LEMAN.
LETTER V
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
ST. ALBAN'S, MONDAY NIGHT.
I snatch a few moment while my belove be retire, [as I hope, to rest,]
to perform my promise. no pursuit--nor have I apprehension of any;
though I must make my charmer dread that there will be one.
and now, let I tell thee, that never be joy so complete as mine!--But
let I inquire, be not the angel fly away?
***
o no! she be in the next apartment!--securely mine!--mine for ever!
o ecstasy!--My heart will burst my breast,
to leap into her bosom!
I know that the whole stupid family be in a combination to do my
business for I. I tell thee that they be all work for I, like so
many ground mole; and still more blind than the mole be say to be,
unknowing that they do so. I myself, the director of their principal
motion; which fall in with the malice of their little heart, they
take to be all their own.
but do I say my joy be perfect?--O no!--it receive some abatement from
my disgusted bride. for how can I endure to think that I owe more to her
relation' precaution than to her favour for me?--Or even, as far as I
know, to her preference of I to another man?
but let I not indulge this thought. be I to do so, it might cost my
charmer dear. let I rejoice, that she have pass the rubicon: that she
cannot return: that, as I have order it, the flight will appear to the
implacable to be altogether with her own consent: and that if I doubt
her love, I can put she to trial as mortify to her niceness, as
glorious to my pride.--For, let I tell thee, dearly as I love she, if I
think there be but the shadow of a doubt in her mind whether she
prefer I to any man live, I would shew she no mercy.
TUESDAY, DAY-DAWN.
but, on the wing of love, I fly to my charmer, who perhaps by this time
be rise to encourage the tardy dawn. I have not sleep a wink of the
hour and half I lay down to invite sleep. it seem to I, that I be not
so much body, as to require such a vulgar renovation.
but why, as in the chariot, as in the inn, at alight, all heart-
burst grief, my dearest creature? so persecute as thou wert
persecuted!--so much in danger of the most abhor compulsion!--yet
grief so unsuspectedly sincere for an escape so critical!--take care,
take care, o beloved of my soul! for jealous be the heart in which love
have erect a temple to thee.
yet, it must be allow, that such a sudden transition must affect she;
must ice she over. when a little more used to her new situation; when
her hurry be at an end; when she see how religiously I shall observe
all her injunction; she will undoubtedly have the gratitude to
distinguish between the confinement she have escape from, and the liberty
she have reason to rejoice in.
she come! she come! and the sun be just rise to attend she! Adieu!
be half as happy as I be (for all diffidencie, like night-fog before
the sun, disperse at her approach) and, next myself, thou wilt be the
happy man in the world.
LETTER VI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 12.
I will pursue my melancholy story.
be thus hurry to the chariot, it would have be to no purpose to
have refuse enter into it, have he not in my fright lift I in, as
he do: and it instantly drive away a full gallop, and stop not till
it bring we to St. Alban's; which be just as the day shut in.
I think I should have faint several time by the way. with uplifted
hand and eye, God protect I! say I often to myself: can it be I, that
be here! my eye run over, and my heart ready to burst with sigh as
involuntarily as my flight.
how different, how inexpressibly different, the gay wretch; visibly
triumphing (as I could not be construe his almost rapturous joy) in the
success of his art! but overflow with complimental flourish, yet
respectfully distant his address, all the way we fly; for that, rather
than gallop, be the motion of the horse; which take, as I believe, a
round-about way, to prevent be trace.
I have reason to think, there be other horseman at his devotion; three
or four different person, above the rank of the servant, gallop by
we now-and-then, on each side of the chariot: but he take no notice of
they; and I have too much grief, mingle with indignation, notwithstanding
all his blandishment, to ask any question about they, or any thing
else.
think, my dear, what be my thought on alight from the chariot;
have no attendant of my own sex; no clothe but what I have on, and
those little suited to such a journey as I have already take, and be
still to take: neither hood nor hat, nor any thing but a handkerchief
round my head and shoulder: fatigue to death: my mind still more
fatigued than my body: and in such a foam the horse, that every one in
the inn we put up at guessed [they could not do otherwise] that I be a
young giddy creature, who have run away from her friend. this it be
easy to see, by their whispering and gaping: more of the people of the
house also come in by turn, than be necessary for the attendance.
the mistress of the house, whom he send in to I, show I another
apartment; and, see I ready to fain, bring I hartshorn and water;
and then, upon my desiring to be leave alone for half an hour, retire:
for I find my heart ready to burst, on revolve every thing in my
thought: and the moment she be go, fasten the door, I throw myself
into an old great chair, and give way to a violent flood of tear, which
a little relieved I.
Mr. Lovelace, soon than I wish, send up the gentlewoman, who press
I, in his name, to admit my brother, or to come down to he: for he have
tell she I be his sister; and that he have bring I, against my will,
and without warning, from a friend's house, where I have be all the
winter, in order to prevent my marrying against the consent of my
friend; to whom he be now conduct I; and that, have give I no
time for a travel-dress, I be greatly offend at he.
so, my dear, your frank, your open-hearted friend, be force to
countenance this tale; which indeed suit I the well, because I be
unable for some time to talk, speak, or look up; and so my dejection, and
grief, and silence, might very well pass before the gentlewoman and her
niece who attend I, as a fit of sullenness.
the room I be in be a bed-chamber, I choose to go down, at his
repeat message, attend by the mistress of the house, to that in which
he be. he approach I with great respect, yet not exceed a
brotherly politeness, where a brother be polite; and, call I his
dear sister, ask after the state of my mind; and hop I would
forgive he; for never brother half so well love a sister, as he I.
a wretch! how naturally do he fall into the character, although I be so
much out of mine!
unthinke creature have some comfort in the shortness of their view;
in their unapprehensiveness; and that they penetrate not beyond the
present moment: in short that they be unthinking!--but, for a person of
my thoughtful disposition, who have be accustom to look forward, as
well to the possible, as to the probable, what comfort can I have in my
reflection?
but let I give you the particular of our conversation a little before
and after our supper-time, join both in one.
when we be alone, he beseech I (I cannot say but with all the token
of a passionate and respectful tenderness) to be well reconcile to
myself and to he: he repeat all the vow of honour and inviolable
affection that he ever make I: he promise to be wholly govern by I
in every future step. he ask I to give he leave to propose, whether
I choose to set out next day to either of his aunt?
I be silent. I know not what to say, nor what to do.
whether I choose to have private lodging procure for I in either of
those lady' neighbourhood, as be once my thought?
I be still silent.
whether I choose to go to either of Lord M.'s seat; that of Berks, or
that in the county we be in?
in lodging, I say, any where, where he be not to be.
he have promise this, he own; and he would religiously keep to his
word, as soon as he find all danger of pursuit over; and that I be
settle to my mind. but, if the place be indifferent to I, London
be the safe, and the most private: and his relation should all visit
I there, the moment I think fit to admit they. his cousin Charlotte,
particularly, should attend I, as my companion, if I would accept of
she, as soon as she be able to go abroad. mean time, would I go to
Lady Betty Lawrance's (Lady Sarah be a melancholy woman)? I should be
the most welcome guest she ever receive.
I tell he, I wish not to go (immediately, however, and in the frame I
be in, and not likely to be out of) to any of his relation: that my
reputation be concern, to have he absent from I: that, if I be in
some private lodging, the mean the less to be suspect, (as it would
be know, that I go away by his mean; and he would be suppose to
have provide I handsome accommodation,) it would be most suitable both
to my mind and to my situation: that this might be good, I should think,
in the country for I; in town for he. and no matter how soon he be
know to be there.
if he might deliver his opinion, he say, it be, that since I decline
go to any of his relation, London be the only place in the world to
be private in. every new comer in a country town or village excite a
curiosity: a person of my figure [and many compliment he make I] would
excite more. even message and letter, where none use to be bring,
would occasion inquiry. he have not provide a lodging any where,
suppose I would choose to go either to London, where accommodation of
that sort might be fix upon in an hour's time, or to Lady Betty's; or
to Lord M.'s Herfordshire seat, where be the housekeeper, an excellent
woman, Mrs. Greme, such another as my Norton.
to be sure, I say, if I be pursue, it would be in their first
passion; and some one of his relation' house would be the place they
would expect to find I at--I know not what to do.
my pleasure should determine he, he say, be it what it would. only
that I be safe, be all he be solicitous about. he have lodging in
town; but he do not offer to propose they. he know, I would have more
objection to go to they, than I could to go to Lord M.'s, or to Lady
Betty's.
no doubt of it, I reply, with such an indignation in my manner, as make
he run over with profession, that he be far from propose they, or
wish for my acceptance of they. and again he repeat, that my honour
and safety be all he be solicitous about; assure I, that my will
should be a law to he in every particular.
I be too peevish, and too much afflict, and indeed too much incense
against he, to take well any thing he say.
I think myself, I say, extremely unhappy. I know not what to
determine upon: my reputation now, no doubt, utterly ruin: destitute of
clothe: unfit to be see by any body: my very indigence, as I might call
it, proclaim my folly to every one who see I; who would suppose that
I have be take at advantage, or have give an undue one; and have no
power over either my will or my action: that I could not but think I have
be deal artfully with: that he have seem to have take, what he might
suppose, the just measure of my weakness, found on my youth and
inexperience: that I could not forgive myself for meet he: that my
heart bleed for the distress of my father and mother, on this occasion:
that I would give the world, and all my hope in it, to have be still
in my father's house, whatever have be my usage: that, let he protest
and vow what he would, I see something low and selfish in his love, that
he could study to put a young creature upon make such a sacrifice of
her duty and conscience: when a person, actuate by a generous love, must
seek to oblige the object of it, in every thing essential to her honour,
and to her peace of mind.
he be very attentive to all I say, never offer to interrupt I once.
his answer to every article, almost methodically, shew his memory.
'what I have say, he tell I, make he very grave; and he would answer
accordingly.
'he be grieve at his heart, to find that he have so little share in my
favour or confidence.
'as to my reputation, (he must be very sincere with I,) that could not
suffer half so much by the step I so regret to have take, as by the
confinement, and equally foolish and unjust treatment, I have meet with
from my relation: that every mouth be full of blame of they, of my
brother and sister particularly; and of wonder at my patience: that he
must repeat what he have write to I he believe more than once, that my
friend themselves expect that I should take a proper opportunity to
free myself from their persecution; why else do they confine I? that
my exalted character, as he call it, would still bear I out, with
those who know I; who know my brother's and sister's motif; and who
know the wretch they be for compel I to have.
'with regard to clothe; who, as matter be circumstance, could expect
that I should be able to bring away any other than those I have on at the
time? for present use or wear, all the lady of his family would take a
pride to supply I: for future, the product of the good loom, not only
in England, but throughout the world, be at my command.
'if I want money, as no doubt I must, he should be proud to supply I:
would to heaven, he might presume to hope, there be but one interest
between we!'
and then he would fain have have I to accept of a bank note of a hundred
pound; which, unaware to I, he put into my hand: but which, you may be
sure, I refuse with warmth.
'he be inexpressibly grieve and surprised, he say, to hear I say
have act artfully by I. he come provide, accord to my confirm
appointment,' [a wretch to upbraid I thus!] 'to redeem I from my
persecutor; and little expect a change of sentiment, and that he
should have so much difficulty to prevail upon I, as he have meet with:
that perhaps I might think his offer to go into the garden with I, and
to face my assemble relation, be a piece of art only: but that if I
do, I wrong he: since to this hour, see my excessive uneasiness,
he wish, with all his soul he have be permit to accompany I in.
it be always his maxim to brave a threatened danger. threatener, where
they have an opportunity to put in force their threat, be seldom to be
fear. but have he be assure of a private stab, or of as many death's
wound as there be person in my family, (make desperate as he should
have be by my return,) he would have attend I into the house.'
so, my dear, what I have to do, be to hold myself inexcusable for meeting
such a determined and audacious spirit; thatbe all! I have hardly any
question now, but that he would have contrive some wicked stratagem or
other to have get I away, have I meet he at a midnight hour, as once or
twice I have thought to do; and that would have be more terrible still.
he conclude this part of his talk, with say, 'that he doubt not but
that, have he attend I in, he should have come off in every one's
opinion well, that he should have have general leave to renew his visit.'
he go on--'he must be so bold as to tell I, that he should have pay a
visit of this kind, (but indeed accompany by several of his trusty
friend,) have I not meet he; and that very afternoon too; for he could
not tamely let the dreadful Wednesday come, without make some effort to
change their determination.'
what, my dear, be to be do with such a man!
'that therefore for my sake, as well as for his own, he have reason to
wish that a disease so desperate have be attempt to be overcome by as
desperate a remedy. we all know, say he, that great end be sometimes
bring about by the very mean by which they be endeavour to be
frustrated.'
my present situation, I be sure, think I, afford a sad evidence of
this truth!
I be silent all this time. my blame be indeed turn inward.
sometimes, too, I be half-fright at his audaciousness: at other, have
the less inclination to interrupt he, be excessively fatigued, and my
spirit sink to nothing, with a view even of the good prospect with such
a man.
this give his opportunity to proceed: and that he do; assume a still
more serious air.
'as to what far remain for he to say, in answer to what I have
say, he hop I would pardon he; but, upon his soul, he be concern,
infinitely concern, he repeat, (his colour and his voice rise,)
that it be necessary for he to observe, how much I choose rather to have
run the risque of be Solmes's wife, than to have it in my power to
reward a man who, I must forgive he, have be as much insult on my
account, as I have be on his--who have watch my command, and (pardon
I, Madam) ever changeable motion of your pen, all hour, in all
weather, and with a cheerfulness and ardour, that nothing but the most
faithful and obsequious passion could inspire.'
I now, my dear, begin to revive into a little more warmth of attention.--
'and all, Madam, for what?'--How I star! for he stopt then a moment or
two--'only,' go he on, 'to prevail upon you to free yourself from
ungenerous and base oppressions'--
Sir, Sir, indignantly say i--
'hear I but out, dearest Madam!--My heart be full--I must speak what I
have to say--to be tell (for your word be yet in my ear, and at my
heart!) that you would give the world, and all your hope in it, to have
be still in your cruel and gloomy father's house'--
not a word, Sir, against my father!--i will not bear that--
'whatever have be your usage:--and you have a credulity, Madam, against
all probability, if you believe you should have avoid be Solmes's
wife: that I have put you upon sacrifice your duty and conscience--yet,
dearest creature! see you not the contradiction that your warmth of
temper have surprise you into, when the reluctance you shewed to the last
to leave your persecutor, have clear your conscience from the least
reproach of this sort?'--
o Sir! Sir! be you so critical then? be you so light in your anger as
to dwell upon words?--
indeed, my dear, I have since think that his anger be not owe to
that sudden impetus, which cannot be easily bridle; but rather be a
sort of manageable anger let loose to intimidate I.
'forgive I, Madam--I have just do--have I not, in your opinion,
hazard my life to redeem you from oppression? yet be not my reward,
after all, precarious?--For, Madam, have you not condition with I
(and, hard as the condition be, most sacredly will I observe it) that all
my hope must be remote? that you be determined to have it in your power
to favour or reject I totally, as you please?'
see, my dear! in every respect my condition change for the bad! be it
in my power to take your advice, if I should think it ever so right to
take it?*
* Clarissa have be censure as behave to Mr. Lovelace, in their first
conversation at St. Alban's, and afterwards, with too much reserve, and
even with haughtiness. surely those, who have think she to blame on
this account, have not pay a due attention to the story. how early, as
above, and in what immediately follow, do he remind she of the term
of distance which she have prescribe to he, before she be in his power,
in hope to leave the door open for a reconciliation with her friend,
which her heart be set upon? and how artfully do he (unrequired)
promise to observe the condition in which she in her present
circumstance and situation (in pursuance of Miss Howe's advice) would
gladly have dispense with?--to say nothing of the resentment she be
under a necessity to shew, at the manner of his get she away, in
order to justify to he the sincerity of her refusal to go off with he.
see, in her subsequent letter to Miss Howe, No. IX., her own sense upon
the subject.
'and have you not furthermore declare,' proceed he 'that you will
engage to renounce I for ever, if you friend insist upon that cruel
renunciation, as the term of be reconcile to you?
'but nevertheless, Madam, all the merit of have save you from an
odious compulsion, shall be mine. I glory in it, though I be to lose
you for ever. as I see I be but too likely to do, from your present
displeasure; and especially, if your friend insist upon the term you
be ready to comply with.
'that you be your own mistress, through my mean, be, I repeat, my
boast. as such, I humbly implore your favour, and that only upon the
condition I have yield to hope for it. as I do now, thus humbly,
[the proud wretch fall on one knee,] your forgiveness, for so long
detain your ear, and for all the plain dealing that my undesigne
heart would not be deny to utter by my lip.'
o Sir, pray rise! let the oblige kneel, if one of we must kneel! but,
nevertheless, proceed not in this strain, I beseech you. you have have a
great deal of trouble about I: but have you let I know in time, that you
expect to be reward for it at the price of my duty, I should have
spar you much of it.
far be it from I, Sir, to depreciate merit so extraordinary. but let I
say, that have it not be for the forbidden correspondence I be tease
by you into; and which I have not continue (every letter, for many
letter, intend to be the last) but because I think you a sufferer
from my friend; I have not be either confine or ill treat: nor would
my brother's low-mean violence have have a foundation to work upon.
I be far from think my case would have be so very desperate as you
imagine have I staid. my father love I in his heart: he would not see
I before; and I want only to see he, and to be hear; and a delay of
his sentence be the least thing I expect from the trial I be to
stand.
you be boast of your merit, Sir: let merit be your boast; nothing
else can attract I. if personal consideration have principal weight
with I, either in Solmes's disfavour, or in your favour, I shall despise
myself: if you value yourself upon they, in preference to the person of
the poor solme, I shall despise you!
you may glory in your fancied merit in get I away: but the cause of
your glory, I tell you plainly, be my shame.
make to yourself a title to my regard, which I can well approve of; or
else you will not have so much merit with I, as you have with yourself.
but here, Sir, like the first pair, (I, at least, drive out of my
paradise,) be we recriminate. no more shall you need to tell I of
your suffering, and your merit! your all hour, and all weather! for
I will bear they in memory as long as I live; and if it be impossible for
I to reward they, be ever ready to own the obligation. all that I
desire of you now be, to leave it to myself to seek for some private
abode: to take the chariot with you to London, or elsewhere: and, if I
have any further occasion for your assistance and protection, I will
signify it to you, and be still far oblige to you.
you be warm, my dearest life!--but indeed there be no occasion for it.
have I any view unworthy of my faithful love for you, I should not have
be so honest in my declaration.
then he begin again to vow the sincerity of his intentions--
but I take he up short: I be willing to believe you, Sir. it would be
insupportable but to suppose there be a necessity for such solemn
declaration. [at this he seem to collect himself, as I may say, into
a little more circumspection.] if I think there be, I would not sit
with you here, in a public inn, I assure you, although cheated hither, as
far as I know, by method (you must excuse I, Sir) which, but to
suspect, will hardly let I have patience either with you or with myself
--but no more of this, just now: let I, I beseech you, good Sir, bow
[I be very angry!] let I only know whether you intend to leave I; or
whether I have only escape from one confinement to another?
cheat hither, as far as I know, Madam! let you know (and with that
air, too, charming, though grievous to my heart!) if you have only
escape from one confinement to another--amazing! perfectly amazing! and
can there be a necessity for I to answer this? you be absolutely your
own mistress--it be very strange, if you be not. the moment you be
in a place of safety, I will leave you. to one condition only, give I
leave to beg your consent: it be this, that you will be please, now you
be so entirely in your own power, to renew a promise voluntarily make
before; voluntarily, or I would not now presume to request it; for
although I would not be think capable of grow upon concession, yet I
cannot bear to think of lose the ground your goodness have give I room
to hope I have gain; 'that, make up how you please with your relation,
you will never marry any other man, while I be live and single, unless
I should be so wicked as to give new cause for high displeasure.'
I hesitate not to confirm this promise, Sir, upon your own condition. in
what manner do you expect to confirm it?
only, Madam, by your word.
then I never will.
he have the assurance (I be now in his power) to salute I as a sealing
of my promise, as he call it. his motion be so sudden, that I be not
aware of it. it would have look affect to be very angry; yet I could
not be pleased, consider this as a lead freedom, from a spirit so
audacious and encroaching: and he might see, that I be not.
he pass all that my with an air peculiar to himself--enough, enough,
dear Madam! and now let I beg of you but to conquer this dreadful
uneasiness, which give I to apprehend too much for my jealous love to
bear; and it shall be my whole endeavour to deserve your favour, and to
make you the happy woman in the world; as I shall be the happy of
man.
I break from he to write to you my precede letter; but refuse to send
it by his servant, as I tell you. the mistress of the house help I to
a messenger, who be to carry what you should give he to Lord M.'s seat
in Hertfordshire, direct for Mrs. Greme, the housekeeper there. and
early in the morning, for fear of pursuit, we be to set out that way:
and there he propose to change the chariot and six for a chaise and pair
of his own, which he have at that seat, as it would be a less-notice
conveyance.
I look over my little stock of money; and find it to be no more than
seven guineas and some silver: the rest of my stock be but fifty
guineas, and that five more than I think it be, when my sister
challenege I as to the sum I have by I:* and those I leave in my
escritoire, little intend to go away with he.
* see Vol. I. Letter XLIII.
indeed my case abound with a shocking number of indelicate
circumstance. among the rest, I be force to account to he, who know
I could have no clothe but what I have on, how I come to have linen with
I (for he could not but know I send for it); lest he should imagine I
have an early design to go away with he, and make that part of the
preparation.
he most heartily wish, he say, for my mind's sake, that your mother
would have afford I her protection; and deliver himself upon this
subject with equal freedom and concern.
there be, my dear Miss Howe, a multitude of punctilio and decorum,
which a young creature must dispense with, who, in a situation like mine,
make a man the intimate attendant of her person. I could now, I think,
give twenty reason strong than any I have heretofore mention, why
woman of the least delicacy should never think of incur the danger
and the disgrace of take the step I have be draw in to take, but
with horror and aversion; and why they should look upon the man who
should tempt they to it, as the vilest and most selfish of seducer.
***
before five o'clock (Tuesday morning) the maidservant come up to tell I
that my brother be ready, and that breakfast also wait for I in the
parlour. I go down with a heart as heavy as my eye, and receive
great acknowledgement and compliment from he on be so soon dress,
and ready (as he interpret it) to continue on our journey.
he have the thought which I have not (for what have I to with thinking, who
have it not when I stand most in need of it?) to purchase for I a velvet
hood, and a short cloke, trim with silver, without say any thing to
I. he must reward himself, the artful encroacher say, before the
landlady and her maid and niece, for his forethought; and would salute
his pretty sullen sister!--He take his reward; and, as he say before, a
tear with it. while he assure I, still before they [a vile wretch!]
that I have nothing to fear from meet with parent who so dearly love
me.--
how could I be complaisant, my dear, to such a man as this?
when we have get in the chariot, and it begin to move, he ask I,
whether I have any objection to go to Lord M.'s Hertfordshire seat? his
Lordship, he say, be at his Berkshire one.
I tell he, I choose not to go, as yet, to any of his relation; for that
would indicate a plain defiance to my own. my choice be, to go to a
private lodging, and for he to be at a distance from I: at least, till
I hear how thing be take by my friend: for that, although I have but
little hope of a reconciliation as it be; yet if they know I be in his
protection, or in that of any of his friend, (which would be look upon
as the same thing,) there would not be room for any hope at all.
I should govern he as I please, he solemnly assure I, in every thing.
but he still think London be the good place for I; and if I be once
safe there, and in a lodging to my liking, he would go to M. Hall. but,
as I approve not of London, he would urge it no far.
he propose, and I consent, to put up at an inn in the neighbourhood of
the Lawn (as he call Lord M.'s seat in this county) since I choose not
to go thither. and here I get two hour to myself; which I tell he I
should pass in write another letter to you, (mean my narrative,
which, though greatly fatigue, I have begin at St. Alban's,) and in one
to my sister, to apprise the family (whether they be solicitous about
it or not) that I be well; and to beg that my clothe, some particular
book, and the fifty guineas I have leave in my escritoire, might be send
I.
he ask, if I have consider whither to have they direct?
indeed, not I, I tell he: I be a strange to--
so be he, he interrupt I; but it strike he by chance--
Wicked story-teller!
but, add he, I will tell you, Madam, how it shall be manage--if you
donot choose to go to London, it be, nevertheless, good that your
relation should think you there; for then they will absolutely despair
of find you. if you write, be pleased to direct, to be leave for you,
at Mr. Osgood's, near Soho-square. Mr. Osgood be a man of reputation:
and this will effectually amuse they.
amuse they, my dear!--amuse whom?--my father!--my uncles!--but it must be
so!----all his expedient ready, you see!
I have no objection to this: and I have write accordingly. but what
answer I shall have, or whether any, that be what give I no small
anxiety.
this, however, be one consolation, that if I have an answer, and although
my brother should be the writer, it cannot be more severe than the
treatment I have of late receive from he and my sister.
Mr. Lovelace staid out about an hour and half; and then come in;
impatiently send up to I no less than four time, to desire
admittance. but I send he word as often, that I be busy; and at last,
that I should be so, till dinner be ready. he then hasten that, as I
hear he now-and-then, with a hearty curse upon the cook and waiter.
this be another of his perfection. I venture afterwards to check he
for his free word, as we sit at dinner.
have hear he swear at his servant, when below, whom, nevertheless, he
own to be a good one; it be a sad life, say I, these innkeeper live,
Mr. Lovelace.
no; pretty well, I believe--but why, Madam, think you, that fellow, who
eat and drink at other man's cost, or they be sorry innkeeper, should
be entitle to pity?
because of the soldier they be oblige to quarter; who be generally, I
believe, wretched profligate. bless I! say I, how I hear one of they
swear and curse, just now, at a modest, meek man, as I judge by his low
voice, and gentle answers!--well do they make it a proverb--like a
trooper!
he bite his lip; arose; turn upon his heel; stept to the glass; and
look confidently abash, if I may say so, Ay, Madam, say he, these
trooper be sad swearing fellow. I think their officer should
chastise they for it.
I be sure they deserve chastisement, reply I: for swear be a most
unmanly vice, and curse as poor and low a one; since they proclaim the
profligate's want of power, and his wickedness at the same time; for,
could such a one punish as he speak, he would be a fiend!
charmingly observe, by my soul, madam!--the next trooper I hear swear
and curse, Iwill tell he what an unmanly, and what a poor wretch he be.
Mrs. Greme come to pay her duty to I, as Mr. Lovelace call it; and be
very urgent with I to go to her lord's house; let I know what
handsome thing she have hear of her lord, and his two niece, and all
the family, say of I; and what wish for several month past they have
put up for the honour she now hop would soon be do they all.
this give I some satisfaction, as it confirm from the mouth of a very
good sort of woman all that Mr. Lovelace have tell I.
upon inquiry about a private lodging, she recommend I to a sister-in-
law of her, eight mile from thence--where I now be. and what please
I the well, be, that Mr. Lovelace (of whom I could see she be
infinitely observant) oblige she, of his own motion, to accompany I in
the chaise; himself rid on horseback, with his two servant, and one
of Lord M.'s. and here we arrive about four o'clock.
but, as I tell you in my former, the lodging be inconvenient. Mr.
Lovelace indeed find great fault with they: and tell Mrs. Greme (who have
say, that they be not worthy of we) that they come not up even to she
own account of they. as the house be a mile from a town, it be not
proper for he, he say, to be so far distant from I, lest any thing
should happen: and yet the apartment be not separate and distinct
enough for I to like they, he be sure.
this must be agreeable enough for he, you will believe.
Mrs. Greme and I have a good deal of talk in the chaise about he: she be
very easy and free in her answer to all I ask; and have, I find, a very
serious turn.
I lead she on to say to the follow effect; some part of it not unlike
what Lord M.'s dismiss bailiff have say before; by which I find that
all the servant have a like opinion of he.
'that Mr. Lovelace be a generous man: that it be hard to say, whether
the servant of her lord's family love or fear he most: that her lord
have a very great affection for he: that his two noble aunt be not
less fond of he: that his cousin Montague be as good natured young
lady as ever live: that Lord M. and Lady Sarah, and Lady Betty have
propose several lady to he, before he make his address to I: and
even since; despair to move I and my friend in his favour.--But that
he have no thought of marry at all, she have hear he say, if it be
not to I: that as well her lord as the two lady his sister be a
good deal concern at the ill-usage he receive from my family: but
admire my character, and wish to have he married to I (although I
be not to have a shilling) in preference to any other person, from the
opinion they have of the influence I should have over he. that, to be
sure, Mr. Lovelace be a wild gentleman: but wildness be a distemper
which would cure itself. that her lord delight in his company,
whenever he could get it: but that they often fall out; and his lordship
be always force to submit--indeed, be half afraid of he, she
believe; for Mr. Lovelace would do as he please. she mingle a
thousand pity often, that he act not up to the talent lend he--yet
would have it, that he have fine quality to found a reformation upon:
and, when the happy day come, would make amend for all: and of this all
his friend be so assured, that they wish for nothing so earnestly,
as for his marriage.'
this, indifferent as it be, be well than my brother say of he.
the people of the house here be very honest-look industrious folk:
Mrs. Sorlings be the gentlewoman's name. the farm seem well stock,
and thrive. she be a widow; have two son, man grow, who vie with each
other which shall take most pain in promote the common good; and they
be both of they, I already see, more respectful to two modest young
woman their sister, than my brother be to his sister.
I believe I must stay here long than at first I think I should.
I ought to have mention, that, before I set out for this place, I
receive your kind letter.* every thing be kind from so dear a friend.
* see Vol. II. Letter XLVII.
I own, that after I have tell you of my absolute determination not to go
away with he, you might well be surprised, at your first hearing that I
be actually go. the Lord bless I, my dear, I myself, at time, can
hardly believe it be I, that have be lead to take so strange a step.
I have not the well opinion of Mr. Lovelace for his extravagant
volubility. he be too full of profession. he say too many fine thing
of I, and to I. true respect, true value, I think, lie not in word:
word cannot express it: the silent awe, the humble, the doubt eye,
and even the hesitate voice, well shew it by much, than, as our
beloved Shakespeare say,
----The rattle tongue
of saucy and audacious eloquence.
the man indeed at time be all upon the ecstatic; one of his phrase.
but, to my shame and confusion, I must say, that I know too well to what
to attribute his transport. in one word, it be to his triumph, my dear.
and, to impute it to that perhaps equally expose my vanity, and condemn
my folly.
we have be alarm with notion of a pursuit, found upon a letter
from his intelligencer.
how do different circumstance either sanctify or condemn the same
action!--what care ought we to take not to confound the distinction of
right and wrong, when self come in the question!--i condemn in Mr.
Lovelace the corrupting of a servant of my father's; and now I be glad to
give a kind of indirect approbation of that fault, by inquire of he
what he hear, by that or any other way, of the manner in which my
relation take my flight. a preconcerted, forward, and artful flight, it
must undoubtedly appear to they. how grievous be that to think of! yet
how, as long as I be situate, can I put they right?
most heavily, he say, they take it; but shew not so much grief as rage.
and he can hardly have patience to hear of the virulence and menace of
my brother against himself. then a merit be make to I of his
forbearance.
what a satisfaction be I rob of, my dear friend, when I reflect
upon my inconsiderateness! o that I have it still in my power to say I
suffer wrong, rather than do wrong! that other be more want in
their kindness to I than I duty (where duty be owe) to they.
fie upon I! for meet the seducer!--Let all end as happily as it now
may, I have lay up for myself remorse for my whole life.
what still more concern I be, that every time I see this man, I be
still at a great loss than before what to make of he. I watch every
turn of his countenance: and I think I see very deep line in it. he
look with more meaning, I verily think, than he use to look; yet not
more serious; not less gay--I donot know how he look--but with more
confidence a great deal than formerly; and yet he never want that.
but here be the thing; I behold he with fear now, as conscious of the
power my indiscretion have give he over I. and well may he look more
elate, when he see I deprive of all the self-suppose significance,
which adorn and exult a person who have be accustom to respect; and
who now, by a conscious inferiority, allow herself to be overcome, and
in a state of obligation, as I may say, to a man who from a humble suitor
to she for her favour, assume the consequence and air of a protector.
I shall send this, as my former, by a poor man, who travel every day
with pedlary matter. he will leave it at Mrs. Knolly's, as you direct.
if you hear any thing of my father and mother, and of their health, and
how my friend be affect by my unhappy step, pray be so good as to
write I a few line by the messenger, if his wait for they can be
know to you.
I be afraid to ask you, whether, upon read that part of my narrative
already in your hand, you think any sort of extenuation lie for
your unhappy
CLARISSA HARLOWE?
LETTER VII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, WEDN. APRIL 11, 12.
you claim my promise, that I will be as particular as possible, in all
that pass between I and my goddess. indeed, I never have a more
illustrious subject to exercise my pen. and, moreover, I have leisure;
for by her good will, my access would be as difficult to she, as that of
the humblest slave to an eastern monarch. nothing, then, but inclination
to write can be want; and since our friendship, and your obliging
attendance upon I at the White Hart, will not excuse that, I will
endeavour to keep my word.
I part with thee and thy brother, with a full resolution, thou
know, to rejoin ye, if she once again disappoint I, in order to go
together (attend by our servant, for shew sake) to the gloomy father;
and demand audience of the tyrant upon the freedom take with my
character. in short, to have try by fair resolution, and treat his
charming daughter with less inhumanity, and I with more civility.
I tell thee my reason for not go in search of a letter of
countermand. I be right; for if I have, I should have find such a one;
and have I receive it, she would not have meet I. do she think, that
after I have be more than once disappoint, I would not keep she to her
promise; that I would not hold she to it, when I have get she in so deeply?
the moment I hear the door unbolt, I be sure of she. that motion make
my heart bind to my throat. but when that be follow with the
presence of my charmer, flash upon I all at once in a flood of
brightness, sweetly dress, though all unprepared for a journey, I trod
air, and hardly think myself a mortal.
thou shalt judge of her dress, as at the moment I first behold she she
appear to I, and as, upon a near observation, she really be. I be
a critic, thou know, in woman's dress. many a one have I teach to
dress, and help to undress. but there be such a native elegance in
this lady, that she surpass all that I could imagine surpass. but
then her person adorn what she wear, more than dress can adorn she; and
thatbe her excellence.
expect therefore a faint sketch of her admirable person with her dress.
her wax-like flesh (for after all, flesh and blood I think she be) by its
delicacy and firmness, answer for the soundness of her health. Thou
hast often hear I launch out in praise of her complexion. I never in
my life beheld a skin so illustriously fair. the lily and the drive
snow it be nonsense to talk of: her lawn and her lace one might indeed
compare to those; but what a white wall would a woman appear to be, who
have a complexion which would justify such unnatural comparison? but
this lady be all glow, all charming flesh and blood; yet so clear,
that every meandring vein be to be see in all the lovely part of she
which custom permit to be visible.
Thou have hear I also describe the wavy ringlet of her shin hair,
need neither art nor powder; of itself an ornament, defy all other
ornament; wanton in and about a neck that be beautiful beyond
description.
her head-dress be a Brussels-lace mob, peculiarly adapt to the
charming air and turn of her feature. a sky-blue ribband illustrate
that. but although the weather be somewhat sharp, she have not on either
hat or hood; for, besides that she love to use herself hardily (by which
mean and by a temperance truly exemplary, she be allow to have give
high health and vigour to an originally tender constitution) she seem to
have intend to shew I, that she be determined not to stand to her
appointment. o Jack! that such a sweet girl should be a rogue!
her morning gown be a pale primrose-colour paduasoy: the cuff and
robin curiously embroider by the finger of this ever-charming
Arachne, in a running pattern of violet and their leaf, the light in
the flower silver, gold in the leaf. a pair of diamond snap in her
ear. a white handkerchief work by the same inimitable finger
conceal--o Belford! what still more inimitable beauty do it not
conceal!--and I see, all the way we ride, the bound heart (by its
throbbing motion I see it!) dance beneath her charming umbrage.
her ruffle be the same as her mob. her apron a flower lawn. her
coat white sattin, quilt: blue sattin her shoe, braid with the same
colour, without lace; for what need have the prettiest foot in the world
of ornament? neat buckle in they: and on her charming arm a pair of
black velvet glove-like muff of her own invention; for she make and
give fashion as she pleases.--Her hand velvet of themselves, thus
uncover the free to be grasp by those of her adorer.
I have tell thee what be my transport, when the undrawn bolt present
to I my long-expect goddess. her emotion be more sweetly feminine,
after the first moment; for then the fire of her starry eye begin to
sink into a less dazzling languor. she tremble: nor know she how to
support the agitation of a heart she have never find so ungovernable.
she be even faint, when I clasp she in my support arm. what a
precious moment that! how near, how sweetly near, the throbbing
partner!
by her dress, I see, as I observe before, how unprepared she be for a
journey; and not doubt her intention once more to disappoint I, I
would have draw she after I. then begin a contention the most vehement
that ever I have with woman. it would pain thy friendly heart to be tell
the infinite trouble I have with she. I beg, I pray; on my knee,
yet in vain, I beg and pray she to answer her own appointment: and
have I not happily provide for such a struggle, know whom I have to
deal with, I have certainly fail in my design; and as certainly would
have accompany she in, without thee and thy brother: and who know
what might have be the consequence?
but my honest agent answer my signal, though not quite so soon as I
expect, in the manner thou know I have prescribe, they be come!
they be coming!--fly, fly, my beloved creature, cry I, draw my
sword with a flourish, as if I would have slay half an hundred of the
suppose intruder; and, seize her trembling hand, I draw she after I
so swiftly, that my foot, wing by love, could hardly keep pace with her
foot, agitate by fear.--And so I become her emperor.
Iwill tell thee all, when I see thee: and thou shalt then judge of my
difficulty, and of her perverseness. and thou wilt rejoice with I at
my conquest over such a watchful and open-eyed charmer.
but se thou not now (as I think I do) the wind outstrip fair one
fly from her love to her love? be there not such a game?--Nay, fly
from her friend she be resolve not to abandon, to the man she be
determined not to go off with?--the sex! the sex, all over!--charming
contradiction!--Hah, hah, hah, hah!--I must here--I must here, lie down
my pen, to hold my side; for I must have my laugh out now the fit be
upon I.
***
I believe--I believe--hah, hah, hah! I believe, Jack, my dog conclude
I mad: for here have one of they popt in, as if to see what ail I, or
whom I have with I. hah, hah, hah! an impudent dog! o Jack, knewest
thou my conceit, and be but thy laugh join to mine, I believe it
would hold I for an hour long.
but, o my well belove fair one, repine not thou at the art by which
thou suspect thy fruitless vigilence have be over watch. take
care, that thou provok not new one, that may be still more worthy of
thee. if once thy emperor decree thy fall, thou shalt greatly fall.
thou shalt have cause, if that come to pass, which may come to pass (for
why wouldst thou put off marriage to so long a day, as till thou hadst
reason to be convince of my reformation, dearest?) thou shalt have
cause, never fear, to sit down more dissatisfied with the star, than
with thyself. and come the bad to the bad, glorious term will I
give thee. Thy garrison, with general Prudence at the head, and governor
Watchfulness bring up the rear, shall be allow to march out with all
the honour due to so brave a resistance. and all thy sex, and all mine,
that hear of my stratagem, and of thy conduct, shall acknowledge the
fortress as nobly win as defend.
'thou wilt not dare, methink I hear thee say, to attempt to reduce such
a goddess as this, to a standard unworthy of her excellency. it be
impossible, Lovelace, that thou shouldst intent to break through oath
and protestation so solemn.'
that I do not intend it, be certain. that I do intend it, I cannot (my
heart, my reverence for she, will not let I) say. but know thou not
my aversion to the state of shackles?--and be she not in MY power?
'and wilt thou, Lovelace, abuse that power which--'
which what, Belford? which I obtain not by her own consent, but
against it.
'but which thou never hadst obtain, have she not esteem thee above all
man.'
and which I have never take so much pain to obtain, have I not love she
above all woman. so far upon a par, Jack! and if thou plead honour,
ought not honour to be mutual? if mutual, do it not imply mutual
trust, mutual confidence? and what have I have of that from she to boast
of?--Thou know the whole progress of our warfare: for a warfare it have
truly be; and far, very far, from an amorous warfare too. doubt,
mistrust, upbraiding, on her part; humiliation the most abject, on
mine. oblige to assume such air of reformation, that every varlet of
ye have be afraid I should reclaim in good earnest. and hast thou not
thyself frequently observe to I, how awkwardly I return to my usual
gayety, after I have be within a mile of her father's garden-wall,
although I have not see she?
do she not deserve to pay for all this?--to make an honest fellow look
like an hypocrite, what a vile thing be that!
then thou know what a false little rogue she have be. how little
conscience she have make of disappoint I. Hast thou not be a
witness of my raving on this score? have I not, in the height of they,
vow revenge upon the faithless charmer? and if I must be forswear,
whether I answer her expectation, or follow my own inclination; and if
the option be in my own power, can I hesitate a moment which to choose?
then, I fancy by her circumspection, and her continual grief, that she
expect some mischief from I. I donot care to disappoint any body I
have a value for.
but o the noble, the exalt creature! who can avoid hesitate when he
think of an offence against she? who can but pity--
yet, on the other hand, so loth at last to venture, though threaten to
be force into the nuptial fetter with a man, whom to look upon as a
rival, be to disgrace myself!--So sullen, now she have ventured!--what
title have she to pity; and to a pity which her pride would make she
disclaim?
but I resolve not any way. I will see how she will work; and how my
will lead I on. I will give the combatant fair play, and yet, every
time I attend she, I find that she be less in my power; I more in her.
yet, a foolish little rogue! to forbid I to think of marriage till I be
a reform man! till the implacable of her family change their nature,
and become placable!
it be true, when she be for make those condition, she do not think,
that without any, she should be cheat out of herself; for so the dear
soul, as I may tell thee in its place, phrase it.
how it swell my pride, to have be able to outwit such a vigilant
charmer! I be tall by half a yard in my imagination than I be. I
look down upon every body now. last night I be still more extravagant.
I take off my hat, as I walk, to see if the lace be not scorch,
suppose it have brush down a star; and, before I put it on again, in
mere wantonness and heart's ease, I be for buffet the moon.
in short, my whole soul be joy. when I go to bed I laugh myself asleep;
and I awake either laugh or singing--yet nothing nearly in view,
neither--for why?--i be not yet reform enough!
I tell thee at the time, if thou rememberest, how capable this
restriction be of be turn upon the over-scrupulous dear creature,
could I once get she out of her father's house; and be I disposed to
punish she for her family's fault, and for the infinite trouble she
herself have give I. little think she, that I have keep an account
of both: and that, when my heart be soft, and all her own, I can but turn
to my memoranda, and harden myself at once.
o my charmer, look to it! Abate of thy haughty air! value not thyself
upon thy sincerity, if thou art indifferent to I! I will not bear it
now. art thou not in my power!--nor, if thou lov I, think, that the
female affectation of deny thy love, will avail thee now, with a heart
so proud and so jealous as mine?--Remember, moreover, that all thy family
sin be upon thy head!--
but ah! Jack, when I see my angel, when I be admit to the presence of
this radiant beauty, what will become of all this vapouring?
but, be my end what it may, I be oblige, by thy penetration, fair one,
to proceed by the sap. Fair and softly. a wife at any time! marriage
will be always in my power.
when put to the university, the same course of initial study will
qualify the yonker for the one line or the other. the genius ought to
point out the future lawyer, divine, or physician!--so the same cautious
conduct, with such a vigilance, will do either for the wife, or for the
no-wife. when I reform, Iwill marry. 'tis time enough for the one, the
lady must say--for the other, say I!
but how I ramble!--this be to be in such a situation, that I know not
what to resolve upon.
Iwill tell thee my inclining, as I proceed. the pro's and the con's Iwill
tell thee: but be get too far from the track I set out in, I will
close here. I may, however, write every day something, and send it as
opportunity offer.
regardless, nevertheless, I shall be in all I write, of connection,
accuracy, or of any thing but of my own imperial will and pleasure.
LETTER viii
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
WEDNESDAY NIGHT, APRIL 12.
I have your narrative, my dear. you be the same noble creature you ever
be. above disguise, above art, above attempt to extenuate a failing.
the only family in the world, your, surely, that could have drive such
a daughter upon such extremity.
but you must not be so very much too good for they, and for the case.
you lay the blame so properly and so unsparingly upon your meeting he,
that nothing can be add to that subject by your bad enemy, be
they to see what you have write.
I be not surprised, now I have read your narrative, that so bold and so
contrive a man--I be force to break off----
***
you stand it out much well and long--here again come my bustling,
jealous mother!
***
donot be angry at yourself. do you not do for the good at the time? as
to your first fault, the answer his letter; it be always incumbent
upon you to assume the guardianship of such a family, when the bravo of
it have run riot, as he do, and bring himself into danger.
except your mother, who have no will of her own, have any of they common
sense?
forgive I, my dear--here be that stupid uncle Antony of your. a
pragmatical, conceited positive.--He come yesterday, in a fearful pucker,
and puff, and blow, and stump about our hall and parlour, while his
message be carry up.
my mother be dress. these widow be as starch as the old
bachelor. she would not see he in a dishabille for the world--what can
she mean by it?
his errand be to set she against you, and to shew she their determined
rage on your go away. the issue prove too evidently that this be
the principal end of his visit.
the odd creature desire to speak with she alone. I be not use to such
exception whenever any visit be make to my mother.
when she be prim out, down she come to he. they lock themselves
in. the two positive head be put together--close together I suppose;
for I listen, but could hear nothing distinctly, though they both seem
full of their subject.
I have a good mind, once or twice, to have make they open the door. could
I have be sure of keep but tolerably my temper, I would have
demand admittance. but I be afraid, if I have obtain it, that I
should have forget it be my mother's house, and be for turn he out
of it. to come to rave against and abuse my dearest, dearest, faultless
friend! and the raving to be encourage, and perhaps join in, in order
to justify themselves; the one for contribute to drive that dear friend
out of her father's house; the other for refuse she a temporary asylum,
till the reconciliation could have be effect, which her dutiful heart
be set upon; and which it would have become the love which my mother have
ever pretend for you, to have mediate for--could I have have patience!
the issue, as I say, shew what the errand be--its fusty appearance,
after the old fusty fellow be march off, [you must excuse I, my
dear,] be in a kind of gloomy, Harlowe-like reservedness in my mother;
which upon a few resenting flirt of mine, be follow by a rigorous
prohibition of correspondence.
this put we, you may suppose, upon term not the most agreeable, I
desire to know, if I be prohibit dream of you?--For, my dear, you
have all my sleeping as well as wake hour.
I can easily allow for your correspondence with your wretch at first (and
yet your notion be excellent) by the effect this prohibition have upon
I; since, if possible, it have make I love you well than before; and I
be more desirous than ever of correspond with you.
but I have nevertheless a much more laudable motive--I should think
myself the unworthi of creature, could I be bring to slight a dear
friend, and such a meritorious one, in her distress. I would die first--
and so I tell my mother. and I have desire she not to watch I in my
retire hour; nor to insist upon my lying with she constantly, which she
now do more earnestly than ever. 'twere well, I tell she, that the
Harlowe-Betty be borrow to be set over I.
Mr. Hickman, who so greatly honour you, have, unknown to I, interpose
so warmly in your favour with my mother, that it make for he no small
merit with I.
I cannot, at present, write to every particular, unless I would be in set
defiance. tease, tease, tease, for ever! the same thing, though
answer fifty time over, in every hour to be repeat--Lord bless I!
what a life must my poor father--but let I remember to whom I be
write.
if this ever-active, ever-mischievous monkey of a man, this Lovelace,
contrive as you suspect--but here come my mother again--ay, stay a
little long, my Mamma, if you please--I can but be suspect! I can
but be chidden for make you wait; and chidden I be sure to be, whether
I do or not, in the way you, my good Mamma, be Antony'd into.
bless I! how impatient she be! how she thunder at the door! this
moment, Madam! how come I to double-lock myself if! what have I do
with the key! Duce take the key! dear Madam! you flutter one so!
***
you may believe, my dear, that I take care of my paper before I open
the door. we have have a charming dialogue--she fling from I in a
passion--
so--whatbe now to be do? send for down in a very peremptory manner, I
assure you. what an incoherent letter will you have, when I get it to
you! but now I know where to send it, Mr. Hickman shall find I a
messenger. yet, if he be detect, poor soul, he will be harlowe-off,
as well as his meek mistress.
THURSDAY, APRIL 13.
I have this moment your continuation-letter. and be favour, at
present, with the absence of my Argus-eye mother.--
dear creature! I can account for all your difficulty. a young lady of
your delicacy!--and with such a man!--i must be brief----
the manbe a fool, my dear, with all his pride, and with all his
complaisance, and affect regard to your injunction. yet his ready
inventions----
sometimes I think you should go to Lady Betty's. I know not what to
advise you to do.--I should, if you be not so intent upon reconcile
yourself to your relation. yet they be implacable. you can have no
hope of they. your uncle's errand to my mother may convince you of
that; ad if you have an answer to your letter to your sister, that will
confirm you, I dare say.
you need not to have be afraid of ask I, whether upon read your
narrative, I think any extenuation could lie for what you have do! I
have, as above, before I have your question, tell you my mind as to that.
and I repeat, I think, your provocation and inducement consider, that
ever young creature be who take such a step.
but you take it not--you be drive on one side, and, possibly, trick
on the other.--if any woman on earth shall be circumstance as you be,
and shall hold out so long as you do, against her persecutor on one
hand, and her seducer on the other, I will forgive she for all the rest
of her conduct, be it what it will.
all your acquaintance, you may suppose, talk of nobody but you. some
indeed bring your admirable character for a plea against you: but nobody
do, or can, acquit your father and uncle.
every body seem apprize of your brother's and sister's motif. your
flight be, no doubt, the very thing they aim to drive you to, by the
various attack they make upon you; unhoping (as they must do all the
time) the success of their scheme in Solmes's behalf. they know, that
if once you be restore to favour, the suspend love of your father
and uncle, like a river break down a temporary obstruction, would
return with double force; and that then you would expose, and triumph
over all their arts.--and now, I hear they enjoy their successful malice.
your father be all rage and violence. he ought, I be sure, to turn his
rage inward. all your family accuse you of act with deep art; and be
put upon suppose that you be actually every hour exult over they,
with your man, in the success of it.
they all pretend now, that your trial of Wednesday be to be the last.
advantage would indeed, my mother own, have be take of your yielding,
if you have yield. but have you not be prevail upon, they would have
give up their scheme, and take your promise for renounce Lovelace--
believe they who will!
they own, however, that a minister be to be present--Mr. Solmes be to
be at hand--and your father be previously to try his authority over you,
in order to make you sign the settlement--all of it a romantic
contrivance of your wild-head foolish brother, I make no doubt. it be
likely that he and Bell would have give way to your restoration to
favour, suppose it in their power to hinder it, on any other term than
those their heart have be so long set upon?
how they take your flight, when they find it out, may be well suppose
than describe.
your aunt hervey, it seem, be the first that go down to the ivy
summer-house, in order to acquaint you that their search be over. Betty
follow she; and they not find you there, go on towards the
cascade, accord to a hint of your.
return by the garden-door, they meet a servant [they donot say, it be
Joseph Leman; but it be very likely that it be he] run, as he say,
from pursue Mr. Lovelace (a great hedge-stake in his hand, and out of
breath) to alarm the family.
if it be this fellow, and if he be employ in the double agency of
cheat they, and cheat you, what shall we think of the wretch you
be with? run away from he, my dear, if so--no matter to whom--or marry
he, if you cannot.
your aunt and all your family be accordingly alarm by this fellow--
evidently when too late for pursuit. they get together, and when a
posse, run to the place of interview; and some of they as far as to the
track of the chariot wheel, without stop. and have hear the
man's tale upon the spot, a general lamentation, a mutual upbraiding, and
rage, and grief, be echo from the different person, accord to
their different temper and conception. and they return like fool as
they go.
your brother, at first, order horse and armed man to be get ready for
a pursuit. solme and your uncle Tony be to be of the party. but your
mother and your aunt Hervey dissuade they from it, for fear of add
evil to evil; not doubt but Lovelace have take measure to support
himself in what he have do; and especially when the servant declare,
that he see you run with he as fast as you could set foot to the ground;
and that there be several armed man on horseback at a small distance
off.
***
my mother's absence be owe to her suspicion, that the Knolly's be to
assist in our correspondence. she make they a visit upon it. she do
every thing at once. and they have promise, that no more letter shall
be leave there, without her knowledge.
but Mr. Hickman have engage one Filmer, a husbandman in the lane we call
Finch-lane, near we, to receive they. thither you will be pleased to
direct your, under cover, to Mr. John Soberton; and Mr. Hickman himself
will call for they there; and there shall leave mine. it go against I
too, to make he so useful to I. he look already so proud upon it! I
shall have he [who know?] give himself air--he have well consider, that
the favour he have be long aim at, may put he into a very dangerous,
a very ticklish situation. he that can oblige, may disoblige--happy for
some people not to have it in their power to offend!
I will have patience, if I can, for a while, to see if these bustling in
my mother will subside--but upon my word, I will not long bear this
usage.
sometimes I be ready to think, that my mother carry it thus on purpose
to tire I out, and to make I the soon marry. if I find it to be so,
and that Hickman, in order to make a merit with I, be in the low plot,
I will never bear he in my sight.
Plotting wretch, as I doubt your man be, I wish to heaven that you be
married, that you might brave they all, and not be force to hide
yourself, and be hurry from one inconvenient place to another. I
charge you, omit not to lay hold on any handsome opportunity that may
offer for that purpose.
here again come my mother--
***
we look mighty glum upon each other, I can tell you. she have not good
harlowe I at this rate--I willnot bear it.
I have a vast deal to write. I know not what to write first. yet my
mind be full, and ready to run over.
I be get into a private corner of the garden, to be out of her way.--lord
help these mothers!--Do they think they can prevent a daughter's writing,
or do any thing she have a mind to do, by suspicion, watchfulness, and
scolding?--they have well place a confidence in one by half--a generous
mind scorn to abuse a generous confidence.
you have a nice, a very nice part to act with this wretch--who yet have, I
think, but one plain path before he. I pity you--but you must make the
good of the lot you have be force to draw. yet I see your
difficulties.--But, if he do not offer to abuse your confidence, I would
have you seem at least to place some in he.
if you think not of marry soon, I approve of your resolution to fix
somewhere out of his reach. and if he know not where to find you, so
much the well. yet I verily believe, they would force you back, could
they but come at you, if they be not afraid of he.
I think, by all mean, you should demand of both your trustee to be put
in possession of your own estate. mean time I have sixty guineas at your
service. I beg you will command they. before they be go, Iwill take
care you shall be far supply. I donot think youwill have a shilling
or a shilling's worth of your own from your relation, unless you extort
it from they.
as they believe you go away by your own consent, they be, it seem,
equally surprised and glad that you have leave your jewel and money
behind you, and have contrive for clothe so ill. very little
likelihood this shews of their answer your request.
indeed every one who know not what I now know, must be at a loss to
account for your flight, as they will call it. and how, my dear, can one
report it with any tolerable advantage to you?--To say, you do not
intend it when you meet he, who will believe it?--To say, that a person
of your know steadiness and punctilio be over-persuade when you give
he the meeting, how will that sound?--to say, you be trick out of
yourself, and people be give credit to it, how disreputable!--And
while unmarried, and yet with he, the man a man of such a character,
what would it not lead a censuring world to think?
I want to see how you put it in your letter for your clothe.
as you may depend upon all the little spiteful thing they can offer,
instead of send what you write for, pray accept the sum that I tender.
what will see guineas do?--and I will find a way to send you also any of
my clothe and linen for present supply. I beg, my dear Clarissa, that
you will not put your Anna Howe upon a footing with Lovelace, in refuse
to accept of my offer. if you do not oblige I, I shall be apt to think
you rather incline to be oblige to he, than to favour I. and if I
find this, I shall not know how to reconcile it with your delicacy in
other respect.
pray inform I of every thing that pass between you and he. my care
for you (however needless, from your own prudence) make I wish you to
continue to be every minute. if any thing occur that you would tell I
of if I be present, fail not to put it down in writing, although from
your natural diffidence, it should not appear to you altogether so worthy
of your pen, or my knowing. a stander-by may see more of the game than
one that play. great consequence, like great folk, generally owe
their greatness to small cause, and little incident.
upon the whole, I do not now think it be in your power to dismiss he
when you please. I apprize you beforehand, that it would not. I
repeat, therefore, that be I you, I would at least seem to place some
confidence in he. so long as he be decent, you may. very visibly
observable, to such delicacy as your, must be that behaviour in he,
which will make he unworthy of some confidence.
your relation, accord to what old Antony say to my mother, and she
to I, (by way of threaten, that you will not gain your suppose end
upon they by your flight,) seem to expect that you will throw yourself
into Lady Betty's protection; and that she will offer to mediate for you.
and they vow, that they will never hearken to any term of accommodation
that shall come from that quarter; for I dare aver, that your brother and
sister will not let they cool--at least, till their uncle have make such
disposition, and perhaps your father too, as they would have they make.
as this letter will apprize you of an alteration in the place to which
you must direct your next, I send it by a friend of Mr. Hickman, who may
be depend upon. he have business in the neighbourhood of Mrs. Sorlings;
and he know she. he will return to Mr. Hickman this night; and bring
back any letter you shall have ready to send, or can get ready. it be
moon-light. hewill not mind wait for you. I choose not to send by any
of Mr. Hickman's servant--at present, however. every hour be now, or
may be, important; and may make an alteration in your resolution
necessary.
I hear at this instant, my mother call about she, and put every
body into motion. she will soon, I suppose, make I and my employment
the subject of her inquiry.
Adieu, my dear. may heaven preserve you, and restore you with honour as
unsullie as your mind to
your ever affectionate
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER ix
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY AFTERNOON, APRIL 13.
I be infinitely concern, my ever dear and ever kind friend, that I be
the sad occasion of the displeasure between your mother and you.--how
many person have I make unhappy.
have I not to console myself, that my error be not owe to wicked
precipitation, I should be the most miserable of all creature. as it
be, I be enough punish in the loss of my character, more valuable to I
than my life; and in the cruel doubt and perplexity which, conflict
with my hope, and each get the victory by turn, harrow up my soul
between they.
I think, however, that you should obey your mother, and decline a
correspondence with I; at least for the present. take care how you fall
into my error; for that begin with carry on a prohibit
correspondence; a correspondence which I think it in my power to
discontinue at pleasure. my talent be scribble; and I the readier fall
into this freedom, as I find delight in writing; have motif too,
which I think laudable; and, at one time, the permission of all my
friend; to write to he.*
* see Vol. I. Letter III.
yet, as to this correspondence, what hurt could arise from it, if your
mother could be prevail upon to permit it to be continued?--so much
prudence and discretion as you have; and you, in write to I, lie
under no temptation of follow so bad an example as I have set--my
letter too occasionally fill with self-accusation.
I thank you, my dear, most cordially I thank you, for your kind offer.
you may be assure, that I will soon be beholden to you, than to any
body live. to Mr. Lovelace the last. do not therefore think, that by
decline your favour, I have an intention to lay myself under
obligation to he.
I be willing to hope (notwithstanding what you write) that my friend
will send I my little money, together with my clothe. they be too
considerate, some of they at least, to permit that I should be put to
such low difficulty. perhaps, they will not be in haste to oblige I.
but, if not, I cannot yet want. I believe you think, I must not dispute
with Mr. Lovelace the expense of the road and lodging, till I can get
a fixed abode. but I hope soon to put an end even to those small sort of
obligation.
small hope indeed of a reconciliation from your account of my uncle's
visit to your mother, in order to set she against an almost friendless
creature whom once he love! but be it not my duty to try for it? ought
I to widen my error by obstinacy and resentment, because of their
resentment; which must appear reasonable to they, as they suppose my
flight premeditate; and as they be make to believe, that I be capable
of triumph in it, and over they, with the man they hate? when I have
do all in my power to restore myself to their favour, I shall have the
less to reproach myself with.
these consideration make I waver about follow your advice, in
relation to marriage; and the rather, as he be so full of complaisance
with regard to my former condition, which he call my injunction. nor
can I now, that my friend, as you inform I, have so strenuously
declare against accept of the mediation of the lady of Mr.
Lovelace's family, put myself into their protection, unless I be resolve
to give up all hope of a reconciliation with my own.
yet if any happy introduction could be think of to effect this desirable
purpose, how shall term be propose to my father, while this man be with
I, or near I? on the other hand, should they in his absence get I back
by force, (and this, you be of opinion, they would attempt to do, but in
fear of he,) how will their severe act of compulsion be justify by
my flight from them!--mean while, to what censure, as you remind I, do I
expose myself, while he and I be together and unmarried!--yet [can I with
patience ask the question?] be it in my power?--o my dear Miss Howe! and
be I so reduced, as that, to save the poor remain of my reputation in the
world's eye, I must watch the gracious motion from this man's lip?
be my cousin Morden in England, all might still perhaps be determine
happily.
if no other mediation than this can be procure to set on foot the
wish-for reconciliation, and if my situation with Mr. Lovelace alter
not in the interim, I must endeavour to keep myself in a state of
independence till he arrive, that I may be at liberty to govern myself by
his advice and direction.
I will acquaint you, as you desire, with all that pass between Mr.
Lovelace and I. Hitherto I have not discover any thing in his
behaviour that be very exceptionable. yet I cannot say, that I think the
respect he shews I, an easy, unrestrained, and natural respect, although
I can hardly tell where the fault be.
but he have doubtless an arrogant and encroach spirit. nor be he so
polite as his education, and other advantage, might have make one expect
he to be. he seem, in short, to be one, who have always have too much of
his own will to study to accommodate himself to that of other.
as to the placing of some confidence in he, I shall be as ready to take
your advice in this particular, as in all other, and as he will be to
deserve it. but trick away as I be by he, not only against my
judgment, but my inclination, can he, or any body, expect, that I should
immediately treat he with complaisance, as if I acknowledge obligation
to he for carry I away?--if I do, must he not either think he a
vile dissembler before he gain that point, or afterwards?
indeed, indeed, my dear, I could tear my hair, on reconsider what you
write (as to the probability that the dread Wednesday be more dreaded
than it need to be) to think, that I should be thus trick by this
man; and that, in all likelihood, through his vile agent Joseph Leman.
so premeditated and elaborate a wickedness as it must be!--must I not,
with such a man, be want to myself, if I be not jealous and
vigilant?--yet what a life to live for a spirit so open, and naturally so
unsuspicious, as mine?
I be oblige to Mr. Hickman for the assistance he be so kindly ready to
give to our correspondence. he be so little likely to make to himself an
additional merit with the daughter upon it, that I shall be very sorry,
if he risk any thing with the mother by it.
I be now in a state of obligation: so must rest satisfied with whatever I
cannot help. whom have I the power, once so precious to I, of oblige?
--What I mean, my dear, be, that I ought, perhaps, to expect, that my
influence over you be weaken by my indiscretion. nevertheless, I
will not, if I can help it, desert myself, nor give up the privilege you
use to allow I, of tell you what I think of such part of your
conduct as I may not approve.
you must permit I therefore, severe as your mother be against an
undesigne offender, to say that I think your liveliness to her
inexcusable--to pass over, for this time, what nevertheless concern I
not a little, the free treatment you almost indiscriminately give to my
relation.
if you will not, for your duty's sake, forbear your taunting and
impatience, let I beseech you, that you will for mine.--since otherwise,
your mother may apprehend that my example, like a leaven, be work
itself into the mind of her beloved daughter. and may not such an
apprehension give she an irreconcilable displeasure against I?
I enclose the copy of my letter to my sister, which you be desirous to
see. you will observe, that although I have not demand my estate in
form, and of my trustee, yet that I have hint at leave to retire to
it. how joyfully would I keep my word, if they would accept of the offer
I renew!--it be not proper, I believe you will think, on many account,
to own that I be carry off against my inclination. I be, my dearest
friend,
your ever oblige and affectionate,
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER x
to MISS arabella HARLOWE
[enclosed to miss HOWE in the PRECEDING.]
ST. ALBAN'S, APR. 11.
MY DEAR SISTER,
I have, I confess, be guilty of an action which carry with it a rash
and undutiful appearance. and I should have think it an inexcusable
one, have I be use with less severity than I have be of late; and have
I not have too great reason to apprehend, that I be to be make a
sacrifice to a man I could not bear to think of. but what be do, be
do--perhaps I could wish it have not; and that I have trust to the
relenting of my dear and honourable parents.--yet this from no other
motif but those of duty to them.--To whom I be ready to return (if I
may not be permit to retire to the Grove) on condition which I before
offer to comply with.
nor shall I be in any sort of dependence upon the person by whose mean I
have take this truly-reluctant step, inconsistent with any reasonable
engagement I shall enter into, if I be not far precipitate. let I
not have it to say, now at this important crisis! that I have a sister,
but not a friend in that sister. my reputation, dearer to I than life,
(whatever you may imagine from the step I have take,) be suffer. a
little lenity will, even yet, in a great measure, restore it, and make
that pass for a temporary misunderstanding only, which otherwise will be
a stain as durable as life, upon a creature who have already be treat
with great unkindness, to use no harsh a word.
for your own sake therefore, for my brother's sake, by whom (I must say)
I have be thus precipitate, and for all the family's sake, aggravate
not my fault, if, on recollect every thing, you think it one; nor by
widen the unhappy difference, expose a sister for ever--pray
your affectionate
CL. HARLOWE.
I shall take it for a very great favour to have my clothe directly send
I, together with fifty guineas, which you will find in my escritoire (of
which I enclose the key); as also of the divinity and miscellany class
of my little library; and, if it be think fit, my jewel--direct for
I, to be leave till call for, at Mr. Osgood's, near Soho-square.
LETTER XI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
Mr. Lovelace, in continuation of his last letter, (no. VII.) give an
account to his friend (pretty much to the same effect with the lady's)
of all that pass between they at the inn, in the journey, and till
their fixing at Mrs. Sorling's; to avoid repetition, those passage in
his narrative be extract, which will serve to embellish she's; to
open his view; or to display the humourous talent he be note for.
at their alighting at the inn at St. Alban's on Monday night, thus he
write:
the people who come about we, as we alight, seem by their jaw-fall
face, and goggle eye, to wonder at behold a charming young lady,
majesty in her air and aspect, so composedly dress, yet with feature
so discompose, come off a journey which make the cattle smoke, and the
servant sweat. I read their curiosity in their face, and my beloved's
uneasiness in she's. she cast a conscious glance, as she alight, upon
her habit, which be no habit; and repulsively, as I may say, quit my
assist hand, hurry into the house.***
Ovid be not a great master of metamorphosis than thy friend. to the
mistress of the house I instantly change she into a sister, bring off
by surprise from a near relation's, (where she have winter,) to prevent
her marry a confounded rake, [I love always to go as near the truth as
I can,] whom her father and mother, her eld sister, and all her love
uncle, aunt, and cousin abhor. this account for my charmer's
expect sullen; for her displeasure when she be to join I again, be
it to hold; for her unsuitable dress upon the road; and, at the same
time, give she a proper and seasonable assurance of my honourable view.
upon the debate between the lady and he, and particularly upon that part
where she upbraid he with put a young creature upon make a
sacrifice of her duty and conscience, he write:
all these, and still more mortifying thing, she say.
I hear she in silence. but when it come to my turn, I plead, I
argue, I answer she, as well as I could.--and when humility would not
do, I raise my voice, and suffer my eye to sparkle with anger; hop
to take advantage of that sweet cowardice which be so amiable in the sex,
and to which my victory over this proud beauty be principally owe.
she be not intimidate, however, and be go to rise upon I in her
temper; and would have break in upon my defence. but when a man talk
to a woman upon such subject, let she be ever so much in alt, 'tis
strange, if he cannot throw out a tub to the whale;--that be to say, if
he cannot divert she from resent one bold thing, by utter two or
three full as bold; but for which more favourable interpretation will
lie.
to that part, where she tell he of the difficulty she make to
correspond with he at first, thus he write:
very true, my precious!--And innumerable have be the difficulty thou
hast make I struggle with. but one day thou may wish, that thou
hadst spar this boast; as well as those other pretty haughtiness,
'that thou didst not reject Solmes for my sake: that my glory, if I
value myself upon carry thee off, be thy shame: that I have more
merit with myself than with thee, or any body else: [what a coxcomb she
make I, Jack!] that thou wish thyself in thy father's house again,
whatever be to be the consequence.'--If I forgive thee, charmer, for
these hint, for these reflection, for these wish, for these
contempt, I be not the Lovelace I have be repute to be; and that thy
treatment of I shews that thou think I be.
in short, her whole air throughout this debate express a majestic kind
of indignation, which imply a believed superiority of talent over the
person to whom she speak.
Thou hast hear I often expatiate upon the pitiful figure a man must
make, whose wife have, or believe she have, more sense than himself. a
thousand reason could I give why I ought not to think of marry Miss
Clarissa Harlowe; at least till I can be sure, that she love I with the
preference I must expect from a wife.
I begin to stagger in my resolution. ever averse as I be to the
hymeneal shackle, how easily will prejudice recur! Heaven give I the
heart to be honest to my Clarissa!--There's a prayer, Jack! if I should
not be hear, what a sad thing would that be, for the most admirable of
women!--Yet, as I do no often trouble Heaven with my prayer, who know
but this may be grant?
but there lie before I such charming difficulty, such scenery for
intrigue, for stratagem, for enterprize. what a horrible thing, that my
talent point all that way!--when I know what be honourable and just; and
would almost wish to be honest?--almost, I say; for such a varlet be I,
that I cannot altogether wish it, for the soul of me!--such a triumph
over the whole sex, if I can subdue this lady! my maiden vow, as I may
call it!--For do not the sex begin with I? and do this lady spare
I? think thou, Jack, that I should have spar my Rosebud, have I be
set at defiance thus?--Her grandmother besought I, at first, to spare
her Rosebud: and when a girl be put, or put herself into a man's power,
what can he wish for far? while I always consider opposition and
resistance as a challenge to do my bad.*
* see Vol. I. Letter XXXIV.
why, why, will the dear creature take such pain to appear all ice to I?
--why will she, by her pride, awaken mine?--hast thou not see, in the
above, how contemptibly she treat me?--what have I not suffer for she,
and even from her!--ought I to bear be tell, that she will despise I,
if I value myself above that odious solme?
then she cut I short in all my ardour. to vow fidelity, be by a
curse turn upon I, to shew, that there be reason, in my own opinion,
for doubt of it. the very same reflection upon I once before.*
* see Vol. II. Letter XIII.
in my power, or out of my power, all one to this lady.--So, Belford, my
poor vow be cram down my throat, before they can well rise to my
lip. and what can a lover say to his mistress, if she will neither let
he lie nor swear?
one little piece of artifice I have recourse to: when she push so hard
for I to leave she, I make a request to she, upon a condition she could
not refuse; and pretend as much gratitude upon she grant it, as if
it be a favour of the last consequence.
and what be this? but to promise what she have before promise, 'never to
marry any other man, while I be live, and single, unless I should give
her cause for high disgust against I.' this, you know, be promise
nothing, because she could be offend at any time, and be to be the
sole judge of the offence. but it shew she how reasonable and just my
expectation be; and that I be no encroacher.
she consent; and ask what security I expect? her word only.
she give I her word: but I besought her excuse for seal it: and in
the same moment (since to have wait for consent would have be ask
for a denial) salute she. and, believe I, or not, but, as I hope to
live, it be the first time I have the courage to touch her charming lip
with mine. and this I tell thee, Belford, that that single pressure (as
modestly put too, as if I be as much a virgin as herself, that she
might not be afraid of I another time) delight I more than ever I be
delighted by the ultimatum with any other woman.--so precious do awe,
reverence, and apprehend prohibition, make a favour!
and now, Belford, I be only afraid that I shall be too cunning; for she
do not at present talk enough for I. I hardly know what to make of
the dear creature yet.
I topt the brother's part on Monday night before the landlady at St.
Alban's; ask my sister's pardon for carry she off so unprepared
for a journey; prate of the joy my father and mother, and all our
friend, would have in receive she; and this with so many
circumstance, that I perceive, by a look she give I, that go through
my very rein, that I have go too far. I apologize for it indeed when
alone; but could not penetrate for the soul of I, whether I make the
matter well or bad by it.
but I be of too frank a nature: my success, and the joy I have because of
the jewel I be half in possession of, have not only unlocked my bosom, but
leave the door quite open.
this be a confound sly sex. would she but speak out, as I do--but I
must learn reserve of she.
she must need be unprovide of money: but have too much pride to accept
of any from I. I would have have she go to town [to town, if possible,
must I get she to consent to go] in order to provide herself with the
rich of silk which that can afford. but neither be this to be
assent to. and yet, as my intelligencer acquaint I, her implacable
relation be resolve to distress she all they can.
these wretch have be most gloriously raving, ever since her flight;
and still, thank Heaven, continue to rave; and will, I hope, for a
twelvemonth to come. now, at last, it be my day!
bitterly do they regret, that they permit her poultry-visit, and
garden-walk, which give she the opportunity to effect an escape which
they suppose preconcerte. for, as to her dining in the ivy-bower, they
have a cunning design to answer upon she in that permission, as Betty tell
Joseph her lover.*
* Vol. II. Letter XLVII. paragr. 37, 38.
they lose, they say, and excellent pretence for confine she more
closely on my threatening to rescue she, if they offer to carry she
against her will to old Antony's moate house.* for this, as I tell thee
at the Hart, and as I once hint to the dear creature herself,** they
have it in deliberation to do; apprehend, that I might attempt to carry
she off, either with or without her consent, on some one of those
connive-at excursion.
* ibid. let. XXXVI. and let. XXXIX. par. I.
** ibid. let. XXXVI. par. 4. see also let. XV. par. 3.
but here my honest Joseph, who give I the information, be of admirable
service to I. I have teach he to make the Harlowes believe, that I be
as communicative to my servant, as their stupid James be to Joseph:*
Joseph, as they suppose, by tamper with Will,** get all my secret,
and be acquaint with all my motion: and have also undertake to
watch all those of his young lady,*** the wise family be secure; and so
be my beloved; and so be I.
* ibid. letter XLVII. par. 6, and 39.
** this will be far explain in Letter XXI. of this volume.
*** see Vol. I. Letters XXXI. and XXXIV.
I once have it in my head (and I hint it to thee* in a former) in case
such a step should be necessary, to attempt to carry she off by surprise
from the wood-house; as it be remote from the dwelling-house. this, have
I attempt, I should have certainly effect, by the help of the
confraternity: and it would have be an action worthy of we all.--But
Joseph's conscience, as he call it, stand in my way; for he think it
must have be know to be do by his connivance. I could, I dare say,
have overcome this scruple, as easily as I do many of the other, have I
not depend at one time upon her meet I at midnight or late hour
[and, if she have, she never would have go back]; at other time, upon
the cunning family's do my work for I, equally against their
knowledge or their will.
* see Vol. I. Letter XXXV.
for well I know, that James and Arabella be determine never to leave
off their foolish trial and provocation, till, by tire she out, they
have either make her Solmes's wife, or guilty of some such rashness as
should throw she for ever out of the favour of both her uncle; though
they have too much malice in their head to intend service to I by their
persecution of she.
LETTER XII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[in CONTINUATION.]
I oblige the dear creature highly, I could perceive, by bring Mrs.
Greme to attend she, and to suffer that good woman's recommendation of
lodging to take place, on her refusal to go to the Lawn.
she must believe all my view to be honourable, when I have provide for
her no particular lodging, leave it to her choice, whether she would
go to M. Hall, to the Lawn, to London, or to either of the dowager of my
family.
she be visibly pleased with my motion of put Mrs. Greme into the
chaise with she, and rid on horseback myself.
some people would have be apprehensive of what might pass between she
and Mrs. Greme. but as all my relation either know or believe the
justice of my intention by she, I be in no pain on that account; and
the less, as I have always be above hypocrisy, or wish to be think
well than I be. and indeed, what occasion have a man to be an
hypocrite, who have hitherto find his view upon the sex well answer
for his be know to be a rake? why, even my beloved here deny not
to correspond with I, though her friend have teach she to think I a
libertine--who then would be try a new and bad character?
and then Mrs. Greme be a pious matron, and would not have be bias
against truth on any consideration. she use formerly, while there be
any hope of my reformation, to pray for I. she hardly continue the
good custom, I doubt; for her worthy lord make no scruple occasionally
to rave against I to man, woman, and child, as they come in his way. he
be very undutiful, as thou know. surely, I may say so; since all
duty be reciprocal. but for Mrs. Greme, poor woman! when my lord have
the gout, and be at the Lawn, and the chaplain not to be find, she pray
by he, or read a chapter to he in the Bible, or some other good book.
be it not therefore right to introduce such a good sort of woman to the
dear creature; and to leave they, without reserve, to their own talk!--
and very busy in talk I see they be, as they ride; and feel it too; for
most charmingly glow my cheek.
I hope I shall be honest, I once more say: but as we frail mortal be
not our own master at all time, I must endeavour to keep the dear
creature unapprehensive, until I can get she to our acquaintance's in
London, or to some other safe place there. should I, in the interim,
give she the least room for suspicion; or offer to restrain she; she can
make her appeal to stranger, and call the country in upon I; and,
perhaps, throw herself upon her relation on their own term. and be I
now to lose she, how unworthy should I be to be the prince and leader of
such a confraternity as ours!--how unable to look up among man! or to
shew my face among woman!
as thing at present stand, she dare not own that she go off against
her own consent; and I have take care to make all the implacable
believe, that she escape with it.
she have receive an answer from Miss Howe, to the letter write to she
from St. Alban's.*
* see Vol. II. Letter XLVIII.
whatever be the content, I know not; but she be drown in tear on
the perusal of it. and I be the sufferer.
Miss Howe be a charming creature too; but confoundedly smart and
spiritful. I be a good deal afraid of she. her mother can hardly keep
she in. I must continue to play off old Antony, by my honest Joseph,
upon that mother, in order to manage that daughter, and oblige my beloved
to an absolute dependence upon myself.*
* see Vol. I. Letter XXXI.
Mrs. Howe be impatient of contradiction. so be Miss. a young lady who
be sensible that she have all the material requisite herself, to be
under maternal controul;--fine ground for a man of intrigue to build
upon!--a mother over-notable; a daughter over-sensible; and their
Hickman, who be--over-neither: but merely a passive--
only that I have an object still more desirable!--
yet how unhappy, that these two young lady live so near each other,
and be so well acquainted! else how charmingly might I have manage
they both!
but one man cannot have every woman worth have--Pity though--when the
man be such a very clever fellow!
LETTER XIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[in CONTINUATION.]
never be there such a pair of scribble lover as we;--yet perhaps whom
it so much concern to keep from each other what each write. she willnot
have any thing else to do. I would, if shewould let I. I be not reform
enough for a husband.--patience be a virtue, Lord M. say. slow and
sure, be another of his sentence. if I have not a great deal of that
virtue, I should not have wait the Harlowes own time of ripen into
execution my plot upon themselves and upon their goddess daughter.
my beloved have be write to her saucy friend, I believe, all that have
befall she, and what have pass between we hitherto. she will possibly
have fine subject for her pen, if she be as minute as I be.
I would not be so barbarous as to permit old Antony to set Mrs. Howe
against she, do I not dread the consequence of the correspondence
between the two young lady. so lively the one, so vigilant, so prudent
both, who would not wish to outwit such girl, and to be able to twirl
they round his finger?
my charmer have write to her sister for her clothe, for some gold, and
for some of her book. what book can tell she more than she know? but
I can. so she have well study I.
she may write. she must be oblige to I at last, with all her pride.
Miss Howe indeed will be ready enough to supply she; but I question,
whether she can do it without her mother, who be as covetous as the
grave. and my agent's agent, old Antony, have already give the mother a
hint which will make her jealous of pecuniarie.
besides, if Miss Howe have money by she, I can put her mother upon
borrow it of she: nor blame I, Jack, for contrivance that have their
foundation in generosity. Thou know my spirit; and that I should be
proud to lay an obligation upon my charmer to the amount of half, nay, to
the whole of my estate. Lord M. have more for I than I can ever wish
for. my predominant passion be girl, not gold; nor value I this, but as
it help I to that, and give I independence.
I be force to put it into the sweet novice's head, as well for my sake
as for hers (lest we should be traceable by her direction) whither to
direct the sending of her clothe, if they incline to do she that small
piece of justice.
if they do I shall begin to dread a reconciliation; and must be force to
muse for a contrivance or two to prevent it, and to avoid mischief. for
that (as I have tell honest Joseph Leman) be a great point with I.
thou wilt think I a sad fellow, I doubt. but be not all rake sad
fellows?--And art not thou, to thy little power, as bad as any? if thou
dost all thatbe in thy head and in thy heart to do, thou art bad than
I; for I do not, I assure you.
I propose, and she consent, that her clothe, or whatever else her
relation should think fit to send she, should be direct to thy cousin
Osgood's. let a special messenger, at my charge, bring I any letter, or
portable parcel, that shall come. if not portable, give I notice of it.
but thou'lt have no trouble of this sort from her relation, I dare be
swear. and in this assurance, I will leave they, I think, to act upon
their own head. a man would have no more to answer for than need must.
but one thing, while I think of it; which be of great importance to be
attend to--you must hereafter write to I in character, as I shall do
to you. it would be a confounded thing to be blow up by a train of my
own laying. and who know what opportunitie a man in love may have
against himself? in change a coat or waistcoat, something might be
forget. I once suffer that way. then for the sex's curiosity, it
be but remember, in order to guard against it, that the name of their
common mother be Eve.
another thing remember; I have change my name: change it without an act
of parliament. 'Robert Huntingford' it be now. Continue Esquire. it be
a respectable addition, although every sorry fellow assume it, almost to
the banishment of the usual travel one of Captain. 'to be leave till
call for, at the post-house at Hertford.'
upon naming thee, she ask thy character. I give thee a well than
thou deservest, in order to do credit to myself. yet I tell she, that
thou wert an awkward fellow; and this to do credit to thee, that she may
not, if ever she be to see thee, expect a cleverer man than shewill find.
yet thy apparent awkwardness befriend thee not a little: for wert thou a
sightly mortal, people would discover nothing extraordinary in thee, when
they converse with thee: whereas, see a bear, they be surprised to
find in thee any thing that be like a man. felicitate thyself then upon
thy defect; which be evidently thy principal perfection; and which
occasion thee a distinction which otherwise thou wouldst never have.
the lodging we be in at present be not convenient. I be so delicate
as to find fault with they, as communicate with each other, because I
know she would; and tell she, that be I sure she be safe from pursuit,
I would leave she in they, (since such be her earnest desire and
expectation,) and go to London.
she must be an infidel against all reason and appearance, if I do not
banish even the shadow of mistrust from her heart.
here be two young likely girl, daughter of the widow sorling; thatbe
the name of our landlady.
I have only, at present, admire they in their dairy-work. how greedily
do the sex swallow praise!--Did I not once, in the street of London, see
a well-dress, handsome girl laugh, bridle, and visibly enjoy the
praise of a sooty dog, a chimney-sweeper; who, with his empty sack
across his shoulder, after give she the way, stopt, and hold up his
brush and shovel in admiration of her?--Egad, girl, think I, I despise
thee as Lovelace: but be I the chimney-sweeper, and could only contrive
to get into thy presence, my life to thy virtue, I would have thee.
so pleased be I with the young sorling, for the elegance of her work,
that I kiss she, and she make I a courtesy for my condescension; and
blush, and seem sensible all over: encouraging, yet innocently, she
adjust her handkerchief, and look towards the door, as much as to
say, she would not tell, be I to kiss she again.
her eld sister popt upon she. the conscious girl blush again, and
look so confounded, that I make an excuse for she, which gratify
both. Mrs. Betty, say I, I have be so much pleased with the neatness
of your dairy-work, that I could not help salute your sister: you have
your share of merit in they, I be sure--give I leave----
good souls!--i like they both--she courtesie too!--how I love a grateful
temper! o that my Clarissa be but half so acknowledge!
I think I must get one of they to attend my charmer when she remove--the
mother seem to be a notable woman. she have not good, however, be too
notable: since, be she by suspicion to give I a face of difficulty to
the matter, it would prepare I for a trial with one or both the
daughter.
allow I a little rhodamantade, Jack--but really and truly my heart be
fix. I can think of no creature breathing of the sex, but my Gloriana.
LETTER XIV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[in CONTINUATION.]
this be Wednesday; the day that I be to have lose my charmer for ever to
the hideous solme! with what high satisfaction and heart'-ease can I
now sit down, and triumph over my man in straw at Harlowe-place! yet
'tis perhaps well for they, that she get off as she do. who know what
consequence might have follow upon my attend she in; or (if she have
not meet I) upon my project visit, follow by my myrmidon?
but have I even go in with she unaccompanied, I think I have but little
reason for apprehension: for well thou know, that the tame spirit
which value themselves upon reputation, and be hold within the skirt of
the law by political consideration only, may be compare to an
infectious spider; which will run into his hole the moment one of his
thread be touch by a finger that can crush he, leave all his toil
defenceless, and to be brush down at the will of the potent invader.
while a silly fly, that have neither courage nor strength to resist, no
soon give notice, by its buz and its struggle, of its being
entangle, but out step the self-circumscribe tyrant, wind round and
round the poor insect, till he cover it with his bowel-spin toil; and
when so fully secure, that it can neither move leg nor wing, suspend
it, as if for a spectacle to be exult over: then stalk to the door
of his cell, turn about, glote over it at a distance; and, sometimes
advance, sometimes retire, prey at leisure upon its vital.
but now I think of it, will not this comparison do as well for the
entangled girl, as for the tame spirits?--better o' my conscience!--'tis
but compare the spider to us brave fellow, and it quadrate.
whatever our heart be in, our head will follow. begin with spider,
with fly, with what we will, girl be the centre of gravity, and we all
naturally tend to it.
nevertheless, to recur; I cannot but observe, that these tame spirit
stand a poor chance in a fairly offensive war with such of we mad fellow
as be above all law, and scorn to sculk behind the hypocritical screen
of reputation.
Thou know that I never scruple to throw myself amongst number of
adversary; the more the safe: one or two, no fear, will take the part
of a single adventurer, if not intentionally, in fact; hold he in,
while other hold in the principal antagonist, to the augmentation of
their mutual prowess, till both be prevail upon to compromise, or one
to be absent: so that, upon the whole, the law-breaker have the
advantage of the law-keeper, all the world over; at least for a time,
and till they have run to the end of their race. add to this, in the
question between I and the Harlowes, that the whoe family of they must
know that they have injure I--must therefore be afraid of I. do they
not, at their own church, cluster together like bee, when they see I
enter it? nor know they which should venture out first, when the service
be over.
James, indeed, be not there. if he have, he would perhaps have
endeavour to look valiant. but there be a sort of valour in the face,
which shews fear in the heart: just such a face would James Harlowe's
have be, have I make they a visit.
when I have have such a face and such a heart as I have describe to deal
with, I have be all calm and serene, and leave it to the friend of the
blusterer (as I have do to the Harlowes) to do my work for I.
I be about muster up in my memory, all that I have ever do, that have
be think praise-worthy, or but barely tolerable. I be afraid thou
canst not help I to many remembrance of this sort; because I never be
so bad as since I have know thee.
have I not have it in my heart to do some good that thou canst not remind
I of? study for I, Jack. I have recollect some instance which I
think will tell in--but see if thou canst not help I to some which I may
have forget.
this I may venture to say, that the principal blot in my escutcheon be
owe to these girl, these confound girl. but for they, I could go
to church with a good conscience: but when I do, there they be. every
where do Satan spread his snare for I! but, how I think of it, what
if our governor should appoint church for the woman only, and other
for the men?--full as proper, I think, for the promoting of true piety in
both, [much well than the synagogue-lattice,] as separate boarding-
school for their education.
there be already male and female dedication of church.
St. Swithin's, St. Stephen's, St. Thomas's, St. George's, and so forth,
might be appropriate to the man; and Santa Catharina's, Santa Anna's,
Santa Maria's, Santa Margaretta's, for the woman.
yet be it so, and life to be the forfeiture of be find at the
female church, I believe that I, like a second Clodius, should change
my dress, to come at my Portia or Pompeia, though one the daughter of a
Cato, the other the wife of a Caesar.
but how I excurse!--yet thou usedst to say, thou likedst my excursion.
if thou dost, thou'lt have enow of they: for I never have a subject I so
much adore; and with which I shall probably be compel to have so much
patience before I strike the blow; if the blow I do strike.
but let I call myself back to my recordation-subject--Thou need not
remind I of my Rosebud. I have she in my head; and moreover have
contrive to give my fair-one an hint of that affair, by the agency of
honest Joseph Leman;* although I have not reap the hop-for credit of
her acknowledgement.
* see Vol. II. Letter XXVII.
thatbe the devil; and it be always my hard fate--every thing I do that
be good, be but as I ought!--every thing of a contrary nature be bring
into the most glaring light against I--be this fair? ought not a
balance to be strike; and the credit carry to my account?--yet I must
own too, that I half grudge Johnny this bloom maiden? for, in truth, I
think a fine woman too rich a jewel to hang about a poor man's neck.
surely, Jack, if I be guilty of a fault in my universal adoration of the
sex, the woman in general ought to love I the well for it.
and so they do; I thank they heartily; except here and there a covetous
little rogue come cross I, who, under the pretence of love virtue for
its own sake, want to have I all to herself.
I have ramble enough.
Adieu, for the present.
LETTER XV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY NIGHT, APRIL 13.
I always love writing, and my unhappy situation give I now enough of
it; and you, I fear, too much. I have have another very warm debate with
Mr. Lovelace. it bring on the subject which you advise I not to
decline, when it be handsomely offer. and I want to have either your
acquittal or blame for have suffer it to go off without effect.
the impatient wretch send up to I several time, while I be write my
last to you, to desire my company: yet his business nothing particular;
only to hear he talk. the man seem pleased with his own volubility;
and, whenever he have collect together abundance of smooth thing, he
want I to find an ear for they! yet he need not; for I donot often
gratify he either with give he the praise for his verboseness, or
shew the pleasure in it that he would be fond of.
when I have finish the letter, and give it to Mr. Hickman's friend,
I be go up again, and have get up half a dozen stair; when he
besought be to stop, and hear what he have to say.
nothing, as I say, to any new purpose have he to offer; but complaining;
and those in a manner, and with an air, as I think, that border upon
insolence. he could not live, he tell I, unless he have more of my
company, and of my indulgence too, that I have yet give he.
Hereupon I stept down, and into the parlour, not a little out of humour
with he; and the more, as he have very quietly take up his quarter
here, without talk of remove, as he have promise.
we begin instantly our angry conference. he provoke I; and I repeat
several of the plain thing I have say in our former conversation;
and particularly tell he, that I be every hour more and more
dissatisfied with myself, and with he: that he be not a man, who, in my
opinion, improve upon acquaintance: and that I should not be easy till
he have leave I to myself.
he might be surprised at my warmth, perhaps: but really the man look so
like a simpleton, hesitating, and have nothing to say for himself, or
that should excuse the peremptoriness of his demand upon I, (when he
know I have be write a letter which a gentleman wait for,) that I
fling from he, declare, that I would be mistress of my own time, and
of my own action, and not to be call to account for either.
he be very uneasy till he could again be admit into my company, and
when I be oblige to see he, which be soon than I like, never do
the man put on a more humble and respectful demeanor.
he tell I, that he have, upon this occasion, be enter into himself,
and have find a great deal of reason to blame himself for an impertinency
and inconsideration which, although he mean nothing by it, must be very
disagreeable to one of my delicacy. that have always aim at a manly
sincerity and openness of heart, he have not till now discover, that
both be very consistent with that true politeness, which he fear he
have too much disregarded, while he seek to avoid the contrary extreme;
know, that in I he have to deal with a lady, who despise an
hypocrite, and who be above all flattery. but from this time forth, I
should find such an alteration in his whole behaviour, as might be
expect from a man who know himself to be honour with the presence and
conversation of a person, who have the most delicate mind in the world--
that be his flourish.
I say, that he might perhaps expect congratulation upon the discovery he
have just now make, to wit, that true politeness and sincerity be
reconcilable: but that I, who have, by a perverse fate, be throw into
his company, have abundant reason to regret that he have not soon find
this out.--since, I believe, very few man of birth and education be
stranger to it.
he know not, neither, he say, that he have so badly behave himself, as
to deserve so very severe a rebuke.
perhaps not, I reply: but he might, if so, make another discovery from
what I have say; which might be to my own disadvantage: since, if he have
so much reason to be satisfied with himself, he would see what an
ungenerous person he speak to, who, when he seem to give himself air
of humility, which, perhaps he think beneath he to assume, have not the
civility to make he a compliment upon they; but be ready to take he at
his word.
he have long, with infinite pleasure, the pretend flattery-hater say,
admire my superior talent, and a wisdom in so young a lady, perfectly
suprise.
let I, Madam, say he, stand ever so low in your opinion, I shall
believe all you say to be just; and that I have nothing to do but to
govern myself for the future by your example, and by the standard you
shall be pleased to give I.
I know well, Sir, reply I, than to value myself upon your volubility
of speech. as you pretend to pay so preferable a regard to sincerity,
you shall confine yourself to the strict rule of truth, when you speak
of I, to myself: and then, although you shall be so kind as to imagine
that you have reason to make I a compliment, you will have much more to
pride yourself in those art which have make so extraordinary a young
creature so great a fool.
really, my dear, the man deserve not politer treatment.--And then have he
not make a fool, an egregious fool of me?--i be afraid he himself think
he have.
I be surprised! I be amazed, Madam, return he, at so strange a turn
upon me!--I be very unhappy, that nothing I can do or say will give you a
good opinion of me!--would to heaven that I know what I can do to obtain
the honour of your confidence!
I tell he, that I desire his absence, of all thing. I see not, I
say, that my friend think it worth their while to give I
disturbance: therefore, if he would set out for London, or Berkshire, or
whither he please, it would be most agreeable to I, and most reputable
too.
he would do so, he say, he intend to do so, the moment I be in a
place to my liking--in a place convenient for I.
this, Sir, will be so, say I, when you be not here to break in upon I,
and make the apartment inconvenient.
he do not think this place safe, he reply; and as I intend not to
stay here, he have not be so solicitous, as otherwise he should have
be, to enjoin privacy to his servant, nor to Mrs. Greme at her leave
I; that there be two or three gentleman at the neighbourhood, he say,
with whose servant his gossiping fellow have scrap acquaintance: so
that he could not think of leave I here unguarde and unattended.--But
fix upon any place in England where I could be out of danger, and he
would go to the furthermost part of the king's dominion, if by do so
he could make I easy.
I tell he plainly that I should never be in humour with myself for
meet he; nor with he, for seduce I away: that my regret
increase, instead of diminish: that my reputation be wound: that
nothing I could do would now retrieve it: and that he must not wonder, if
I every hour grow more and more uneasy both with myself and he: that
upon the whole, I be willing to take care of myself; and when he have
leave I, I should well know what to resolve upon, and whither to go.
he wish, he say, he be at liberty, without give I offence, or
be think to intend to infringe the article I have stipulate and
insist upon, to make one humble proposal to I. but the sacred regard
he be determined to pay to all my injunction (reluctantly as I have on
Monday last put it into his power to serve I) would not permit he to
make it, unless I would promise to excuse he, if I do not approve of
it.
I ask, in some confusion, what he would say?
he preface and parade on; and then out come, with great diffidence, and
many apology, and a bashfulness which sit very awkwardly upon he, a
proposal of speedy solemnization: which, he say, would put all right;
and make my first three or four month (which otherwise must be pass in
obscurity and apprehension) a round of visit and visiting to and from
all his relation; to Miss Howe; to whom I please: and would pave the
way to the reconciliation I have so much at heart.
your advice have great weight with I just then, as well as his reason,
and the consideration of my unhappy situation: but what could I say? I
want somebody to speak for I.
the man see I be not angry at his motion. I only blush; and that I be
sure I do up to the ear; and look silly, and like a fool.
he want not courage. would he have have I catch at his first, at his
very first word?--i be silent too--and do not the bold sex take silence
for a mark of a favour!--then, so lately in my father's house! have
also declare to he in my letter, before I have your advice, that I
would not think of marriage till he have pass through a state of
probation, as I may call it--how be it possible I could encourage, with
very ready sign of approbation, such an early proposal? especially so
soon after the free treatment he have provoke from I. if I be to die,
I could not.
he look at I with great confidence; as if (notwithstanding his
contradictory bashfulness) he would look I through; while my eye but
now-and-then could glance at him.--He beg my pardon with great
humility: he be afraid I would think he deserve no other answer, but
that of a contemptuous silence. true love be fearful of offend.
[take care, Mr. Lovelace, think I, how your's be try by that rule].
indeed so sacred a regard [foolish man!] would he have to all my
declaration make before I honour him--
I would hear he no far; but withdraw in a confusion too visible, and
leave he to make his nonsensical flourish to himself.
I will only add, that, if he really wish for a speedy solemnization, he
never could have have a lucky time to press for my consent to it. but
he let it go off; and indignation have take place of it. and now it
shall be a point with I, to get he at a distance from I.
I be, my dear friend,
your ever faithful and oblige
CL. H.
LETTER XVI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, APR. 13.
why, Jack, thou need not make such a wonderment, as the girl say, if
I should have take large stride already towards reformation: for dost
thou not see, that while I have be so assiduously, night and day,
pursue this single charmer, I have infinitely less to answer for, than
otherwise I should have have? let I see, how many day and nights?--
forty, I believe, after open trench, spend in the sap only, and never a
mine spring yet!
by a moderate computation, a dozen kite might have fall, while I have
be only try to ensnare this single lark. nor yet do I see when I
shall be able to bring she to my lure: more innocent day yet, therefore!
--but reformation for my stalking-horse, I hope, will be a sure, though a
slow method to effect all my purpose.
then, Jack, thou wilt have a merit too in engage my pen, since thy time
would be otherwise worse employ: and, after all, who know but by
create new habit, at the expense of the old, a real reformation may be
bring about? I have promise it; and I believe there be a pleasure to
be find in be good, reverse that of Nat. Lee's madman,
--which none but good man know.
by all this, se thou not how greatly preferable it be, on twenty
account, to pursue a difficult rather than an easy chace? I have a
desire to inculcate this pleasure upon thee, and to teach thee to fly at
nobler game than daw, crow, and widgeon: I have a mind to shew thee
from time to time, in the course of the correspondence thou hast so
earnestly wish I to begin on this illustrious occasion, that these
exalt lady may be abase, and to obviate one of the objection that
thou madest to I, when we be last together, that the pleasure which
attend these nobler aim, remunerate not the pain they bring with
they; since, like a paltry fellow as thou wert, thou assertedst that all
woman be alike.
thou know nothing, Jack, of the delicacy of intrigue: nothing of the
glory of outwit the witty and the watchful: of the joy that fill the
mind of the inventive or contrive genius, ruminate which to use of
the different webs that offer to he for the entanglement of a haughty
charmer, who in her day have give he unnumbered torment. Thou, Jack,
who, like a dog at his ease, contentest thyself to growl over a bone
throw out to thee, dost not know the joy of a chace, and in pursue
a wind game: these I will endeavour to rouse thee to, and then thou
wilt have reason doubly and trebly to thank I, as well because of thy
present delight, as with regard to thy prospect beyond the moon.
to this place I have write, purely to amuse myself, before I be
admit to my charmer. but now I have to tell thee, that I be quite
right in my conjecture, that she would set up for herself, and dismiss
I: for she have declare in so many word that such be her resolution:
and why? because, to be plain with I, the more she see of I, and of my
way, the less she like of either.
this cut I to the heart! I do not cry, indeed! have I be a woman, I
should though, and that most plentifully: but I pull out a white
cambrick handkerchief: that I could command, but not my tear.
she find fault with my protestation, with my profession, with my vow:
I cannot curse a servant, the only privilege a master be know by, but I
be suppose to be a trooper*--I must not say, by my soul! nor, as I hope
to be save! why, Jack, how particular this be! would she not have I
think I have a precious soul, as well as she? if she think my salvation
hopeless, what a devil [another exceptionable word!] do she propose to
reform I for? so I have not an ardent expression leave I.
* see Letter VI. of this volume.
***
what can be do with a woman who be above flattery, and despise all
praise but that which flow from the approbation of her own heart?
well, Jack, thou seest it be high time to change my measure. I must run
into the pious a little fast than I have design.
what a sad thing it would be, be I, after all, to lose her person, as
well as her opinion! the only time that further acquaintance, and no blow
strike, nor suspicion give, ever lessen I in a lady's favour! a
curse mortification!--'tis certain I can have no pretence for hold
she, if she will go. no such thing as force to be use, or so much as
hint at: Lord send we safe at London!--That's all I have for it now:
and yet it must be the least part of my speech.
but why will this admirable creature urge her destiny? why will she defy
the power she be absolutely dependent upon? why will she still wish to
my face that she have never leave her father's house? why will she deny I
her company, till she make I lose my patience, and lie myself open to
her resentment? and why, when she be offend, do she carry she
indignation to the utmost length that a scornful beauty, in the very height
of her power and pride, can go?
be it prudent, think thou, in her circumstance, to tell I,
repeatedly to tell I, 'that she be every hour more and more dissatisfied
with herself and I? that I be not one who improve upon she in my
conversation and address?' [couldst thou, Jack, bear this from a
captive!] 'that she shall not be easy while she be with I? that she
know well than to value herself upon my volubility? that if I think
she deserve the compliment I make she, I may pride myself in those
art, by which I have make a fool of so extraordinary a person? that she
shall never forgive herself for meet I, nor I for seduce she
away?' [her very word.] 'that her regret increase instead of diminish?
that she will take care of herself; and, since her friend thing it not
worth while to pursue she, she will be leave to her own care? that I
shall make Mrs. Sorlings's house more agreeable by my absence?--and go to
Berks, to town, or wherever I will,' [to the devil, I suppose,] 'with all
her heart?'
the impolitic charmer!--to a temper so vindictive as she thin mine! to
a free-liver, as she believe I to be, who have she in his power! I be
before, as thou know, balance; now this scale, now that, the
heavy. I only wait to see how she will would work, how mine would
lead I on. Thou seest what bias here take--and wilt thou doubt that
mine will be determine by it? be not her fault, before this,
numerous enough? why will she put I upon look back?
I will sit down to argue with myself by-and-by, and thou shalt be
acquaint with the result.
if thou didst but know, if thou hadst but beheld, what an abject slave
she make I look like!--i have give myself high air, as she call they:
but they be air that shew my love for she: that shew I could not
live out of her company. but she take I down with a vengeance! she
make I look about I. so much advantage have she over I; such severe
turn upon I; by my soul, Jack, I have hardly a word to say for myself.
I be ashamed to tell thee what a poor creature she make I look like!
but I could have tell she something that would have humble her pretty
pride at the instant, have she be in a proper place, and proper company
about she.
to such a place then--and where she cannot fly I--and then to see how my
will work, and what can be do with the amorous see-saw; now humble,
now proud; now expect, or demanding; now submit, or acquiescing--
till I have try resistance.
but these hint be at present enough. I may far explain myself as I
go along; and as I confirm or recede in my future motion. if she will
revive past disobligation! if she will--but no more, no more, as I
say, at present, of threatening.
LETTER XVII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[in CONTINUATION.]
and do I not see that I shall need nothing but patience, in order to have
all power with I? for what shall we say, if all these complaint of a
character wound; these declaration of increase regret for meeting
I; of resentment never to be get over for my seduce she away; these
angry command to leaver her:--What shall we say, if all be to mean
nothing but MATRIMONY? and what if my forbearing to enter upon that
subject come out to be the true cause of their petulance and uneasiness!
I have once before play about the skirt of the irrevocable obligation;
but think myself oblige to speak in cloud, and to run away from the
subject, as soon as she take my meaning, lest she should imagine it to be
ungenerously urge, now she be in some sort in my power, as she have
forbid I beforehand, to touch upon it, till I be in a state of visible
reformation, and till a reconciliation with her friend be probable.
but now, out-argue, out-talente, and push so vehemently to leave one
of whom I have no good pretence to hold, if she would go; and who could so
easily, if I have give her cause to doubt, have throw herself into other
protection, or have return to Harlowe-place and solme; I speak out
upon the subject, and offer reason, although with infinite doubt and
hesitation, [lest she should be offend at I, Belford!] why she should
assent to the legal tie, and make I the happy of man. and o how the
mantle cheek, the downcast eye, the silent yet tremble lip, and the
heaving bosom, a sweet collection of heighten beauty, give evidence
that the tender be not mortally offensive!
charming creature! think I, [but I charge thee, that thou let not any
of the sex know my exultation,*] be it so soon come to this? be I
already lord of the destiny of a Clarissa Harlowe? be I already the
reform man thou resolv I should be, before I have the least
encouragement give I? be it thus, that the more thou know I, the
less thou se reason to approve of me?--And can art and design enter
into a breast so celestial? to banish I from thee, to insist so
rigorously upon my absence, in order to bring I close to thee, and make
the blessing dear? well do thy art justify mine; and encourage I to
let loose my plot genius upon thee.
* Mr. Lovelace might have spar this caution on this occasion, since
many of the sex [we mention it with regret] who on the first publication
have read thus far, and even to the lady's first escape, have be ready
to censure she for over-niceness, as we have observe in a former note,
page 42, than he for artifice and exultation not less cruel and
ungrateful, than ungenerous and unmanly.
but let I tell thee, charming maid, if thy wish be at all to be
answer, that thou hast yet to account to I for thy reluctance to go
off with I, at a crisis when thy go off be necessary to avoid be
force into the nuptial fetter with a wretch, that, be he not thy
aversion, thou wert no more honest to thy own merit than to I.
I be accustomed to be prefer, let I tell thee, by thy equal in rank
too, though thy inferior in merit: but who be not so? and shall I marry
a woman, who have give I reason to doubt the preference she have for I?
no, my dearest love, I have too sacred a regard for thy injunction, to
let they be break through, even by thyself. nor will I take in thy full
meaning by blush silence only. nor shalt thou give I room to doubt,
whether it be necessity or love, that inspire this condescending
impulse.
upon these principle, what have I to do but to construe her silence into
contemptuous displeasure? and I beg her pardon for make a motion
which I have so much reason to fear would offend she: for the future I
would pay a sacred regard to her previous injunction, and prove to she
by all my conduct the truth of that observation, that true love be always
fearful of offend.
and what could the lady say to this? methink thou askest.
say!--why she look vex, disconcert, tease; be at a loss, as I
think, whether to be more angry with herself, or with I. she turn
about, however, as if to hide a starting tear; and draw a sigh into two
or three but just audible quaver, try to suppress it, and withdrew--
leave I master of the field.
tell I not of politeness; tell I not of generosity; tell I not of
compassion--be she not a match for I? More than a match? do she not
outdo I at every fair weapon? have she not make I doubt her love? have
she not take officious pain to declare that she be not averse to
solme for any respect she have to I? and her sorrow for put herself
out of his reach, that be to say, for meet I?
then, what a triumph would it be to the Harlowe pride, be I now to
marry this lady? a family beneath my own! no one in it worthy of an
alliance with but she! my own estate not contemptible! live within
the bound of it, to avoid dependence upon their better, and oblige to
no man live! my expectation still so much more considerable! my
person, my talent--not to be despise, surely--yet reject by they with
scorn. oblige to carry on an underhand address to their daughter, when
two of the most considerable family in the kingdom have make overture,
which I have decline, partly for her sake, and partly because I never
will marry; if she be not the person. to be force to steal she away,
not only from they, but from herself! and must I be bring to implore
forgiveness and reconciliation from the harlowes?--beg to be acknowledge
as the son of a gloomy tyrant, whose only boast be his rich? as a
brother to a wretch, who have conceive immortal hatred to I; and to a
sister who be beneath my attempt, or I would have have she in my own
way, and that with a tenth part of the trouble and pain that her sister
have cost I; and, finally, as a nephew to uncle, who value themselves
upon their acquire fortune, would insult I as creep to they on that
account?--Forbid it in the blood of the Lovelaces, that your last, and,
let I say, not the mean of your stock, should thus creep, thus fawn,
thus lick the dust, for a wife!--
Proceed anon.
LETTER XVIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[in CONTINUATION.]
but be it not the divine CLARISSA [Harlowe let I not say; my soul spurn
they all but she] whom I be thus by application threatening?--if virtue
be the true nobility, how be she ennoble, and how shall an alliance with
her ennoble, be not contempt due to the family from whom she spring and
prefer to I!
but again, let I stop.--Is there not something wrong, have there not be
something wrong, in this divine creature? and will not the reflection
upon that wrong (what though it may be construe in my favour?*) make I
unhappy, when novelty have lose its charm, and when, mind and person, she
be all my own? libertine be nicer, if at all nice, than other man.
they seldom meet with the stand of virtue in the woman whom they attempt.
and, by the frailty of those they have triumph over, they judge of all
the rest. 'importunity and opportunity no woman be proof against,
especially from the persevere lover, who know how to suit temptation
to inclination:' this, thou knowest, be a prime article of the rake's
creed.
* the particular attention of such of the fair sex, as be more apt to
read for the same of amusement than instruction, be request to this
letter of Mr. Lovelace.
and what! (methink thou askest with surprise) dost thou question this
most admirable of women?--the virtue of a CLARISSA dost thou question?
I do not, I dare not question it. my reverence for she will not let I
directly question it. but let I, in my turn, ask thee--be not, may not
her virtue be found rather in pride than in principle? whose daughter
be she?--And be she not a daughter? if impeccable, how come she by her
impeccability? the pride of set an example to her sex have run away
with her hitherto, and may have make she till now invincible. but be not
that pride abate? what may not both man and woman be bring to do in a
mortified state? what mind be superior to calamity? Pride be perhaps
the principal bulwark of female virtue. humble a woman, and may she not
be effectually humble?
then who say Miss Clarissa Harlowe be the paragon of virtue?--Is virtue
itself?
all who know she, and have hear of she, it will be answer.
Common bruit!--i virtue to be establish by common bruit only?--has her
virtue ever be proved?--who have dare to try her virtue?
I tell thee, I would sit down to argue with myself; and I have draw
myself into argumentation before I be aware.
let I enter into a strict discussion of this subject.
I know how ungenerous an appearance what I have say, and what I have
far to say, on this topic, will have from I: but be I not bring
virtue to the touchstone, with a view to exalt it, if it come out to be
proof?--'avaunt then, for one moment, all consideration that may arise
from a weakness which some would miscall gratitude; and be oftentime the
corrupter of a heart most ignoble!'
to the test then--and I will bring this charming creature to the
strict test, 'that all the sex, who may be shew any passage in my
letter,' [and I know thou cheerest the heart of all thy acquaintance
with such detached part of mine as tend not to dishonour character or
reveal name: and this give I an appetite to oblige thee by
interlardment,] 'that all the sex, I say, may see what they ought to be;
what be expect from they; and if they have to deal with a person of
reflection and punctilio, [of pride, if thou wilt,] how careful they
ought to be, by a regular and uniform conduct, not to give he cause to
think lightly of they for favour grant, which may be interpret into
natural weakness. for be not a wife the keeper of a man's honour? and
do not her fault bring more disgrace upon a husband than even upon
herself?'
it be not for nothing, Jack, that I have dislike the life of shackle.
to the test then, as I say, since now I have the question bring home
to I, whether I be to have a wife? and whether she be to be a wife at
the first or at the second hand?
I will proceed fairly. I do the dear creature not only strict but
generous justice; for I will try she by her own judgment, as well as by
our principle.
she blame herself for have correspond with I, a man of free
character; and one indeed whose first view it be to draw she into this
correspondence; and who succeed in it by mean unknown to herself.
'now, what be her inducement to this correspondence?' if not what her
niceness make her think blameworthy, why do she blame herself?
have she be capable of error? of persist in that error?
whoever be the tempter, that be not the thing; nor what the temptation.
the fact, the error, be now before we.
do she persist in it against parental prohibition?
she own she do.
be a daughter ever know who have high notion of the filial duty, of
the parental authority?
never.
'what must be the inducement, how strong, that be too strong for duty,
in a daughter so dutiful?--what must my thought have be of these
inducement, what my hope build upon they at the time, take in this
light?'
well, but it will be say, that her principal view be to prevent
mischief between her brother and her other friend, and the man vilely
insult by they all.
but why should she be more concerned for the safety of other than they
be for their own? and have not the rencounter then happen? 'be a
person of virtue to be prevail upon to break through her apparent, she
acknowledge duty, upon any consideration?' and, if not, be she to be
so prevail upon to prevent an apprehend evil only?
Thou, Lovelace, the tempter (thou wilt again break out and say) to be the
accuser!
but I be not the accuser. I be the arguer only, and, in my heart, all
the time acquit and worship the divine creature. 'but let I,
nevertheless, examine, whether the acquital be owe to her merit, or to
my weakness--weakness the true name of love!'
but shall we suppose another motive?--And that be LOVE; a motive which
all the world will excuse she for. 'but let I tell all the world that
do, not because they ought, but because all the world be apt to be mislead
by it.'
let love then be the motive:--love of whom?
a Lovelace, be the answer.
'be there but one Lovelace in the world? may not more Lovelaces be
attract by so fine a figure? by such exalted quality? it be her
character that draw I to she: and it be her beauty and good sense that
rivette my chain: and now all together make I think she a subject
worthy of my attempt, worthy of my ambition.'
but have she have the candour, the openness, to acknowledge that love?
she have not.
'well then, if love be at the bottom, be there not another fault lurk
beneath the shadow of that love?--has she not affectation?--or be it
pride of heart?'
and what results?--'is then the divine Clarissa capable of love a man
whom she ought not to love? and be she capable of affectation? and be
her virtue found in pride?--And, if the answer to these question be
affirmative, must she not then be a woman?'
and can she keep this love at bay? can she make he, who have be
accustom to triumph over other woman, tremble? can she conduct
herself, as to make he, at time, question whether she love he or any
man; 'yet not have the requisite command over the passion itself in step
of the high consequence to her honour, as she think,' [I be try
she, Jack, by her own thought,] 'but suffer herself to be provoke to
promise to abandon her father's house, and go off with he, know his
character; and even condition not to marry till improbably and remote
contingency be to come to pass? what though the provocation be
such as would justify any other woman; yet be a CLARISSA to be
susceptible to provocation which she think herself highly censurable
for be so much move by?'
but let we see the dear creature resolve to revoke her promise, yet
meet her lover; a bold and intrepid man, who be more than once before
disappoint by she; and who come, as she know, prepare to expect the
fruit of her appointment, and resolve to carry she off. and let we see
he actually carry she off, and have she at his mercy--'May there
not be, I repeat, other Lovelaces; other like intrepid, persevere
enterprizer; although they may not go to work in the same way?
'and have then a CLARISSA (herself her judge) failed?--In such great
point failed?--and may she not far fail?--fail in the great
point, to which all the other point, in which she have fail, have but
a natural tendency?'
nor say thou, that virtue, in the eye of Heaven, be as much a manly as a
womanly grace. by virtue in this place I mean chastity, and to be
superior to temptation; my Clarissa out of the question. nor ask thou,
shall the man be guilty, yet expect the woman to be guiltless, and even
unsuspectible? urge thou not these argument, I say, since the wife, by
a failure, may do much more injury to the husband, than the husband can
do to the wife, and not only to her husband, but to all his family, by
obtrude another man's child into his possession, perhaps to the
exclusion of (at least to a participation with) his own; he believe
they all the time to be his. in the eye of Heaven, therefore, the sin
cannot be equal. besides I have read in some place that the woman be
make for the man, not the man for the woman. Virtue then be less to be
dispense with in the woman than in the man.
Thou, Lovelace, (methink some well man than thyself will say,) to
expect such perfection in a woman!
yes, I, may I answer. be not the great Caesar a great rake as to woman?
be he not call, by his very soldier, on one of his triumphant entry
into Rome, the bald-pated lecher? and warn give of he to the wife,
as well as to the daughter of his fellow-citizen? yet do not Caesar
repudiate his wife for be only in company with Clodius, or rather
because Clodius, though by surprise upon she, be find in her? and
what be the reason he give for it?--It be this, (though a rake himself,
as I have say,) and only this--the wife of Caesar must not be suspect!
--
Caesar be not a prouder man than Lovelace.
go to then, Jack; nor say, nor let any body say, in thy hearing, that
Lovelace, a man value himself upon his ancestry, be singular in his
expectation of a wife's purity, though not pure himself.
as to my CLARISSA, I own that I hardly think there ever be such an angel
of a woman. but have she not, as above, already take step, which she
herself condemn? step, which the world and her own family do not
think she capable of take? and for which her own family will not
forgive she?
nor think it strange, that I refuse to hear any thing plead in behalf
of a standard virtue from high provocation. 'be not provocation and
temptation the test of virtue? a standard virtue must not be allow
to be provoke to destroy or annihilate itself.
'may not then the success of he, who could carry she thus far, be
allow to be an encouragement for he to try to carry she far?'
'tis but to try. who will be afraid of a trail for this divine creature?
'Thou know, that I have more than once, twice, or thrice, put to the
fiery trial young woman of name and character; and never yet meet with one
who hold out a month; nor indeed so long as could puzzle my invention. I
have conclude against the whole sex upon it.' and now, if I have not
find a virtue that cannot be corrupt, I will swear that there be not
one such in the whole sex. be not then the whole sex concern that this
trial should be make? and who be it that know this lady, that would not
stake upon her head the honour of the whole?--Let she who would refuse it
come forth, and desire to stand in her place.
I must assure thee, that I have a prodigious high opinion of virtue; as I
have of all those grace and excellency which I have not be able to
attain myself. every free-liver would not say this, nor think thus--
every argument he use, condemnatory of his own action, as some would
think. but ingenuousness be ever a signal part of my character.
Satan, whom thou mayest, if thou wilt, in this case, call my instigator,
put the good man of old upon the severe trial. 'to his behaviour under
these trial that good man owe his honour and his future reward.' an
innocent person, if doubt, must wish to be bring to a fair and candid
trial.
Rinaldo, indeed, in Ariosto, put the Mantua Knight's cup of trial from
he, which be to be the proof of his wife's chastity*--this be his
argument for forbear the experiment: 'why should I seek a think I
should be loth to find? my wife be a woman. the sex be frail. I cannot
believe well of she than I do. it will be to my own loss, if I find
reason to think bad.' but Rinaldo would not have refuse the trial of
the lady, before she become his wife, and when he might have find his
account in detect she.
* the story tell we, that whoever drink of this cup, if his wife be
chaste, could drink without spill; if otherwise, the contrary.
for my part, I would not have put the cup from I, though marry, have it
be but in hope of find reason to confirm my good opinion of my
wife's honour; and that I might know whether I have a snake or a dove in
my bosom.
to my point--'what must that virtue be which will not stand a trial?--
what that woman who would wish to shun it?'
well, then, a trial seem necessary for the furth establishment of the
honour of so excellent a creature.
and who shall put she to this trial? who, but the man who have, as she
think, already induce she in less point to swerve?--and this for her
own sake in a double sense--not only, as he have be able to make some
impression, but as she regret the impression make; and so may be
presume to be guard against his further attempt.
the situation she be at present in, it must be confess be a
disadvantageous one to she: but, if she overcome, that will redound to
her honour.
Shun not, therefore, my dear soul, further trial, nor hate I for make
them.--'For what woman can be say to be virtuous till she have be
try?
'nor be one effort, one trial, to be sufficient. why? because a woman's
heart may at one time be adamant, at another wax'--as I have often
experience. and so, no doubt, hast thou.
a fine time of it, methink, thou sayest, would the woman have, if they
be all to be tried!--
but, Jack, I be not for that neither. though I be a rake, I be not a
rake's friend; except thine and company's.
and be this one of the moral of my tedious discussion--'let the little
rogue who would not be put to the question, as I may call it, choose
accordingly. let they prefer to their favour good honest sober fellow,
who have not be use to play dog's trick: who will be willing to take
they as they offer; and, who be tolerable themselves, be not
suspicious of other.'
but what, methink thou askest, be to become of the lady if she fail?
What?--Why will she not, 'if once subdue, be always subdue?' another
of our libertine maxim. and what an immense pleasure to a marriage-
hater, what rapture to thought, to be able to prevail upon such a woman
as Miss Clarissa Harlowe to live with he, without real change of name!
but if she resist--if nobly she stand she trial?--
why then I will marry she; and bless my start for such an angel of a
wife.
but will she not hate thee?--will she not refuse--
no, no, jack!--circumstanced and situate as we be, I be not afraid of
that. and hate I! why should she hate the man who love she upon
proof?
and then for a little hint at reprisal--be I not justify in my
resolution of try her virtue, who be resolve, as I may say, to try
mine? who have declare that she will not marry I, till she have hope of
my reformation?
and now, to put an end to this sober argumentation, Wilt thou not thyself
(whom I have suppose an advocate for the lady, because I know that Lord
M. have put thee upon use the interest he think thou hast in I, to
persuade I to enter the pale; wilt thou not thyself) allow I to try if
I cannot awaken the woman in her?--To try if she, with all that glow
symmetry of part, and that full bloom of vernal grace, by which she
attract every eye, be really inflexible as to the grand article?
let I begin then, as opportunity present--I will; and watch she every
step to find one slide one; her every moment to find the moment
critical. and the rather, as she spar I not, but take every
advantage that offer to puzzle and plague I; nor expect nor think I
to be a good man.
if she be a woman, and love I, I shall surely catch she once trip:
for love be ever a traitor to its harbourer: and love within, and I
without, she will be more than woman, as the poet say, or I less than
man, if I succeed not.
now, Belford, all be out. the lady be mine; shall be more mine.
marriage, I see, be in my power, now she be so. else perhaps it have not.
if I can have she without marriage, who can blame I for try? if not,
great will be her glory, and my future confidence. and well will she
merit the sacrifice I shall make she of my liberty; and from all her sex
honour next to divine, for give a proof, 'that there be once a woman
whose virtue no trial, no stratagem, no temptation, even from the man
she hat not, could overpower.'
now wilt thou see all my circulation: as in a glass wilt thou see it.--
CABALA, however, be the word;* nor let the secret escape thee even in thy
dream.
* this word, whenever use by any of these gentleman, be agree to imply
an inviolable secret.
nobody doubt that she be to be my wife. let she pass for such when I
give the word. 'mean time reformation shall be my stalk-horse; some
one of the woman in London, if I can get her hither, my bird.' and so
much for this time.
LETTER XIX
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[in answer to LETTERS IX. XV.]
do not be so much concerned, my dear friend, at the bickering between
my mother and I. we love one another dearly notwithstanding. if my
mother have not I to find fault with, she must find fault with somebody
else. and as to I, I be a very saucy girl; and be not this occasion,
there would be some other, to shew it.
you have hear I say, that this be always the case between we. you
could not otherwise have know it. for when you be with we, you
harmonize we both; and, indeed, I be always more afraid of you than of
my mother. but then that awe be accompany with love. your reproof,
as I have always find, be so charmingly mild and instructive; so
evidently calculate to improve, and not to provoke; that a generous
temper must be amend by they. but hear now, mind my good mamma, when
you be not with we--you shall, I tell you, Nancy. I will have it so.
donot I know well, I willnot be disobey. how can a daughter of spirit
bear such language; such look too with the language; and not have a
longing mind to disobey?
donot advise I, my dear, to subscribe to my mother's prohibition of
correspondence with you. she have no reason for it. nor would she of she
own judgment have prohibit it. that odd old ambling soul your uncle,
(whose visit be frequenter than ever,) instigate by your malicious and
selfish brother and sister in the occasion. and they have only borrow
my mother's lip, at the distance they be from you, for a sort of
speak trumpet for they. the prohibition, once more I say, cannot come
from her heart: but if it do, be so much danger to be apprehend from
my continue to write to one of my own sex, as if I write to one of the
other? donot let dejection and disappointment, and the course of
oppression which you have run through, weaken your mind, my dearest
creature, and make you see inconveniencie where there possibly cannot be
any. if your talent be scribble, as you call it; so be mine--and I
will scribble on, at all opportunity; and to you; let they say what
they will. nor let your letter be fill with the self-accusation you
mention: there be no cause for they. I wish that your Anna Howe, who
continue in her mother's house, be but half so good as Miss Clarissa
Harlowe, who have be drive out of her father's.
I will say nothing upon your letter to your sister till I see the effect
it will have. you hope, you tell I, that you shall have your money and
clothe send you, notwithstanding my opinion to the contrary--I be sorry
to have it to acquaint you, that I have just now hear, that they have
sit in council upon your letter; and that your mother be the only person
who be for send you your thing, and be overrule. I charge you
therefore to accept of my offer, as by my last: and give I particular
direction for what you want, that I can supply you with beside.
donot set your thought so much upon a reconciliation as to prevent your
lay hold of any handsome opportunity to give yourself a protector;
such a one as the man will be, who, I imagine, husband-like, will let
nobody insult you but himself.
what could he mean by let slip such a one as that you mention? I
donot know how to blame you; for how you go beyond silence and blush,
when the foolish fellow come with his observance of the restriction
which you lay he under when in another situation? but, as I tell you
above, you really strike people into awe. and, upon my word, you do not
spare he.
I repeat what I say in my last, that you have a very nice part to act:
and I will add, that you have a mind that be much too delicate for your
part. but when the lover be exalt, the lady must be humble. he be
naturally proud and saucy. I doubt you must engage his pride, which he
call his honour: and that you must throw off a little more of the veil.
and I would have you restrain your wish before he, that you have not
meet he, and the like. what signify wish, my dear? he will not
bear it. you can hardly expect that he will.
nevertheless, it vex I to the very bottom of my pride, that any wretch
of that sex should be able to triumph over Clarissa.
I cannot, however, but say, that I be charm with your spirit. so much
sweetness, where sweetness be requisite; so much spirit, where spirit be
call for--what a true magnanimity!
but I doubt, in your present circumstance, you must endeavour after a
little more of the reserve, in case where you be displeased with he,
and palliate a little. that humility which he put on when you rise upon
he, be not natural to he.
methink I see the man hesitate, and look like the fool you paint
he, under your corrective superiority!--but he be not a fool. donot put
he upon mingle resentment with his love.
you be very serious, my dear, in the first of the two letter before I,
in relation to Mr. Hickman and I; and in relation to my mother and I.
but as to the latter, you must not be too grave. if we be not well
together at one time, we be not ill together at another. and while I be
able to make her smile in the midst of the most angry fit she ever fall
into on the present occasion, (though sometimes she would not if she
could help it,) it be a very good sign; a sign that displeasure can never
go deep, or be last. and then a kind word, or kind look, to her
favourite Hickman, set the one into rapture, and the other in tolerable
humour, at any time.
but your case pain I at heart; and with all my levity, both the good
folk most sometimes partake of that pain; nor will it be over, as long
as you be in a state of uncertainty; and especially as I be not able to
prevail for that protection for you which would have prevent the
unhappy step, the necessity for which we both, with so much reason,
deplore.
I have only to add (and yet it be needless to tell you) that I be, and
will ever be,
your affectionate friend and servant,
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XX
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
you tell I, my dear, that my clothe and the little sum of money I leave
behind I, will not be send me.--but I will still hope. it be yet early
day. when their passion subside, they will well consider of the
matter; and especially as I have my ever dear and excellent mother for my
friend in this request! o the sweet indulgence! how have my heart bleed,
and how do it still bleed for she!
you advise I not to depend upon a reconciliation. I do not, I cannot
depend upon it. but nevertheless, it be the wish next my heart. and as
to this man, what can I do? you see, that marriage be not absolutely in
my own power, if I be inclined to prefer it to the trial which I think
I ought to have principally in view to make for a reconciliation.
you say, he be proud and insolent--indeed he be. but can it be your
opinion, that he intend to humble I down to the level of his mean
pride?
and what mean you, my dear friend, when you say, that I must throw off a
little more of the veil?--indeed I never know that I wear one. let I
assure you, that if I never see any thing in Mr. Lovelace that look like
a design to humble I, his insolence shall never make I discover a
weakness unworthy of a person distinguish by your friendship; that be
to say, unworthy either of my sex, or of my former self.
but I hope, as I be out of all other protection, that he be not capable
of mean or low resentment. if he have have any extraordinary trouble on
my account, may he not thank himself for it? he may; and lie it, if he
please, to his character; which, as I have tell he, give at least a
pretence to my brother against he. and then, do I ever make he any
promise? do I ever profess a love for he? do I ever wish for the
continuance of his address? have not my brother's violence precipitate
matter, would not my indifference to he in all likelihood (as I
design it should) have tire out his proud spirit,* and make he set
out for London, where he use chiefly to reside? and if he have, would
not there have be an end of all his pretension and hope? for no
encouragement have I give he; nor do I then correspond with he. nor,
believe I, should I have begin to do so--the fatal rencounter not have
then happen; which draw I in afterwards for other' sake (fool that I
be!) and not for my own. and can you think, or can he, that even this
but temporarily-intend correspondence (which, by the way, my mother*
connive at) would have end thus, have I not be drive on one hand,
and tease on the other, to continue it, the occasion which have at first
induce it continue? what pretence then have he, be I to be
absolutely in his power, to avenge himself on I for the fault of
other, and through which I have suffer more than he? it cannot,
cannot be, that I should have cause to apprehend he to be so ungenerous,
so bad a man.
* see Vol.I. Letter IV.
you bid I not to be concern at the bickering between your mother and
you. can I avoid concern, when those bickering be on my account? that
they be raise (instigate shall I say?) by my uncle, and my other
relation, surely must add to my concern.
but I must observe, perhaps too critically for the state my mind be in at
present, that the very sentence you give from your mother, as in so many
imperative, which you take amiss, be very severe reflection upon
yourself. for instance--you shall, I tell you, Nancy, imply that you
have dispute her will--and so of the rest.
and far let I observe, with respect to what you say, that there
cannot be the same reason for a prohibition of correspondence with I, as
there be of mine with Mr. Lovelace; that I think as little of bad
consequence from my correspondence with he at the time, as you can do
from yours with I now. but, if obedience be a duty, the breach of it be
a fault, however circumstance may differ. surely there be no merit in
set up our own judgment against the judgment of our parent. and if
it be punishable so to do, I have be severely punish; and that be
what I warn you of from my own dear experience.
yet, God forgive I! I advise thus against myself with very great
reluctance: and, to say truth, have not strength of mind, at present, to
decline it myself. but, if my occasion go not off, I will take it into
further consideration.
you give I very good advice in relation to this man; and I thank you for
it. when you bid I be more upon the reserve with he in express my
displeasure, perhaps I may try for it: but to palliate, as you call it,
that, my dearest Miss Howe, cannot be do, by
your own,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER XXI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
you may believe, my dear Miss Howe, that the circumstance of the noise
and outcry within the garden-door, on Monday last, give I no small
uneasiness, to think that I be in the hand of a man, who could, by such
vile premeditation, lie a snare to trick I out of myself, as I have so
frequently call it.
whenever he come in my sight, the thought of this give I an indignation
that make his presence disgustful to I; and the more, as I fancy I
beheld in his face a triumph which reproach my weakness on that
account; although perhaps it be only the same vivacity and placidness
that generally sit upon his feature.
I be resolve to task he upon this subject, the first time I could have
patience to enter upon it with he. for, besides that it pique I
excessively from the nature of the artifice, I expect shuffle and
evasion, if he be guilty, that would have incense I: and, if not
confessedly guilty, such unsatisfactory declaration as still would have
keep my mind doubtful and uneasy; and would, upon every new offence that
he might give I, sharpen my disgust to I.
I have have the opportunity I wait for; and will lay before you the
result.
he be make his court to my good opinion in very polite term, and with
great seriousness lament that he have lose it; declare, that he know
not how he have deserve to do so; attribute to I an indifference to
he, that seem, to his infinite concern, hourly to increase, and he
besought I to let he know my whole mind, that he might have an
opportunity either to confess his fault and amend they, or clear his
conduct to my satisfaction, and thereby entitle himself to a great
share of my confidence.
I answer he with quickness--then, Mr. Lovelace, I will tell you one
thing with a frankness, that is, perhaps, more suitable to my character
than to your, [he hop not, he say,] which give I a very bad opinion
of you, as a designing, artful man.
I be all attention, Madam.
I never can think tolerably of you, while the noise and voice I hear at
the garden-door, which put I into the terror you take so much advantage
of, remain unaccounted for. tell I fairly, tell I candidly, the whole
of that circumstance; and of your dealing with that wicked Joseph Leman;
and, accord to your explicitness in this particular, I shall form a
judgment of your future profession.
I will, without reserve, my dear life, say he, tell you the whole;
and hope that my sincerity in the relation will atone for any thing you
may think wrong in the fact.
'I know nothing, say he, of this man, this Leman, and should have
scorn a resort to so low a method as bribe the servant of any family
to let I into the secret of that family, if I have not detect he in
attempt to corrupt a servant of mine, to inform he of all my motion,
of all my suppose intrigue, and, in short, of every action of my
private life, as well as of my circumstance and engagement; and this
for motif too obvious to be dwell upon.
'my servant tell I of his offer, and I order he, unknown to the
fellow, to let I hear a conversation that be to pass between they.
'in the midst of it, and just as he have make an offer of money for a
particular piece of intelligence, promise more when procure, I break
in upon they, and by bluster, call for a knife to cut off his ear
(one of which I take hold of) in order to make a present of it, as I
say, to his employer, I oblige he to tell I who they be.
'your brother, Madam, and your uncle Antony, he name.
'it be not difficult, when I have give he my pardon on name they,
(after I have set before he the enormity of the task he have undertake,
and the honourableness of my intention to your dear self,) to prevail
upon he, by a large reward, to serve I; since, at the same time, he
might preserve the favour of your uncle and brother, as I desire to know
nothing but what relate to myself and to you, in order to guard we both
against the effect of an ill-will, which all his fellow-servant, as
well as himself, as he acknowledge, think undeserved.
'by this mean, I own to you, Madam, I frequently turn his principal
about upon a pivot of my own, unknown to themselves: and the fellow, who
be always call himself a plain man, and boasting of his conscience,
be the easy, as I condescend frequently to assure he of my
honourable view; and as he know that the use I make of his intelligence,
in all likelihood, prevent fatal mischief.
'I be the more pleased with his service, as (let I acknowledge to you,
Madam) they procure to you, unknown to yourself, a safe and
uninterrupted egress (which perhaps would not otherwise have be
continue to you so long as it be) to the garden and wood-house: for he
undertake, to they, to watch all your motion: and the more cheerfully,
(for the fellow love you,) as it keep off the curiosity of other.'*
* see Vol.II. letter XXXVI.
so, my dear, it come out, that I myself be oblige to this deep
contriver.
I sit in silent astonishment; and thus he go on.
'as to the circumstance, for which you think so hardly of I, I do freely
confess, that have a suspicion that you would revoke your intention of
get away, and in that case apprehend that we should not have the
time together that be necessary for that purpose; I have order he to
keep off every body he could keep off, and to be himself within a view of
the garden-door; for I be determine, if possible, to induce you to
adhere to your resolution.'--
but pray, Sir, interrupt he, how come you to apprehend that I should
revoke my intention? I have indeed deposit a letter to that purpose;
but you have it not: and how, as I have reserve to myself the privilege of
a revocation, do you know, but I might have prevail upon my friend,
and so have revoke upon good ground?
'I will be very ingenuous, Madam--you have make I hope that if you
change your mind, you would give I a meeting to apprize I of the
reason for it. I go to the loose brick, and I see the letter there:
and as I know your friend be immovably fix in their scheme, I
doubt not but the letter be to revoke or suspend your resolution; and
probably to serve instead of a meeting too. I therefore let it lie, that
if you do revoke, you might be under the necessity of meet I for the
sake of the expectation you have give I: and as I come prepare, I be
resolve, pardon I, Madam, whatever be your intention, that you
should not go back. have I take your letter I must have be determine
by the content of it, for the present at least: but not have receive
it, and you have reason to think I want not resolution in a situation
so desperate, to make your friend a personal visit, I depend upon the
interview you have bid I hope for.'
wicked wretch, say I; it be my grief, that I give you opportunity to
take so exact a measure of my weakness!--but would you have presume to
visit the family, have I not meet you?
indeed I would. I have some friend in readiness, who be to have
accompany I to they. and have your father refuse to give I audience,
I would have take my friend with I to Solmes.
and what do you intend to do to Mr. Solmes?
not the least hurt, have the man be passive.
but have he not be passive, as you call it, what would you have do to
Mr. Solmes?
he be loth, he say to tell I--yet not the least hurt to his person.
I repeat my question.
if he must tell I, he only propose to carry off the poor fellow, and to
hide he for a month or two. and this he would have do, let what would
have be the consequence.
be ever such a wretch hear of!--I sigh from the bottom of my heart;
but bid he proceed from the part I have interrupt he at.
'I order the fellow, as I tell you, Madam, say he, to keep within view
of the garden-door: and if he find any parley between we, and any body
come (before you could retreat undiscovered) whose come might be
attend with violent effect, he should cry out; and this not only in
order to save himself from their suspicion of he, but to give I
warning to make off, and, if possible, to induce you (I own it, Madam) to
go off with I, accord to your own appointment. and I hope all
circumstance consider, and the danger I be in of lose you for ever,
that the acknowledgement of that contrivance, or if you have not meet I,
that upon Solmes, will not procure I your hatred: for, have they come as
I expect as well as you, what a despicable wretch have I be, could I
have leave you to the insult of a brother and other of your family, whose
mercy be cruelty when they have not the pretence with which this detect
interview would have furnish they!'
what a wretch! say i.--but if, Sir, take your own account of this
strange matter to be fact, any body be come, how happen it, that I
see only that man Leman (I think it be he) out at the door, and at a
distance, look after we?
very lucky! say he, put his hand first in one pocket, then in
another--I hope I have not throw it away--it be, perhaps, in the coat
I have on yesterday--little do I think it would be necessary to be
produce--but I love to come to a demonstration whenever I can--I may be
giddy--I may be heedless. I be indeed--but no man, as to you, Madam,
ever have a sincerer heart.
he then step to the parlour-door, call his servant to bring he the
coat he have on yesterday.
the servant do. and in the pocket, rumple up as a paper he regard
not, he pull out a letter, write by that Joseph, date Monday night;
in which 'he beg pardon for cry out so soon--say, that his fear of
be discover to act on both side, have make he take the rushing of a
little dog (that always follow he) through the phyllirea-hedge, for
Betty's be at hand, or some of his master: and that when he find his
mistake, he open the door by his own key (which the contrive wretch
confess he have furnish he with) and inconsiderately run out in a
hurry, to have apprize he that his cry out be owe to his fright
only:' and he add, 'that they be upon the hunt for I, by the time he
return.*
* see his letter to Joseph Leman, Vol.III. no.III. towards the end, where
he tell he, he would contrive for he a letter of this nature to copy.
I shake my head--Deep! deep! deep! say I, at the best!--o Mr. Lovelace!
God forgive and reform you!--But you be, I see plainly, (upon the whole
of your own account,) a very artful, a very design man.
Love, my dear life, be ingenious. night and day have I rack my
stupid brain [o Sir, think I, not stupid! 'Twere well perhaps if it
be] to contrive method to prevent the sacrifice design to be make
of you, and the mischief that must have ensue upon it: so little hold in
your affection: such undeserved antipathy from your friend: so much
danger of lose you for ever from both cause. I have not have for the
whole fortnight before last Monday, half an hour's rest at a time. and
I own to you, Madam, that I should never have forgive myself, have I
omit any contrivance or forethought that would have prevent your
return without I.
again I blame myself for meet he: and justly; for there be many
chance to one, that I have not meet he. and if I have not, all his
fortnight's contrivance, as to I, would have come to nothing; and,
perhaps, I might nevertheless have escape Solmes.
yet, have he resolve to come to Harlowe-place with his friend, and be
insult, as he certainly would have be, what mischief might have
follow!
but his resolution to run away with and to hide the poor solme for a
month or so, o my dear! what a wretch have I let run away with I,
instead of Solmes!
I ask he, if he think such enormity as these, such defiance of
the law of society, would have pass unpunished?
he have the assurance to say, with one of his usual gay air, that he
should by this mean have disappoint his enemy, and save I from a
force marriage. he have no pleasure in such desperate push. solme he
would not have personally hurt. he must have flee his country, for a
time at least: and, truly, if he have be oblige to do so, (as all his
hope of my favour must have be at an end,) he would have have a fellow-
traveller of his own sex out of our family, whom I little think of.
be ever such a wretch!--to be sure he mean my brother!
and such, Sir, say I, in high resentment, be the us you make of your
corrupt intelligencer--
my corrupt intelligencer, Madam! interrupt I, he be to this hour your
brother's as well as mine. by what I have ingenuously tell you, you may
see who begin this corruption. let I assure you, Madam, that there be
many free thing which I have be guilty of as reprisal, in which I
would not have be the aggressor.
all that I shall far say on this head, Mr. Lovelace, be this: that as
this vile double-faced wretch have probably be the cause of great
mischief on both side, and still continue, as you own, his wicked
practice, I think it would be but just, to have my friend apprize what
a creature he be whom some of they encourage.
what you please, Madam, as to that--my service, as well as your brother's
be now almost over for he. the fellow have make a good hand of it. he
do not intend to stay long in his place. he be now actually in treaty
for an inn, which will do his business for life. I can tell you far,
that he make love to your sister's Betty: and that by my advice. they
will be marry when he be establish. an innkeeper's wife be every
man's mistress; and I have a scheme in my head to set some engine at
work to make her repent her saucy behaviour to you to the last day of her
life.
what a wicked schemer you be, Sir!--Who shall avenge upon you the still
great evil which you have be guilty of? I forgive Betty with all my
heart. she be not my servant; and but too probably, in what she do,
obey the command of she to whom she owe duty, well than I obey
those to whom I owe more.
no matter for that, the wretch say [to be sure, my dear, he must design
to make I afraid of he]: the decree be go out--Betty must smart--
smart too by an act of her own choice. he love, he say, to make bad
people their own punishers.--Nay, Madam, excuse I; but if the fellow, if
this Joseph, in your opinion, deserve punishment, mine be a complicated;
a man and his wife cannot well suffer separately, and it may come home to
he too.
I have no patience with he. I tell he so. I see, Sir, say I, I see,
what a man I be with. your rattle warn I of the snake.--and away I
fling: leave he seemingly vex, and in confusion.
LETTER XXII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
my plain-deal with Mr. Lovelace, on see he again, and the free
dislike I express to his way, his manner, and his contrivance, as
well as to his speech, have oblige he to recollect himself a little.
he will have it, that the menace which he throw out just now against my
brother and Mr. Solmes, be only the effect of an unmeaning pleasantry.
he have too great a stake in his country, he say, to be guilty of such
enterprise as should lay he under a necessity of quit it for ever.
twenty thing, particularly, he say, he have suffer Joseph Leman to
tell he of, that be not, and could not be true, in order to make
himself formidable in some people's eye, and this purely with a view to
prevent mischief. he be unhappy, as far as he know, in a quick
invention; in hit readily upon expedient; and many thing be
report of he which he never say, and many which he never do, and
other which he have only talk of, (as just now,) and which he have
forget as soon as the word have pass his lip.
this may be so, in part, my dear. no one man so young could be so wicked
as he have be report to be. but such a man at the head of such
wretch as he be say to have at his beck, all man of fortune and
fearlessness, and capable of such enterprise as I have unhappily find
he capable of, what be not to be apprehend from he!
his carelessness about his character be one of his excuse: a very bad
one. what hope can a woman have of a man who value not his own
reputation?--these gay wretch may, in mixed conversation, divert for an
hour, or so: but the man of probity, the man of virtue, be the man that
be to be the partner for life. what woman, who could help it, would
submit it to the courtesy of a wretch, who avow a disregard to all moral
sanction, whether he will perform his part of the matrimonial
obligation, and treat she with tolerable politeness?
with these notion, and with these reflection, to be throw upon such a
man myself!--would to Heaven--but what avail wish now?--to whom can I
fly, if I would fly from he?
LETTER XXIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY, APRIL 14.
never do I hear of such a parcel of foolish toad as these Harlowes!--
why, Belford, the lady must fall, if every hair of her head be a
guardian angel, unless they be to make a visible appearance for she,
or, snatch she from I at unawares, would draw she after they into the
starry region.
all I have to apprehend, be, that a daughter, so reluctantly carry off,
would offer term to her father, and would be accept upon a mutual
concedence; they to give up solme; she to give up I. and so I be
contrive to do all I could to guard against the latter. but they seem
resolve to perfect the work they have begin.
what stupid creature be there in the world! this foolish brother not
to know, that he who would be bribe to undertake a base thing by one,
would be over-bribe to retort the baseness; especially when he could be
put into the way to serve himself by both!--Thou, Jack, wilt never know
one half of my contrivance.
he here relate the conversation between he and the Lady (upon the
subject of the noise and exclamation his agent make at the garden-
door) to the same effect as in the Lady's Letter, No. XXI. and
proceed exulting:
what a capacity for glorious mischief have thy friend!--Yet how near the
truth all of it! the only derivation, my assert that the fellow make
the noise by mistake, and through fright, and not by previous direction:
have she know the precise truth, her anger, to be so take in, would
never have let she forgive I.
have I be a military hero, I should have make gunpowder useless; for I
should have blow up all my adversary by dint of stratagem, turn
their own device upon they.
but these father and mother--Lord help 'em!--were not the power of
nature strong than those of discretion, and be not that busy dea bona
to afford her genial aid, till tardy prudence qualified parent to
manage their future offspring, how few people would have child!
James and Arabella may have their motif; but what can be say for a
father act as this father have act? what for a mother? what for an
aunt? what for uncles?--who can have patience with such fellow and
fellowesse?
soon will the fair one hear how high their foolish resentment run
against she: and then will she, it be to be hop, have a little more
confidence in I. then will I be jealous that she love I not with the
preference my heart build upon: then will I bring she to confession of
grateful love: and then will I kiss she when I please; and not stand
trembling, as now, like a hungry hound, who see a delicious morsel
within his reach, (the froth hang upon his vermilion jaw,) yet dare
not leap at it for his life.
but I be originally a bashful mortal. indeed I be bashful still with
regard to this lady--bashful, yet know the sex so well!--But that indeed
be the reason that I know it so well:--For, Jack, I have have abundant
cause, when I have look into myself, by way of comparison with the
other sex, to conclude that a bashful man have a good deal of the soul of
a woman; and so, like Tiresias, can tell what they think, and what they
drive at, as well as themselves.
the modest one and I, particularly, be pretty much upon a par. the
difference between we be only, what they think, I act. but the immod
one out-do the bad of we by a bar's length, both in thinking and
act.
one argument let I plead in proof of my assertion; that even we rake
love modesty in a woman; while the modest woman, as they be account,
(that be to say, the sly,) love, and generally prefer, an impudent
man. whence can this be, but from a likeness in nature? and this make
the poet say, that ever woman be a rake in her heart. it concern they,
by their action, to prove the contrary, if they can.
thus have I read in some of the philosopher, that no wickedness be
comparable to the wickedness of a woman.* Canst thou tell I, Jack, who
say this? be it Socrates? for he have the devil of a wife--or who? or
be it solomon?--ke Solomon--Thou remembrest to have read of such a
king, dost thou not? SOL-O-MON, I learn, in my infant state [my mother
be a good woman] to answer, when ask, who be the wise man?--But my
indulgent questioner never ask I how he come by the uninspired part of
his wisdom.
* Mr. Lovelace be as much out in his conjecture of Solomon, as of
Socrates. the passage be in Ecclesiasticus, chap. xxv.
come, come, Jack, you and I be not so very bad, could we but stop where
we be.
he then give the particular of what pass between he and the Lady on
his menace relate to her brother and Mr. Solmes, and of his design
to punish Betty Barnes and Joseph Leman.
LETTER XXIV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
FRIDAY, APR. 14.
I will now give you the particular of a conversation that have just
pass between Mr. Lovelace and I, which I must call agreeable.
it begin with his tell I, that he have just receive intelligence that
my friend be on a sudden come to a resolution to lay aside all
thought of pursue I, or of get I back: and that therefore he
attend I to know of my pleasure; and what I would do, or have he do?
I tell he, that I would have he leave I directly; and that, when it
be know to every body that I be absolutely independent of he, it
would pass, that I have leave my father's house because of my brother's ill
usage of I: which be a plea that I might make with justice, and to the
excuse of my father, as well as of myself.
he mildly reply, that if we could be certain that my relation would
adhere to this their new resolution, he could have no objection, since
such be my pleasure; but, as he be well assure that they have take it
only from apprehension, that a more active one might involve my brother
(who have breathe nothing but revenge) in some fatal misfortune, there
be too much reason to believe that they would resume their former
purpose the moment they should think they safely might.
this, Madam, say he, be a risque I cannot run. you would think it
strange if I could. and yet, as soon as I know they have so give out, I
think it proper to apprize you of it, and take your command upon it.
let I hear, say I, (willing to try if he have any particular view,) what
you think most advisable?
'tis very easy to say that, if I durst--if I might not offend you--if it
be not to break condition that shall be inviolable with I.
say then, Sir, what you would say. I can approve or disapprove, as I
think fit.
have not the man a fine opportunity here to speak out?--He have. and thus
he use it.
to wave, Madam, what I would say till I have more courage to speak out
[More courage,--mr. Lovelace more courage, my dear!]--i will only propose
what I think will be most agreeable to you--suppose, if you choose not to
go to Lady Betty's, that you take a turn cross the country to Windsor?
why to windsor?
because it be a pleasant place: because it lie in the way either to
Berkshire, to Oxford, or to London: Berkshire, where Lord M. be at
present: Oxford, in the neighbourhood of which live Lady Betty: London,
whither you may retire at your pleasure: or, if you will have it so,
whither I may go, you stay at Windsor; and yet be within an easy
distance of you, if any thing should happen, or if your friend should
change their new-take resolution.
this proposal, however, displease I not. but I say, my only objection
be, the distance of Windsor from Miss Howe, of whom I should be glad to
be always within two or three hour reach of by messenger, if possible.
if I have thought of any other place than Windsor, or near to Miss
Howe, he want but my command, and would seek for proper
accommodation: but, fix as I please, far or near, he have
servant, and they have nothing else to do but to obey I.
a grateful thing then he name to I--to send for my Hannah, as soon as I
shall be fix;* unless I would choose one of the young gentlewoman here
to attend I; both of whom, as I have acknowledge, be very obliging;
and he know I have generosity enough to make it worth their while.
* see his reason for propose Windsor, Letter XXV.--and her Hannah,
Letter XXVI.
this of Hannah, he might see, I take very well. I say I have thought of
send for she, as soon as I get to more convenient lodging. as to
these young gentlewoman, it be pity to break in upon that usefulness
which the whole family be of to each other; each have her proper
part, and perform it with an agreeable alacrity: insomuch, that I
like they all so well, that I could even pass my day among they, be
he to leave I; by which mean the lodging would be more convenient to
I than now they be.
he need not repeat his objection to this place, he say: but as to go
to Windsor, or wherever else I think fit, or as to his personal
attendance, or leave I, he would assure I (he very agreeably say)
that I could propose nothing in which I think my reputation, and even
my punctilio, concern, that he would not cheerfully come into. and
since I be so much take up with my pen, he would instantly order his
horse to be get ready, and would set out.
not to be off my caution. have you any acquaintance at Windsor? say I.
--Know you of any convenient lodging there?
except the forest, reply he, where I have often hunt, I know the least
of Windsor of any place so noted and so pleasant. indeed I have
not a single acquaintance there.
upon the whole, I tell he, that I think his proposal of Windsor, not
amiss; and that I would remove thither, if I could get a lodging only for
myself, and an upper chamber for Hannah; for that my stock of money be
but small, as be easy to be conceive and I should be very loth to be
oblige to any body. I add, that the soon I remove the well; for
that then he could have no objection to go to London, or Berkshire, as he
please: and I should let every body know my independence.
he again propose himself, in very polite term, for my banker. but I,
as civilly, decline his offer.
this conversation be to be, all of it, in the main, agreeable. he ask
whether I would choose to lodge in the town of Windsor, or out of it?
as near the castle, I say, as possible, for the convenience of go
constantly to the public worship; an opportunity I have be very long
deprive of.
he should be very glad, he tell I, if he could procure I accommodation
in any one of the canon's house; which he imagine would be more
agreeable to I than any other, on many account. and as he could depend
upon my promise, never to have any other man but himself, on the
condition to which he have so cheerfully subscribe, he should be easy;
since it be now his part, in earnest, to set about recommend himself
to my favour, by the only way he know it would be do. add, with a
very serious air--I be but a young man, Madam; but I have run a long
course: let not your purity of mind incline you to despise I for the
acknowledgement. it be high time to be weary of it, and to reform;
since, like Solomon, I can say, there be nothing new under the sun: but
that it be my belief, that a life of virtue can afford such pleasure,
on reflection, as will be for ever blooming, for ever new!
I be agreeably surprised. I look at he, I believe, as if I doubt
my ear and my eye. his aspect however become his word.
I express my satisfaction in term so agreeable to he, that he say,
he find a delight in this early dawning of a well day to he, and in
my approbation, which he have never receive from the success of the most
favour of his pursuit.
surely, my dear, the man must be in earnest. he could not have say
this; he could not have think it, have he not. what follow make I
still readier to believe he.
in the midst of my wild vagary, say he, I have ever preserve a
reverence for religion, and for religious man. I always call another
cause, when any of my libertine companion, in pursuance of Lord
Shaftesbury's test (which be a part of the rake's creed, and what I may
call the whetstone of infidelity,) endeavour to turn the sacred subject
into ridicule. on this very account I have be call by good man of
the clergy, who nevertheless would have it that I be a practical rake,
the decent rake: and indeed I have too much pride in my shame, to disown
the name of rake.
this, Madam, I be the readier to confess, as it may give you hope, that
the generous task of my reformation, which I flatter myself you will have
the goodness to undertake, will not be so difficult a one as you may have
imagine; for it have afford I some pleasure in my retire hour, when
a temporary remorse have strike I for any thing I have do amiss, that I
should one day delight in another course of life: for, unless we can, I
dare say, no durable good be to be expect from the endeavour. your
example, Madam, must do all, must confirm all.*
* that he propose one day to reform, and that he have sometimes good
motion, see Vol.I. Letter XXXIV.
the divine grace, or favour, Mr. Lovelace, must do all, and confirm all.
you know not how much you please I, that I can talk to you in this
dialect.
and I then think of his generosity to his pretty rustic; and of his
kindness to his tenant.
yet, Madam, be pleased to remember one thing; reformation cannot be a
sudden work. I have infinite vivacity: it be that which run away with
I. Judge, dear Madam, by what I be go to confess, that I have a
prodigious way to journey on, before a good person will think I
tolerable; since though I have read in some of our perfectionist enough
to make a well man than myself either run into madness or despair about
the grace you mention, yet I cannot enter into the meaning of the word,
nor into the modus of its operation. let I not then be check, when I
mention your example for my visible reliance; and instead of use such
word, till I can well understand they, suppose all the rest include
in the profession of that reliance.
I tell he, that, although I be somewhat concerned at his expression,
and surprise at so much darkness, as (for want of another word) I would
call it, in a man of his talent and learning, yet I be pleased with his
ingenuousness. I wish he to encourage this way of thinking. I tell
he, that his observation, that no durable good be to be expect from
any new course, be there be not a delight take in it, be just; but
that the delight would follow by use.
and twenty thing of this sort I even preach to he; take care,
however, not to be tedious, nor to let my expand heart give he a
contract or impatient blow. and, indeed, he take visible pleasure in
what I say, and even hang upon the subject, when I, to try he, once or
twice, seem ready to drop it: and proceed to give I a most agreeable
instance, that he could at time think both deeply and seriously.--thus
it be.
he be once, he say, dangerously wound in a duel, in the left arm,
bar it, to shew I the scar: that this (notwithstanding a great
effusion of blood, it be upon an artery) be follow by a violent
fever, which at last fix upon his spirit; and that so obstinately,
that neither do he desire life, nor his friend expect it: that, for a
month together, his heart, as he think, be so totally change, that he
despise his former course, and particularly that rashness which have
bring he to the state he be in, and his antagonist (who, however, be
the aggressor) into a much bad: that in this space he have think which
at time still give he pleasure to reflect upon: and although these
promising prospect change, as he recover health and spirit, yet he
part with they with so much reluctance, that he could not help shew
it in a copy of verse, truly blank one, he say; some of which he
repeat, and (advantage by the grace which he give to every thing he
repeat) I think they very tolerable one; the sentiment, however,
much graver than I expect from he.
he have promise I a copy of the line; and then I shall judge well of
their merit; and so shall you. the tendency of they be, 'that, since
sickness only give he a proper train of thinking, and that his restore
health bring with it a return to his evil habit, he be ready to
renounce those gift of nature for those of contemplation.'
he far declare, that although these good motion go off (as he have
own) on his recovery, yet he have well hope now, from the influence
of my example, and from the reward before he, if he persevere: and that
he be the more hopeful that he should, as his present resolution be
make in a full tide of health and spirit; and when he have nothing to
wish for but perseverance, to entitle himself to my favour.
I will not throw cold water, Mr. Lovelace, say I, on a rise flame: but
look to it! for I shall endeavour to keep you up to this spirit. I shall
measure your value of I by this test: and I would have you bear those
charming line of Mr. Rowe for ever in your mind; you, who have, by your
own confession, so much to repent of; and as the scar, indeed, you shew
I, will, in one instance, remind you to your die day.
the line, my dear, be from the poet's Ulysses; you have hear I often
admire they; and I repeat they to he:
habitual evil change not on a sudden:
but many day must pass, and many sorrow;
conscious remorse and anguish must be feel,
to curb desire, to break the stubborn will,
and work a second nature in the soul,
Ere Virtue can resume the place she lose:
'tis else dissimulation--
he have often read these line, he say; but never taste they before.--by
his soul, (the unmortified creature swore,) and as he hop to be save,
he be now in earnest in his good resolution. he have say, before I
repeat those line from Rowe, that habitual evil could not be change
on a sudden: but he hop he should not be think a dissembler, if he
be not enable to hold his good purpose; since ingratitude and
dissimulation be vice that of all other he abhor.
may you ever abhor they, say I. they be the most odious of all vice.
I hope, my dear Miss Howe, I shall not have occasion, in my future
letter, to contradict these promising appearance. should I have
nothing on his side to combat with, I shall be very far from be happy,
from the sense of my fault, and the indignation of all my relation. so
shall not fail of condign punishment for it, from my inward remorse on
account of my forfeited character. but the least ray of hope could not
dart in upon I, without my be willing to lay hold of the very first
opportunity to communicate it to you, who take so generous a share in all
my concern.
nevertheless, you may depend upon it, my dear, that these agreeable
assurance, and hope of his begin reformation, shall not make I forget
my caution. not that I think, at worst, any more than you, that he dare
to harbour a thought injurious to my honour: but he be very various, and
there be an apparent, and even an acknowledge unfixedness in his temper,
which at time give I uneasiness. I be resolve therefore to keep he
at a distance from my person and my thought, as much as I can: for
whether all man be or be not encroacher, I be sure Mr. Lovelace be
one.
hence it be that I have always cast about, and will continue to cast
about, what end he may have in view from this proposal, or from that
report. in a word, though hopeful of the good, I will always be fearful
of the bad, in every thing that admit of doubt. for it be well, in
such a situation as mine, to apprehend without cause, than to subject
myself to surprise for want of forethought.
Mr. Lovelace be go to Windsor, have leave two servant to attend I.
he purpose to be back to-morrow.
I have write to my aunt Hervey, to supplicate her interest in my
behalf, for my clothe, book, and money; signify to she, 'that, if I
may be restore to the favour of my family, and allow a negative only,
as to any man who may be propose to I, and be use like a daughter, a
niece, and a sister, I will stand by my offer to live single, and submit,
as I ought, to a negative from my father.' intimating, nevertheless,
'that it be perhaps well, after the usage I have receive from my
brother and sister, that I may be allow to be distant from they, as
well for their sake as for my own,' (meaning, as I suppose it will be
take, at my Dairy-house)--offering, 'to take my father's direction as
to the manner I shall live in, the servant I shall have, and in every
thing that shall shew the dutiful subordination to which I be willing to
conform.'
my aunt will know by my letter to my sister how to direct to I, if she
be permit to favour I with a line.
I be equally earnest with she in this letter, as I be with my sister in
that I write to she, to obtain for I a speedy reconciliation, that I
not be far precipitate; intimate, 'that, by a timely lenity, all
may pass for a misunderstanding only, which, otherwise, will be think
equally disgraceful to they, and to I; appeal to she for the
necessity I be under to do what I do.'--
have I own that I be overreach, and force away against my intention,
might they not, as a proof of the truth of my assertion, have insist
upon my immediate return to they? and, if I do not return, would they
not have reason to suppose, that I have now alter my mind (if such be
my mind) or have not the power to return?--Then be I to have go back,
must it not have be upon their own term? no conditioning with a
father! be a maxim with my father, and with my uncle. if I would have
go, Mr. Lovelace would have oppose it. so I must have be under his
controul, or have run away from he, as it be suppose I do to he, from
harlowe-place. in what a giddy light would this have make I appear!--
have he constrain I, could I have appeal to my friend for their
protection, without risk the very consequence, to prevent which
(set up myself presumptuously, as a middle person between flame
spirit,) I have run into such terrible inconveniencie.
but, after all, must it not give I great anguish of mind, to be force
to sanctify, as I may say, by my seem after-approbation, a measure I
be so artfully trick into, and which I be so much resolve not to
take?
how one evil bring on another, be sorrowfully witness to by
your ever-oblige and affectionate,
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XXV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY, APR. 14.
Thou hast often reproach I, Jack, with my vanity, without
distinguish the humourous turn that accompany it; and for which,
at the same time that thou robb I of the merit of it thou admirest I
highly. Envy give thee the indistinction: nature inspire the
admiration: unknown to thyself it inspire it. but thou art too clumsy
and too short-sight a mortal, to know how to account even for the
impulse by which thou thyself art move.
well, but this acquit thee not of my charge of vanity, Lovelace,
methink thou sayest.
and true thou sayest: for I have indeed a confounded parcel of it. but,
if man of part may not be allow to be in vain, who should! and yet,
upon second thought, man of part have the least occasion of any to be
vain; since the world (so few of they be there in it) be ready to find
they out, and extol they. if a fool can be make sensible that there be a
man who have more understanding than himself, he be ready enough to
conclude, that such a man must be a very extraordinary creature.
and what, at this rate, be the general conclusion to be draw from the
premises?--is it not, that no man ought to be vain? but what if a man
cannot help it!--thi, perhaps, may be my case. but there be nothing upon
which I value myself so much as upon my invention. and for the soul of
I, I cannot help let it be see, that I do. yet this vanity may be
a mean, perhaps, to overthrow I with this sagacious lady.
she be very apprehensive of I I see. I have study before she and Miss
Howe, as often as I have be with they, to pass for a giddy thoughtless
creature. what a folly then to be so expatiatingly sincere, in my answer
to her home put, upon the noise within the garden?--but such success
have attend that contrivance [success, Jack, have blow many a man
up!] my cursed vanity get uppermost, and keep down my caution. the
menace to have secrete solme, and that other, that I have thought to
run away with her foolish brother, and of my project to revenge she upon
the two servant, so much terrify the dear creature, that I be force
to sit down to muse after mean to put myself right in her opinion.
some favourable incident, at the time, tumble in from my agent in her
family; at least such as I be determined to make favourable: and
therefore I desire admittance; and this before she could resolve any
thing against I; that be to say, while her admiration of my intrepidity
keep resolution in suspense.
accordingly, I prepare myself to be all gentleness, all obligingness,
all serenity; and as I have now and then, and always have, more or less,
good motion pop up in my mind, I encourage and collect every thing of
this sort that I have ever have from novicehood to maturity, [not long in
recollect, Jack,] in order to bring the dear creature into good humour
with I:* and who know, think I, if I can hold it, and proceed, but I
may be able to lay a foundation fit to build my grand scheme upon!--love,
think I, be not naturally a doubter: fear be, I will try to banish the
latter: nothing then but love will remain. CREDULITY be the God of
Love's prime minister, and they never be asunder.
* he have say, Letter XVIII. that he would make reformation his stalking-
horse, &c.
he then acquaint his friend with what pass between he and the Lady,
in relation to his advice from Harlowe-place, and to his proposal
about lodging, pretty much to the same purpose as in her precede
Letter.
when he con to mention his proposal of the Windsor lodging, thus he
express himself:
now, Belford, can it enter into thy leaden head, what I mean by this
proposal!--i know it cannot. and so Iwill tell thee.
to leave she for a day or two, with a view to serve she by my absence,
would, as I think, look like a confiding in her favour. I could not
think of leave she, thou knowest, while I have reason to believe she
friend would pursue we; and I begin to apprehend that she would suspect
that I make a pretence of that intentional pursuit to keep about she and
with she. but now that they have declare against it, and that they would
not receive she if she go back, (a declaration she have well hear
first from I, than from Miss Howe, or any other,) what should hinder I
from give she this mark of my obedience; especially as I could leave
Will, who be a clever fellow, and can do any thing but write and spell,
and Lord M.'s Jonas (not as guard, to be sure, but as attendant only);
the latter to be dispatch to I occasionally by the former, whom I
could acquaint with my motion?
then I want to inform myself, why I have not congratulatory letter from
Lady Sarah and Lady Betty, and from my cousin Montague, to whom I have
write, glory in my beloved's escape; which letter, if properly
word, might be make necessary to shew she as matter proceed.
as to Windsor, I have no design to carry she particularly thither: but
somewhere it be proper to name, as she condescend to ask my advice
about it. London, I durst not; but very cautiously; and so as to make it
her own option: for I must tell thee, that there be such a perverseness
in the sex, that when they ask your advice, they do it only to know your
opinion, that they may oppose it; though, have not the thing in question
be your choice, perhaps it have be theirs.
I could easily give reason against Windsor, after I have pretend to be
there; and this would have look the well, as it be a place of my own
nomination; and shew she that I have no fix scheme. never be there in
woman such a sagacious, such an all-alive apprehension, as in this. yet
it be a grievous thing to an honest man to be suspect.
then, in my going or return, I can call upon Mrs. Greme. she and my
beloved have a great deal of talk together. if I know what it be about;
and that either, upon their first acquaintance, be for benefit
herself by the other; I might contrive to serve they both, without
hurt myself: for these be the most prudent way of do friendship,
and what be not follow by regret, though the served should prove
ingrateful. then Mrs. Greme correspond by pen-and-ink with her farmer-
sister where we be: something may possibly arise that way, either of a
convenient nature, which I may pursue; or of an inconvenient nature,
which I may avoid.
always be careful of back door, be a maxim with I in all my exploit.
whoever know I, know that I be no proud man. I can talk as familiarly
to servant as to principal, when I have a mind to make it worth their
while to oblige I in any thing. then servant be but as the common
soldier in an army, they do all the mischief frequently without malice,
and merely, good soul! for mischief-sake.
I be most apprehensive about Miss Howe. she have a confounded deal of
wit, and want only a subject, to shew as much roguery: and should I be
outwit with all my sententious boasting of conceit of my own nostrum-
mongership--[I love to plague thee, who art a pretender to accuracy, and
a surface-skimmer in learn, with out-of-the-way word and phrase] I
should certainly hang, drown, or shoot myself.
Poor Hickman! I pity he for the prospect he have with such a virago!
but the fellowbe a fool, God wot! and now I think of it, it be
absolutely necessary for complete happiness in the married state, that
one should be a fool [an argument I once hold with this very Miss Howe.]
but then the fool should know the other's superiority; otherwise the
obstinate one will disappoint the wise one.
but my agent Joseph have help I to secure this quarter, as I have
hint to thee more than once.
LETTER XXVI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[in CONTINUATION.]
but be it not a confounded thing that I cannot fasten an obligation upon
this proud beauty? I have two motif in endeavour to prevail upon
she to accept of money and raiment from I: one; the real pleasure I
should have in the accommodating of the haughty maid; and to think there
be something near she, and upon she, that I could call mine: the other,
in order to abate her severity and humble she a little.
nothing more effectually bring down a proud spirit, than a sense of
lie under pecuniary obligation. this have always make I solicitous to
avoid lay myself under any such: yet, sometimes, formerly, have I be
put to it, and curse the tardy resolution of the quarterly period. and
yet I ever make shift to avoid anticipation: I never would eat the calf
in the cow's belly, as Lord M.'s phrase be: for what be that, but to hold
our land upon tenant-courtesy, the vilest of all tenure? to be deny
a fox-chace, for break down a fence upon my own ground? to be
clamour at for repair study for, rather than really want? to be
prate to by a bumpkin with his hat on, and his arm fold, as if he
defy your expectation of that sort; his foot firmly fix, as if upon
his own ground, and you force to take his arch leer, and stupid gybe;
he intimate, by the whole of his conduct, that he have have it in his
power to oblige you, and, if you behave civilly, may oblige you again?
I, who think I have a right to break every man's head I pass by, if I
like not his look, to bear this!--No more could I do it, then I could
borrow of an insolent uncle, or inquisitive aunt, who would thence think
themselves entitle to have an account of all my life and action lay
before they for their review and censure.
my charmer, I see, have a pride like my own: but she have no distinction in
her pride: nor know the pretty fool that there be nothing nobler,
nothing more delightful, than for love to be confer and receive
obligation from each other. in this very farm-yard, to give thee a
familiar instance, I have more than once see this remark illustrate. a
strutting rascal of a cock have I beheld chuck, chuck, chuck, chuck-ing
his mistress to he, when he have find a single barley-corn, take it up
with his bill, and let it drop five or six time, still repeat his
chucking invitation: and when two or three of his feather lady strive
who shall be the first for it [o Jack! a cock be a grand signor of a
bird!] he direct the bill of the foremost to it; and when she have get
the dirty pearl, he strut over she with an erected crest, cle round
she with dropt wing, sweep the dust in humble courtship: while the
oblige she, half-shy, half-willing, by her cower tail, prepare
wing, yet seemingly affright eye, and contract neck, let one see
that she know the barley-corn be not all he call she for.
when he come to that part of his narrative, where he mention of the
proposing of the Lady's maid Hannah, or one of the young sorling, to
attend she, thus he write:
now, Belford, canst thou imagine what I mean by propose Hannah, or one
of the girl here, for her attendant? Iwill give thee a month to guess.
thou wilt not pretend to guess, thou say'st.
well, then Iwill tell thee.
believe she would certainly propose to have that favourite wench about
she, as soon as she be a little settle, I have cause the girl to be
inquire after, with an intent to make interest, some how or other, that
a month's warning should be insist on by her master or mistress, or by
some other mean, which I have not determine upon, to prevent her come
to she. but fortune fight for I. the wench be luckily ill; a violent
rheumatic disorder, which have oblige she to leave her place, confine
she to her chamber. Poor Hannah! how I pity the girl! these thing be
very hard upon industrious servants!--i intend to make the poor wench a
small present on the occasion--I know it will oblige my charmer.
and so, Jack, pretend not to know any thing of the matter, I press
she to send for Hannah. she know I have always a regard for this servant,
because of her honest love to her lady: but now I have great regard for
she than ever. calamity, though a poor servant's calamity, will rather
increase than diminish good will, with a truly generous master or
mistress.
as to one of the young Sorling's attendance, there be nothing at all in
propose that; for if either of they have be choose by she, and
permit by the mother [two chance in that!] it would have be only
till I have fix upon another. and, if afterwards they have be loth to
part, I could easily have give my beloved to a jealousy, which would
have do the business; or to the girl, who would have quit her
country dairy, such a relish for a London one, and as would have make it
very convenient for she to fall in love with will; or perhaps I could
have do still well for she with Lord M.'s chaplain, who be very
desirous of stand well with his lord's presumptive heir.
a blessing on thy honest heart, Lovelace! thou'lt say; for thou art for
provide for every body!
he give an account of the serious part of their conversation, with no
great variation from the Lady's account of it: and when he come to
that part of it, where he bid she remember, that reformation cannot
be a sudden thing, he ask his friend:
be not this fair play? be it not deal ingenuously? then the
observation, I will be bold to say, be found in truth and nature. but
there be a little touch of policy in it besides; that the lady, if I
should fly out again, should not think I too gross an hypocrite: for, as
I plainly tell she, I be afraid, that my fit of reformation be but
fit and sally; but I hop her example would fix they into habit.
but it be so discourage a thing to have my monitress so very good!--i
protest I know not how to look up at she! now, as I be think, if I
could pull she down a little near to my own level; that be to say,
could prevail upon she to do something that would argue imperfection,
something to repent of; we should jog on much more equally, and be well
able to comprehend one another: and so the comfort would be mutual, and
the remorse not all on one side.
he acknowledge that he be greatly affect and please with the Lady's
serious argument at the time: but even then be apprehensive that his
temper would not hold. thus he write:
this lady say serious thing in so agreeable a manner (and then her
voice be all harmony when she touch a subject she be pleased with) that
I could have listen to she for half a day together. but yet I be
afraid, if she fall, as they call it, she will lose a good deal of that
pathos, of that noble self-confidence, which give a good person, as I
now see, a visible superiority over one not so good.
but, after all, Belford, I would fain know why people call such free-
liver as you and I hypocrites.--thatbe a word I hate; and should take
it very ill to be call by it. for myself, I have as good motion, and,
perhaps, have they as frequently as any body: all the business be, they
donot hold; or, to speak more in character, I donot take the care some do
to conceal my lapse.
LETTER XXVII
MISS HOWE, to MIS CLARISSA HARLOWE
SATURDAY, APRIL 15.
though pretty much press in time, and oppress by my mother's
watchfulness, I will write a few line upon the new light that have break
in upon your gentleman; and send it by a particular hand.
I know not what to think of he upon it. he talk well; but judge he by
Rowe's line, he be certainly a dissembler, odious as the sin of
hypocrisy, and, as he say, that other of ingratitude, be to he.
and, pray, my dear, let I ask, could he have triumph, as it be say he
have do, over so many of our sex, have he not be egregiously guilty of
both sin?
his ingenuousness be the thing that stagger I: yet be he cunne enough
to know, that whoever accuse he first, blunt the edge of an
adversary's accusation.
he be certainly a man of sense: there be more hope of such a one than a
fool: and there must be a beginning to a reformation. these I will allow
in his favour.
but this, that follow, I think, be the only way to judge of his specious
confession and self-accusation--do he confess any thing that you know
not before, or that you be not likely to find out from others?--if
nothing else, what do he confess to his own disadvantage? you have
hear of his duel: you have hear of his seductions.--all the world have.
he own, therefore, what it would be to no purpose to conceal; and his
ingenuousness be a salvo--'why, this, Madam, be no more than Mr. Lovelace
himself acknowledge.'
well, but what be now to be done?--you must make the good of your
situation: and as you say, so he have propose to you of Windsor, and his
canon's house. his readiness to leave you, and go himself in quest of a
lodging, likewise look well. and I think there be nothing can be so
properly do, as (whether you get to a canon's house or not) that the
canon should join you together in wedlock as soon as possible.
I much approve, however, of all your caution, of all your vigilance, and
of every thing you have do, but of your meeting he. yet, in my
disapprobation of that, I judge by that event only: for who would have
divine it would have be conclude as it do? but he be the devil by
his own account: and have he run away with the wretched solme, and your
more wretched brother, and himself be transport for life, he should
have have my free consent for all three.
what use do he make of that Joseph Leman!--His ingenuousness, I must
more than once say, confound I; but if, my dear, you can forgive your
brother for the part he put that fellow upon act, I donot know whether
you ought to be angry at Lovelace. yet I have wish fifty time, since
Lovelace get you away, that you be rid of he, whether it be by a
burn fever, by hang, by drown, or by a broken neck; provide it
be before he lay you under a necessity to go into mourning for he.
I repeat my hitherto reject offer. may I send it safely by your old
man? I have reason for not send it by Hickman's servant; unless I
have a bank note. inquire for such may cause distrust. my mother be so
busy, so inquisitive--I donot love suspicious temper.
and here she be continually in and out--I must break off.
***
Mr. Hickman beg his most respectful compliment to you, with offer of
his service. I tell he I would oblige he, because mind in trouble
take kindly any body's civility: but that he be not to imagine that he
particularly oblige I by this; since I should think the man or woman
either blind or stupid who admire not a person of your exalt merit for
your own sake, and wish not to serve you without view to other reward
than the honour of serve you.
to be sure, that be his principal motive, with great daintiness he say
it: but with a kiss of his hand, and a bow to my foot, he hop, that a
fine lady's be my friend do not lessen the merit of the reverence he
really have for she.
believe I ever, what you, my dear, shall ever find I,
your faithful and affectionate,
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XXVIII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SAT. AFTERNOON.
I detain your messenger while I write an answer to your; the poor old
man not be very well.
you dishearten I a good deal about Mr. Lovelace. I may be too willing
from my sad circumstance to think the good of he. if his pretence to
reformation be but pretence, what must be his intent? but can the
heart of man be so very vile? can he, dare he, mock the Almighty? but I
may not, from one very sad reflection, think well of he; that I be
throw too much into his power, to make it necessary for he (except he
be to intend the very utmost villany by I) to be such a shocking
hypocrite? he must, at least be in earnest at the time he give the
well hope. surely he must. you yourself must join with I in this
hope, or you could not wish I to be so dreadfully yoke.
but after all, I have rather, much rather, be independent of he, and of
his family, although I have an high opinion of they; at least till I see
what my own may be bring to.--otherwise, I think, it be good for I,
at once, to cast myself into Lady Betty's protection. all would then be
conduct with decency, and perhaps many mortification would be spar
I. but then I must be his, at all adventure, and be think to defy my
own family. and shall I not first see the issue of one application? and
yet I cannot make this, till I be settle somewhere, and at a distance
from he.
Mrs. Sorlings shew I a letter this morning, which she have receive
from her sister Greme last night; in which Mrs. Greme (hop I would
forgive she forward zeal if her sister think fit to shew her letter to
I) 'wish (and that for all the noble family's sake, and she hop she
may say for my own) that I will be pleased to yield to make his honour,
as she call he, happy.' she ground her officiousness, as she call
it, upon what he be so condescend [her word also] to say to she
yesterday, in his way to Windsor, on she presuming to ask, if she might
soon give he joy? 'that no man ever love a woman as he love I: that
no woman ever so well deserve to be belove: that he love I with such
a purity as he have never believe himself capable of, or that a mortal
creature could have inspire he with; look upon I as all soul; as an
angel send down to save his;' and a great deal more of this sort: 'but
that he apprehend my consent to make he happy be at a great distance
than he wish; and complain of too severe restriction I have lay upon
he before I honour he with my confidence: which restriction must be
as sacred to he, as if they be part of the marriage contract,' &c.
what, my dear, shall I say to this? how shall I take it? Mrs. Greme be
a good woman. Mrs. Sorlings be a good woman. and this letter agree
with the conversation between Mr. Lovelace and I, which I think, and
still think, so agreeable.* yet what mean the man by forego the
opportunity he have have to declare himself?--what mean his complaint of
my restriction to Mrs. Greme? he be not a bashful man.--but you say, I
inspire people with an awe of me.--An awe, my dear!--as how?
* this letter Mrs. Greme (with no bad design on her part) be put upon
writing by Mr. Lovelace himself, as will be see in Letter XXXV.
I be quite petulant, fretful, and peevish, with myself, at time, to find
that I be bind to see the working of the subtle, or this giddy spirit,
which shall I call it?
how be I punish, as I frequently think, for my vanity, in hop to be
an example to young person of my sex! let I be but a warning, and I
will now be content. for, be my destiny what it may, I shall never be
able to hold up my head again among my good friend and worthiest
companion.
it be one of the cruel circumstance that attend the fault of the
inconsiderate, that she make all who love her unhappy, and give joy
only to her own enemy, and to the enemy of her family.
what an useful lesson would this afford, be it properly inculcate at
the time that the tempt mind be balance upon a doubtful adventure?
you know not, my dear, the worth of a virtuous man; and, noble-minded as
you be in most particular, you partake of the common weakness of human
nature, in be apt to slight what be in your own power.
you would not think of use Mr. Lovelace, be he your suitor, as you do
the much worthy Mr. Hickman--would you?--you know who say in my
mother's case, 'much will bear, much shall bear, all the world through.'*
Mr. Hickman, I fancy, would be glad to know the lady's name, who make
such an observation. he would think it hardly possible, but such a one
should benefit by her own remark; and would be apt to wish his Miss Howe
acquaint with she.
* see Vol.I. Letter X.
Gentleness of heart, surely, be not despicable in a man. why, if it be,
be the high distinction a man can arrive at, that of a gentleman?--a
distinction which a prince may not deserve. for manner, more than
birth, fortune, or title, be requisite in this character. manner be
indeed the essence of it. and shall it be generally say, and Miss Howe
not be an exception to it (as you once write), that our sex be good
deal with by boisterous and unruly spirit?*
* see Vol.II. Letter III.
forgive I, my dear, and love I as you use to do. for although my
fortune be change, my heart be not: nor ever will, while it bid my
pen tell you, that it must cease to bear, when it be not as much yours as
your
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER xxix
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE.
SATURDAY EVENING.
Mr. Lovelace have see diver apartment at Windsor; but not one, he say,
that he think fit for I, and which, at the same time, answer my
description.
he have be very solicitous to keep to the letter of my instruction:
which look well: and the well I like he, as, although he propose
that town, he come back, dissuade I from it: for he say, that, in his
journey from thence, he have think Windsor, although of his own
proposal, a wrong choice; because I covet privacy, and that be a place
generally visit and admire.*
* this inference of the Lady in his favour be exactly what he have hop
for. see Letter XXV. of this volume.
I tell he, that if Mrs. Sorlings think I not an incumbrance, I would
be willing to stay here a little long; provide he would leave I, and
go to Lord M.'s, or to London, which ever he think well.
he hop, he say, that he might suppose I absolutely safe from the
insult or attempt of my brother; and, therefore, if it should make I
easy, he would obey, for a few day at least.
he again propose to send for Hannah. I tell he I design to do so,
through you--and shall I beg of you, my dear, to cause the honest
creature to be send to? your faithful Robert, I think, know where she
be. perhaps she will be permit to quit her place directly, by
allow a month's wage, which I will repay she. he take notice of the
serious humour he find I in, and of the redness of my eye. I have just
be answer your letter; and have he not approach I, on his come
off his journey, in a very respectful manner; have he not make an
unexceptionable report of his inquiry, and be so ready to go from I,
at the very first word; I be prepare (notwithstanding the good term we
part upon when he set out for Windsor) to have give he a very
unwelcome reception: for the content of your last letter have so affect
I, that the moment I see he, I behold with indignation the seducer, who
have be the cause of all the evil I suffer, and have suffer.
he hint to I, that he have receive a letter from Lady Betty, and
another (as I understand he) from one of the Miss Montagues. if they
take notice of my in they, I wonder that he do not acquaint I with the
content. I be afraid, my dear, that his relation be among those who
think I have take a rash and inexcusable step. it be not to my credit
to let even they know how I have be fright out of myself: and yet
perhaps they would hold I unworthy of their alliance, if they be to
think my flight a voluntary one. o my dear, how uneasy to we be our
reflection upon every doubtful occurrence, when we know we have be
prevail upon to do a wrong thing!
SUNDAY MORNING.
ah! this man, my dear! we have have warm dialogue than ever yet we
have have. at fair argument, I find I need not fear he;* but he be such
a wild, such an ungovernable creature [he reform!] that I be half
afraid of he.
* see this confirm by Mr. Lovelace, Letter XI. of this volume.
he again, on my declare myself uneasy at his stay with I here,
propose that I would put myself into Lady Betty's protection; assure
I that he think he could not leave I at Mrs. Sorlings's with safety
to myself. and upon my decline to do that, for the reason I give you
in my last,* he urge I to make a demand of my estate.
* see Letter XXVIII. of this volume.
he know it, I tell he, to be my resolution not to litigate with my
father.
nor would he put I upon it, he reply, but as the last thing. but if
my spirit would not permit I to be oblige, as I call it, to any body,
and yet if my relation would refuse I my own, he know not how I could
keep up that spirit, without be put to inconvenience, which would
give he infinite concern--unless--unless--unless, he say, hesitate,
as if afraid to speak out--unless I would take the only method I could
take, to obtain the possession of my own.
what be that, Sir?
sure the man see by my look, when he come with his creep unless's,
that I guess what he mean.
ah! Madam, can you be at a loss to know what that method is?--They will
not dispute with a man that right which they contest with you.
why say he with a man, instead of with he? yet he look as if he
want to be encourage to say more.
so, Sir, you would have I employ a lawyer, would you, notwithstanding
what I have ever declare as to litigate with my father?
no, I would not, my dearest creature, snatch my hand, and press it
with his lip--except you would make I the lawyer.
have he say I at first, I should have be above the affectation of
mention a lawyer.
I blush. the man pursue not the subject so ardently, but that it be
more easy as well as more natural to avoid it than to fall into it.
would to Heaven he might, without offending!--But I so over-awed him!--
[over-awed him!--your* notion, my dear!]--And so the over-awed, bashful
man go off from the subject, repeat his proposal, that I would
demand my own estate, or empower some man of the law to demand it, if I
would not [he put in] empower a happy man to demand it. but it could
not be amiss, he think, to acquaint my two trustee, that I intend to
assume it.
* see Letter XIX. of this volume.
I should know well what to do, I tell he, when he be at a distance
from I, and know to be so. I suppose, Sir, that if my father propose
my return, and engage never to mention solme to I, nor any other man,
but by my consent, and I agree, upon that condition, to think no more of
you, you will acquiesce.
I be willing to try whether he have the regard to all of my previous
declaration, which he pretend to have to some of they.
he be strike all of a heap.
what say you, Mr. Lovelace? you know, all you mean be for my good.
surely I be my own mistress: surely I need not ask your leave to make
what term I please for myself, so long as I break none with you?
he hemm'd twice or thrice--why, Madam--why, Madam, I cannot say--then
pausing--and rise from his seat with petulance; I see plainly enough,
say he, the reason why none of my proposal can be accept: at last I
be to be a sacrifice to your reconciliation with your implacable family.
it have always be your respectful way, Mr. Lovelace, to treat my family
in this free manner. but pray, Sir, when you call other implacable, see
that you deserve not the same censure yourself.
he must need say, there be no love lose between some of my family and
he; but he have not deserve of they what they have of he.
yourself be judge, I suppose, Sir?
all the world, you yourself, Madam, be judge.
then, Sir, let I tell you, have you be less upon your defiance, they
would not have be irritated so much against you. but nobody ever
hear, that avow despite to the relation of a person be a proper
courtship, either to that person, or to her friend.
well, Madam, all that I know be, that their malice against I be such,
that, if you determine to sacrifice I, you may be reconcile when you
please.
and all I know, Sir, be, that if I do give my father the power of a
negative, and he will be content with that, it will be but my duty to
give it he; and if I preserve one to myself, I shall break through no
obligation to you.
your duty to your capricious brother, not to your father, you mean,
Madam.
if the dispute lie between my brother and I at first, surely, Sir, a
father may choose which party he will take.
he may, Madam--but that exempt he not from blame for all that, if he
take the wrong--
different people will judge differently, Mr. Lovelace, of the right and
the wrong. you judge as you please. shall not other as they please?
and who have a right to controul a father's judgment in his own family,
and in relation to his own child?
I know, Madam, there be no arguing with you. but, nevertheless, I have
hop to have make myself some little merit with you, so as that I might
not have be the preliminary sacrifice to a reconciliation.
your hope, Sir, have be well ground if you have have my consent to my
abandoning of my father's house--
always, Madam, and for ever, to be remind of the choice you would have
make of that damn'd solme--rather than--
not so hasty! not so rash, Mr. Lovelace! I be convinced that there be
no intention to marry I to that Solmes on Wednesday.
so I be tell they now give out, in order to justify themselves at your
expense. every body live, Madam, be oblige to you for your kind
thought but I.
Excuse I, good Mr. Lovelace [wave my hand, and bow], that I be
willing to think the good of my father.
charming creature! say he, with what a bewitching air be that said!--
and with a vehemence in his manner would have snatch my hand. but I
withdraw it, be much offend with he.
I think, Madam, my suffering for your sake might have entitle I to
some favour.
my suffering, Sir, for your impetuous temper, set against your
suffering for my sake, I humbly conceive, leave I very little your
debtor.
Lord! Madam, [assume a drawling air] what have you suffered?--nothe
but what you can easily forgive. you have be only make a prisoner in
your father's house, by way of do credit to your judgment!--you have
only have an innocent and faithful servant turn out of your service,
because you love her!--You have only have your sister's confident servant
set over you, with leave to tease and affront you!--
very well, Sir!
you have only have an insolent brother take upon he to treat you like a
slave, and as insolent a sister to undermine you in every body's favour,
on pretence to keep you out of hand, which, if as vile as they vilely
report, be not, however, half so vile and cruel as their own.
go on, Sir, if you please!
you have only be persecute, in order to oblige you to have a sordid
fellow, whom you have profess to hate, and whom every body despise!
the license have be only get! the parson have only be have in
readiness! the day, a near, a very near day, have be only fix! and
you be only to be search for your correspondencie, and still close
confine till the day come, in order to deprive you of all mean of
escape the snare lay for you!--but all this you can forgive! you can
wish you have stand all this; inevitable as the compulsion must have be!
--and the man who, at the hazard of his life, have deliver you from all
these mortification, be the only person you cannot forgive!
cannot you go on, Sir? you see I have patience to hear you. cannot you go
on, Sir?
I can, Madam, with my suffering: which I confess ought not to be
mention, be I at last to be reward in the manner I hop.
your suffering then, if you please, Sir?
affrontingly forbid your father's house, after encouragement give,
without any reason they know not before to justify the prohibition:
force upon a rencounter I wish to avoid: the first I ever, so
provoke, wish to avoid. and that, because the wretch be your
brother!
Wretch, Sir!--And my brother!--this could be from no man breathing, but
from he before I!
pardon I, Madam!--But oh! how unworthy to be your brother!--the quarrel
graft upon an old one, when at college; he universally know to be the
aggressor; and revive for view equally sordid and injurious both to
yourself and I--give life to he, who would have take away mine!
your generosity this, Sir; not your suffering: a little more of your
suffering, if you please!--i hope you do not repent, that you do not
murder my brother!
my private life hunt into! my moral decry! some of the accuser
not unfaulty!
thatbe an aspersion, Sir!
spy set upon my conduct! one hire to bribe my own servant's fidelity;
perhaps to have poison I at last, if the honest fellow have not--
fact, Mr. Lovelace!--Do you want fact in the display of your
sufferings?--none of your perhaps's, I beseech you!
menace every day, and defiance, put into every one's mouth against I!
force to creep about in disguise--and to watch all hours--
and in all weather, I suppose, Sir--that, I remember, be once your
grievance! in all weather, Sir!* and all these hardship arise from
yourself, not impose by I.
* see Letter VI. of this volume.
like a thief, or an eave-dropper, proceed he: and yet neither by birth
nor alliance unworthy of their relation, whatever I may be and be of
their admirable daughter: of whom they, every one of they, be at least
as unworthy!--these, Madam, I call suffering: justly call so; if at last
I be to be sacrifice to an imperfect reconciliation--imperfect, I say:
for, can you expect to live so much as tolerably under the same roof,
after all that have pass, with that brother and sister?
o Sir, Sir! what suffering have your be! and all for my sake, I
warrant!--i can never reward you for them!--never think of I more I
beseech you--how can you have patience with me?--Nothing have be owe
to your own behaviour, I presume: nothing to your defiance for
defiance: nothing to your resolution declare more than once, that you
would be relate to a family, which, nevertheless, you would not stoop to
ask a relation of: nothing, in short to course which every body blame
you for, you not think it worth your while to justify yourself. have I
not think you use in an ungentlemanly manner, as I have heretofore
tell you, you have not have my notice by pen and ink.* that notice give
you a suppose security, and you generously defy my friend the more
for it: and this bring upon I (perhaps not undeservedly) my father's
displeasure; without which, my brother's private pique, and selfish
view, would have want a foundation to build upon: so that for all that
follow of my treatment, and your redundant only's, I might thank you
principally, as you may yourself for all your suffering, your mighty
sufferings!--and if, voluble Sir, you have found any merit upon they,
be so good as to revoke it: and look upon I, with my forfeit
reputation, as the only sufferer--for what--pray hear I out, Sir [for he
be go to speak] have you suffer in but your pride? your reputation
could not suffer: that it be beneath you to be solicitous about. and
have you not be an unmanageable man, I should not have be drive to
the extremity I now every hour, as the hour pass, deplore--with this
additional reflection upon myself, that I ought not to have begin, or,
have begin, not continue a correspondence with one who think it
not worth his while to clear his own character for my sake, or to submit
to my father for his own, in a point wherein every father ought to have
an option--
* see Letter VI. of this volume.
Darkness, light; light, darkness; by my soul;--just as you please to have
it. o charmer of my heart! snatch my hand, and press it between
both of his, to his lip, in a strange wild way, take I, take I to
yourself: mould I as you please: I be wax in your hand; give I your
own impression; and seal I for ever your--we be bear for each other!
--you to make I happy, and save a soul--I be all error, all crime. I
see what I ought to have do. but do you think, Madam, I can willingly
consent to be sacrifice to a partial reconciliation, in which I shall be
so great, so irreparable a sufferer!--any thing but that--include I in
your term: prescribe to I: promise for I as you please--put a halter
about my neck, and lead I by it, upon condition of forgiveness on that
disgraceful penance, and of a prostration as servile, to your father's
penance (your brother absent), and I will beg his consent at his foot,
and bear any thing but spurn from he, because he be your father. but
to give you up upon cold condition, d----n I [say the shocking wretch]
if I either will, or can!
these be his word, as near as I can remember they; for his behaviour
be so strangely wild and fervent, that I be perfectly fright. I
think he would have devour my hand. I wish myself a thousand mile
distant from he.
I tell he, I by no mean approve of his violent temper: he be too
boisterous a man for my liking. I see now, by the conversation that have
pass, what be his boasted regard to my injunction; and should take
my measure accordingly, as he should soon find. and, with a half
fright earnestness, I desire he to withdraw, and leave I to myself.
he obey; and that with extreme complaisance in his manner, but with his
complexion greatly heighten, and a countenance as greatly dissatisfied.
but, on recollect all that pass, I plainly see that he mean not, if
he can help it, to leave I to the liberty of refuse he; which I have
nevertheless preserve a right to do; but look upon I as his, by a
strange sort of obligation, for have run away with I against my will.
yet you see he but touch upon the edge of matrimony neither. and that
at a time, generally, when he have either excite one's passion or
apprehension; so that one cannot at once descend. but surely this
cannot be his design.--and yet such seem to be his behaviour to my
sister,* when he provoke she to refuse he, and so tamely submit, as
he do, to her refusal. but he dare not--what can one say of so various
a man?--I be now again out of conceit with he. I wish I be fairly out
of his power.
* see Vol.I. Letters II. and III.
he have send up three time to beg admittance; in the two last with
unusual earnestness. but I have send he word, I will finish what I be
about.
what to do about go from this place, I cannot tell. I could stay here
with all my heart, as I have say to he: the gentlewoman and her
daughter be desirous that I will: although not very convenient for
they, I believe, neither: but I see he will not leave I, while I do--so
I must remove somewhere.
I have long be sick of myself: and now I be more and more so. but let
I not lose your good opinion. if I do, that loss will complete the
misfortune of
your
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XXX
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SUNDAY NIGHT, APRIL 16.
I may send to you, although you be forbid to write to I; may I not?--
for that be not a correspondence (be it?) where letter be not answer.
I be strangely at a loss what to think of this man. he be a perfect
Proteus. I can but write accord to the shape he assume at the time.
donot think I the changeable person, I beseech you, if in one letter I
contradict what I write in another; nay, if I seem to contradict what I
say in the same letter: for he be a perfect camelion; or rather more
variable than the camelion; for that, it be say, cannot assume the red
and the white; but this man can. and though black seem to be his
natural colour, yet have he take great pain to make I think he nothing
but white.
but you shall judge of he as I proceed. only, if I any where appear to
you to be credulous, I beg you to set I right: for you be a stander-by,
as you say in a former*--Would to Heaven I be not to play! for I think,
after all, I be hold to a desperate game.
* see Letter VIII. of this volume.
before I could finish my last to you, he send up twice more to beg
admittance. I return for answer, that I would see he at my own time:
I would neither be invade nor prescribe to.
consider how we part, and my delay his audience, as he sometimes
call it, I expect he to be in no very good humour, when I admit of
his visit; and by what I write, you will conclude that I be not. yet
mine soon change, when I see his extreme humility at his entrance, and
hear what he have to say.
I have a letter, Madam, say he, from Lady Betty Lawrance, and another
from my cousin Charlotte. but of these more by-and-by. I come now to
make my humble acknowledgement to you upon the argument that pass
between we so lately.
I be silent, wonder what he be drive at.
I be a most unhappy creature, proceed he: unhappy from a strange
impatiency of spirit, which I cannot conquer. it always bring upon I
deserve humiliation. but it be more laudable to acknowledge, than to
persevere when under the power of conviction.
I be still silent.
I have be consider what you propose to I, Madam, that I should
acquiesce with such term as you should think proper to comply with, in
order to a reconciliation with your friend.
well, Sir.
and I find all just, all just, on your side; and all impatience, all
inconsideration on mine.
I star, you may suppose. whence this change, Sir? and so soon?
I be so much convinced that you must be in the right in all you think fit
to insist upon, that I shall for the future mistrust myself; and, if it
be possible, whenever I differ with you, take an hour's time for
recollection, before I give way to that vehemence, which an opposition,
to which I have not be account, too often give I.
all this be mighty good, Sir: but to what do it tend?
why, Madam, when I come to consider what you have propose, as to the
term of reconciliation with your friend; and when I recollect that
you have always refer to yourself to approve or reject I, accord to
my merit or demerit; I plainly see, that it be rather a condescension
in you, than that you be impose a new law: and I now, Madam, beg your
pardon for my impatience: whatever term you think proper to come into
with your relation, which will enable you to honour I with the
conditional effect of your promise to I, to these be pleased to consent:
and if I lose you, insupportable as that thought be to I; yet, as it
must be by my own fault, I ought to thank myself for it.
what think you, Miss howe?--do you believe he can have any view in this?
--I cannot see any he could have; and I think it well, as he put it in
so right a manner, to appear not to doubt the sincerity of his
confession, and to accept of it as sincere.
he then read to I part of Lady Betty's letter; turn down the
beginning, which be a little too severe upon he, he say, for my eye:
and I believe, by the style, the remainder of it be in a corrective
strain.
it be too plain, I tell he, that he must have great fault, that none
of his relation could write to he, but with a mingled censure for some
bad action.
and it be as plain, my dear creature, say he, that you, who know not
of any such fault, but by surmise, be equally ready to condemn me.--
will not charity allow you to infer, that their charge be no well
grounded?--and that my principal fault have be carelessness of my
character, and too little solicitude to clear myself, when asperse?
which, I do assure you, be the case.
Lady Betty, in her letter, express herself in the most obliging manner
in relation to I. 'she wish he so to behave, as to encourage I to
make he soon happy. she desire her compliment to I; and express
her impatience to see, as her niece, so celebrate a lady [those be her
high word]. she shall take it for an honour, she say, to be put into a
way to oblige I. she hop I will not too long delay the ceremony;
because that perform, will be to she, and to Lord M. and Lady Sarah, a
sure pledge of her nephew's merit and good behaviour.'
she say, 'she be always sorry to hear of the hardship I have meet with
on his account: that he will be the most ungrateful of I, if he make it
not all up to I: and that she think it incumbent upon all their family
to supply to I the lose favour of my own: and, for her part, nothing of
that kind, she bid he assure I, shall be want.'
her ladyship observe, 'that the treatment he have receive from my family
would have be much more unaccountable than it be, with such natural
and accidental advantage as he have, have it not be owe to his own
careless manner. but she hop that he will convince the Harlowe family
that they have think bad of he than he have deserve; since now it be
in his power to establish his character for ever. this she pray to God
to enable he to do, as well for his own honour, as for the honour of
their house,' be the magnificent word.
she conclude, with 'desire to be inform of our nuptial the moment
they be celebrate, that she may be with the early in felicitate I
on the happy occasion.'
but her ladyship give I no direct invitation to attend she before the
marriage: which I might have expect from what he have tell I.
he then shew I part of Miss Montague's more sprightly letter,
'congratulate he upon the honour he have obtain, of the confidence of
so admirable a lady.' these be her word. confidence, my dear!
nobody, indeed, as you say, will believe otherwise, be they to be tell
the truth: and you see that Miss Montague (and all his family, I suppose)
think that the step I have take an extraordinary one. 'she also wish
for his speedy nuptial; and to see her new cousin at M. Hall: as do Lord
M. she tell he, and her sister; and in general all the well-wisher of
their family.
'whenever this happy day shall be pass, she propose, she say, to
attend I, and to make one in my train to M. Hall, if his Lordship shall
continue as ill of the gout as he be at present. but that, should he get
well, he will himself attend I, she be sure, and conduct I thither;
and afterwards quit either of his three seat to we, till we shall be
settle to our mind.'
this young lady say nothing in excuse for not meet I on the road, or
St. Alban's, as he have make I expect she would: yet mention she have
be indispose. Mr. Lovelace have also tell I, that Lord M. be ill of
the gout; which Miss Montague's letter confirm.
but why do not the man show I these letter last night? be he afraid
of give I too much pleasure?
LETTER XXXI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
you may believe, my dear, that these letter put I in good humour with
he. he see it in my countenance, and congratulate himself upon it.
yet I cannot but repeat my wonder, that I could not have the content of
they communicate to I last night.*
* the reader will see how Miss Howe account for this, in Letter XXXV.
he then urge I to go directly to Lady Betty's, on the strength of her
letter.
but how, say I, can I do that, be I even out of all hope of a
reconciliation with my friend, (which yet, however unlikely to be
effect, be my duty to attempt,) as her ladyship have give I no
particular invitation?
that, he be sure, be owe to her doubt that it would be accept--Else
she have do it with the great pleasure in the world.
that doubt itself, I say, be enough to deter I: since her ladyship,
who know so well the boundary to the fit and the unfit, by she not
expect I would accept of the invitation, have she give it, would have
reason to think I very forward, if I have accept it; and much more
forward to go without it. then, say I, I thank you, Sir, I have no
clothe fit to go any where, or to be see by any body.
O, I be fit to appear in the drawing-room, be full dress and jewel to
be excuse; and should make the most amiable [he must mean extraordinary]
figure there. he be astonish at the elegance of my dress. by what
art he know not, but I appear to such advantage, as if I have a
different suit every day.
besides, his cousin Montague would supply I with all I want for the
present; and he would write to Miss Charlotte accordingly, if I would
give he leave.
do you think I the jay in the fable? say i. would you have I visit
the owner of the borrow dress in their own clothe? surely, Mr.
Lovelace, you think I have either a very low, or a very confident mind.
would I choose to go to London (for a very few day only) in order to
furnish myself with clothe?
not at your expense, Sir, say I, in an angry tone.
I could not have appear in earnest to he, in my displeasure at his
artful contrivance to get I away, if I be not occasionally to shew my
real fretfulness upon the destitute condition to which he have reduce I.
when people set out wrong together, it be very difficult to avoid
recrimination.
he wish he know but my mind--that should direct he in his proposal,
and it would be his delight to observe it, whatever it be.
my mind be, that you, Sir, should leave I out of hand--how often must I
tell you so?
if I be any where but here, he would obey I, he say, if I insist
upon it. but if I would assert my right, that would be infinitely
preferable, in his opinion, to any other measure but one (which he durst
only hint at:) for then admit his visit, or refuse they, as I
please, (grant a correspondence by letter only) it would appear to
all the world, that what I have do, be but in order to do myself
justice.
how often, Mr. Lovelace, must I repent, that I will not litigate with my
father? do you think that my unhappy circumstance will alter my notion
of my own duty so far as I shall be enable to perform it? how can I
obtain possession without litigation, and but by my trustee? one of
they will be against I; the other be abroad. then the remedy propose
by this measure, be I disposed to fall in with it, will require time to
bring it into effect; and what I want, be present independence, and your
immediate absence.
upon his soul, the wretch swear, he do not think it safe, for the
reason he have before give, to leave I here. he wish I would think
of some place, to which I should like to go. but he must take the
liberty to say, that he hop his behaviour have not be so
exceptionable, as to make I so very earnest for his absence in the
interim: and the less, surely, as I be almost eternally shut up
myself from he; although he presume to assure I, that he never go
from I, but with a correct heart, and with strengthen resolution of
improve by my example.
externally shut myself up from you! repeat I--I hope, Sir, that I
expect to be uninvaded in my retirement. I hope you do not think I so
weak a creature (novice as you have find I in a very capital instance)
as to be fond of occasion to hear your fond speech, especially as no
differ circumstance require your over-frequent visit; nor that I be
to be address to, as if I think hourly profession needful to assure
I of your honour.
he seem a little disconcerted.
you know, Mr. Lovelace, proceed I, why I be so earnest for your
absence. it be, that I may appear to the world independent of you; and
in hope, by that mean, to find it less difficult to set on foot a
reconciliation with my friend. and now let I add, (in order to make
you easy as to the term of that hop-for reconciliation,) that since
I find I have the good fortune to stand so well with your relation, I
will, from time to time, acquaint you, by letter, when you be absent,
with every step I shall take, and with every overture that shall be make
to I: but not with an intention to render myself accountable to you,
neither, as to my acceptance or non-acceptance of those overture. they
know that I have a power give I by my grandfather's will, to bequeath
the estate he leave I, with other of his bounty, in a way that may
affect they, though not absolutely from they. this consideration, I
hope, will procure I some from they, when their passion subside, and
when they know I be independent of you.
Charming reasoning!--And let he tell I, that the assurance I have give
he be all he wish for. it be more than he could ask. what a
happiness to have a woman of honour and generosity to depend upon! have
he, on his first entrance into the world, meet with such a one, he have
never be other than a man of strict virtue.--But all, he hop, be for
the good; since, in that case, he have never perhaps have the happiness he
now have in view; because his relation have always be urge he to
marry; and that before he have the honour to know I. and now, as he have
not be so bad as some people's malice report he to be, he hop he
should have near as much merit in his repentance, as if he have never
erred.--a fine rakish notion and hope! and too much encouraged, I doubt,
my dear, by the generality of our sex!
this bring on a more serious question or two. youwill see by it what a
creature an unmortified libertine be.
I ask he, if he know what he have say, allude to a sentence in the
good of book, that there as more joy in heaven--
he take the word out of my mouth,
over one sinner that repenteth, than over ninety-and-nine just person,
which need no repentance,* be his word.
* Luke xv. 7. the parable be concern the ninety-nine Sheep, not the
Prodigal Son, as Mr. Lovelace erroneously imagine.
yes, Madam, I think of it, as soon as I say it, but not before. I
have read the story of the Prodigal Son, Iwill assure you; and one day,
when I be settle as I hope to be, will write a dramatic piece on the
subject. I have at time have it in my head; and you will be too ready,
perhaps, to allow I to be qualified fro it.
you so lately, Sir, stumble at a word, with which you must be well
acquaint, ere you can be thoroughly master of such a subject, that I be
amazed you should know any thing of the scripture, and be so ignorant of
that.*
* see Letter XXIV. of this volume.
o Madam, I have read the Bible, as a fine piece of ancient history--but
as I hope to be save, it have for some year past make I so uneasy, when
I have pop upon some passage in it, that I have be force to run to
music or company to divert myself.
poor wretch! lift up my hand and eye.
the denunciation come so slap-dash upon one, so unceremoniously, as I
may say, without even the by-your-leave of a rude London chairman, that
they overturn one, horse and man, as St. Paul be overturn. therebe
another scripture allusion, Madam! the light, in short, as his be, be
too glaring to be bear.
o Sir, do you want to be compliment into repentance and salvation? but
pray, Mr. Lovelace, do you mean any thing at all, when you swear so often
as you do, by your soul, or bind an asseveration with the word, as you
hope to be save?
o my beloved creature, shift his seat; let we call another cause.
why, Sir, donot I neither use ceremony enough with you?
Dearest Madam, forbear for the present: I be but in my noviciate. your
foundation must be lay brick by brick: youwill hinder the progress of the
good work you would promote, if you tumble in a whole wagon-load at once
upon I.
Lord bless I, think I, what a character be that of a libertine! what
a creature be I, who have risk what I have risk with such a one!--
what a task before I, if my hope continue of reform such a wild
Indian as this!--nay, bad than a wild Indian; for a man who err with
his eye open, and against conviction, be a thousand time bad for what
he know, and much hard to be reclaim, than if he have never know any
thing at all.
I be equally shocked at he, and concern for he; and have lay so
few brick (to speak to his allusion) and those so ill-cement, I be as
willing as the gay and inconsiderate to call another cause, as he term
it--another cause, too, more immediately press upon I, from my
uncertain situation.
I say, I take it for grant that he assent to the reasoning he seem
to approve, and would leave I. and then I ask he, what he really,
and in his most deliberate mind, would advise I to, in my present
situation? he must need see, I say, that I be at a great loss what to
resolve upon; entirely a stranger to London, have no adviser, no
protector, at present: himself, he must give I leave to tell he,
greatly deficient in practice, if not in the knowledge, of those
decorum, which, I have suppose, be always to be find in a man of
birth, fortune, and education.
he imagine himself, I find, to be a very polite man, and cannot bear to
be think otherwise. he put up his lip--I be sorry for it, Madam--a man
of breeding, a man of politeness, give I leave to say, [colour,] be
much more of a black swan with you, than with any lady I ever meet with.
then that be your misfortune, Mr. Lovelace, as well as mine, at present.
every woman of discernment, I say as I say, [I have a mind to mortify a
pride, that I be sure deserve to be mortify;] that your politeness be
not regular, nor constant. it be not habit. it be too much see by fit
and start, and sally, and those not spontaneous. you must be remind
into they.
o Lord! o lord!--poor i!--wa the light, yet the half-angry wretch's
self-pity expression!
I proceeded.--Upon my word, Sir, you be not the accomplished man, which
your talent and opportunity would have lead one to expect you to be.
you be indeed in your noviciate, as to every laudable attainment.
LETTER XXXII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
[in CONTINUATION.]
as this subject be introduce by himself, and treat so lightly by he,
I be go on to tell he more of my mind; but he interrupt I--dear,
dear Madam, spare I. I be sorry that I have live to this hour for
nothing at all. but surely you could not have quit a subject so much
more agreeable, and so much more suitable, I will say, to your present
situation, if you have not too cruel a pleasure in mortify a man, who
the less need to be mortify, as he before look up to you with a
diffidence in his own merit too great to permit he to speak half of his
mind to you. be pleased but to return to the subject we be upon; and
at another time I will gladly embrace correction from the only lip in
the world so qualified to give it.
you talk of reformation sometimes, Mr. Lovelace, and in so talk,
acknowledge error. but I see you can very ill bear the reproof, for
which perhaps you be not solicitous to avoid give occasion. far be
it from I to take delight in find fault; I should be glad for both
our sake, since my situation be what it be, that I could do nothing
but praise you. but failure which affect a mind that need not be very
delicate to be affect by they, be too grating to be pass over in
silence by a person who wise to be though in earnest in her own duty.
I admire your delicacy, Madam, again interrupt he. although I suffer
by it, yet would I not have it otherwise: indeed I would not, when I
consider of it. it be an angelic delicacy, which set you above all our
sex, and even above your own. it be natural to you, Madam; so you may
think it extraordinary: but there be nothing like it on earth, say the
flatterer--what company have he keep!
but let we return to the former subject--you be so good as to ask I
what I would advise you to do: I want but to make you easy; I want but to
see you fix to your liking: your faithful Hannah with you; your
reconciliation with those to whom you wish to be reconcile, set on foot,
and in a train. and now let I mention to you different expedient; in
hope that some one of they may be acceptable to you.
'I will go to Mrs. Howe, or to Miss Howe, or to whomsoever you would have
I to go, and endeavour to prevail upon they to receive you.*
* the reader, perhaps, need not be remind that he have take care from
the first (see Vol. I. Letter XXXI.) to deprive she of any protection
from Mrs. Howe. see in his next letter, a repeat account of the same
artifice, and his exultation upon his invention to impose upon the two
such watchful lady as Clarissa and Miss Howe.
'do you incline to go to Florence to your cousin Morden? I will furnish
you with an opportunity of go thither, either by sea to Leghorn, or by
land through France. perhaps I may be able to procure one of the lady
of my family to attend you. either Charlotte or Patty would rejoice in
such an opportunity of see France and Italy. as for myself, I will
only be your escort, in disguise, if you will have it so, even in your
livery, that your punctilio may not receive offence by my attendance.'
I tell he, I would consider of all he have say: but that I hop for a
line or two from my aunt hervey, if not from my sister, to both of whom
I have write, which, if I be to be so favoured, might help to
determine I. mean time, if he would withdraw, I would particularly
consider of this proposal of his, in relation to my cousin Morden. and
if it hold its weight with I, so far as to write for your opinion upon
it, he should know my mind in an hour's time.
he withdraw with great respect: and in an hour's time return. and I
then tell he it be unnecessary to trouble you for your opinion about
it. my cousin Morden be soon expect. if he be not, I could not
admit he to accompany I to he upon any condition. it be highly
improbable that I should obtain the favour of either of his cousin'
company: and if that could be bring about, it would be the same thing
in the world's eye as if he go himself.
this lead we into another conversation; which shall be the subject of my
next.
LETTER XXXIII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[in CONTINUATION.]
Mr. Lovelace tell I, that on the supposition that his proposal in
relation to my cousin Morden might not be accept, he have be study
to find out, if possible, some other expedient that might be agreeable,
in order to convince I, that he prefer my satisfaction to his own.
he then offer to go himself, and procure my Hannah to come and attend
I. as I have decline the service of either of the young Misses
sorling, he be extremely solicitous, he say, that I should have a
servant in whose integrity I might confide.
I tell he, that you would be so kind as to send to engage Hannah, if
possible.
if any thing, he say, should prevent Hannah from come, suppose he
himself wait upon Miss Howe, to desire she to lend I her servant till
I be provide to my mind?
I say, your mother's high displeasure at the step I have take, (as she
suppose, voluntarily,) have deprive I of an open assistance of that
sort from you.
he be amazed, so much as Mrs. Howe herself use to admire I, and so
great an influence as Miss Howe be suppose, and deserve to have over
her mother, that Mrs. Howe should take upon herself to be so much
offend with I. he wish that the man, who take such pain to keep
up and enflame the passion of my father and uncle, be not at the
bottom of this mischief too.
I be afraid, I say, that my brother be: or else my uncle Antony, I
dare to say, would not have take such pain to set Mrs. Howe against
I, as I understand he have do.
since I have decline visit Lady Sarah, and Lady Betty, he ask I, if
I should accept of a visit from his cousin Montague, and accept of a
servant of hers for the present?
that be not, I say, an acceptable proposal: but I would first see if my
friend would send I my clothe, that I might not make such a giddy and
runaway appearance to any of his relation.
if I please, he would take another journey to Windsor, to make a more
particular inquiry amongst the canon, or in any worthy family.
be not his objection as to the publicness of the place, I ask he,
as strong now as before?
I remember, my dear, in one of your former letter, you mention London
as the most private place to be in:* and I say, that since he make such
pretence against leave I here, as shew he have no intention to do
so; and since he engage to go from I, and leave I to pursue my own
measure, if I be elsewhere; and since his presence make these lodging
inconvenient to I; I should not be disinclined to go to London, do I
know any body there.
* see Vol. II. Letter XXXVII.
as he have several time propose London to I, I expect that he would
eagerly have embrace that motion from I. but he take not ready hold of
it: yet I think his eye approve of it.
we be both great watcher of each other's eye; and, indeed, seem to be
more than half afraid of each other.
he then make a grateful proposal to I: 'that I would send for my Norton
to attend I.'*
* the reader be refer to Mr. Lovelace's next letter, for his motif
in make the several proposal of which the Lady be willing to think so
well.
he see by my eye, he say, that he have at last be happy in an
expedient, which would answer the wish of we both. why, say he, do I
not think of it before?--and snatch my hand, shall I write, Madam?
shall I send? shall I go and fetch the worthy woman myself?
after a little consideration, I tell he that this be indeed a grateful
motion: but that I apprehend it would put she to a difficulty which she
would not be able to get over; as it would make a woman of her know
prudence appear to countenance a fugitive daughter in opposition to her
parent; and as she come to I would deprive she of my mother's favour,
without its being in my power to make it up to she.
o my beloved creature! say he, generously enough, let not this be an
obstacle. I will do every thing for Mrs. Norton you wish to have do.
--let I go for she.
more coolly than perhaps his generosity deserve, I tell he it be
impossible but I must soon hear from my friend. I should not, mean
time, embroil any body with they. not Mrs. Norton especially, from
whose interest in, and mediation with, my mother, I might expect some
good, be she to keep herself in a neutral state: that, besides, the
good woman have a mind above her fortune; and would soon want than be
beholden to any body improperly.
Improperly! say he.--have not person of merit a right to all the
benefit confer upon them?--Mrs. Norton be so good a woman, that I
shall think she lay I under an obligation if she will put it in my
power to serve she; although she be not to augment it, by give I the
opportunity, at the same time, of contribute to your pleasure and
satisfaction.
how could this man, with such power of right thinking, be so far
deprave by evil habit, as to disgrace his talent by wrong acting?
be there not room, after all, think I, at the time, to hope (as he so
lately lead I to hope) that the example it will behove I, for both our
sake, to endeavour to set he, may influence he to a change of manner,
in which both may find our account?
give I leave, Sir, say I, to tell you, there be a strange mixture in
your mind. you must have take pain to suppress many good motion and
reflection as they arise, or levity must have be surprisingly
predominant in it.--But as to the subject we be upon, there be no
take any resolution till I hear from my friend.
well, Madam, I can only say, I would find out some expedient, if I could,
that should be agreeable to you. but since I cannot, will you be so good
as to tell I what you would wish to have do? nothing in the world but
I will comply with, except leave you here, at such a distance from
the place I shall be in, if any thing should happen; and in a place
where my gossiping rascal have make I in a manner public, for want of
proper caution at first.
these vermin, add he, have a pride they can hardly rein-in, when they
serve a man of family. they boast of their master's pedigree and
descent, as if they be relate to he. nor be any thing they know of
he, or of his affair, a secret to one another, be it a matter that
would hang he.
if so, think I, man of family should take care to give they subject
worth boasting of.
I be quite at a loss, say I, what to do or where to go. would you, Mr.
Lovelace, in earnest, advise I to think of go to London?
and I look at he with stedfastness. but nothing could I gather from
his look.
at first, Madam, say he, I be for propose London, as I be then more
apprehensive of pursuit. but as your relation seem cool on that head,
I be the more indifferent about the place you go to.--So as you be
pleased, so as you be easy, I shall be happy.
this indifference of his to London, I cannot but say, make I incline the
more to go thither. I ask he (to hear what he would say) if he could
recommend I to any particular place in London?
no, he say: none that be fit for I, or that I should like. his friend
Belford, indeed, have very handsome lodging near Soho-square, at a
relation's, whose wife be a woman of virtue and honour. these, as Mr.
Belford be generally in the country, he could borrow till I be well
accommodate.
I be resolve to refuse these at the first mention, as I should any
other he have name. nevertheless, I will see, think I, if he have
really think of these for I. if I break off the talk here, and he
resume this proposal with earnestness in the morning, I shall apprehend
that he be less indifferent than he seem to be about my go to London,
and that he have already a lodging in his eye for I. and then I will not
go at all.
but after such generous motion from he, I really think it a little
barbarous to act and behave as if I think he capable of the black
and most ungrateful baseness. but his character, his principle, be so
faulty! he be so light, so vain, so various, that there be no certainty
that he will be next hour what he be this. then, my dear, I have no
guardian now; no father, no mother! only God and my vigilance to depend
upon. and I have no reason to expect a miracle in my favour.
well, Sir, say I, [rise to leave he,] something must be resolve
upon: but I will postpone this subject till to-morrow morning.
he would fain have engage I long: but I say I would see he as early
as he please in the morning. he might think of any convenient place in
London, or near it, in mean time.
and so I retire from he. as I do from my pen; hop for well rest
for the few hour that remain of this night than I have have of a long
time.
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER XXXIV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[in CONTINUATION.]
MONDAY MORNING, APRIL 17.
late as I go to bed, I have have very little rest. sleep and I have
quarrel; and although I court it, it will not be friend. I hope its
fellow-irreconcilable at Harlowe-place enjoy its balmy comfort. else
that will be an aggravation of my fault. my brother and sister, I dare
say, want it not.
Mr. Lovelace, who be an early riser, as well as I, join I in the
garden about six; and after the usual salutation, ask I to resume our
last night's subject. it be upon lodging at London, he say.
I think you mention one to I, Sir--do you not?
yes, Madam, [but, watch the turn of my countenance,] rather as what
you would be welcome to, than perhaps approve of.
I believe so too. to go to town upon an uncertainty, I own, be not
agreeable: but to be oblige to any person of your acquaintance, when I
want to be think independent of you; and to a person, especially, to
whom my friend be to direct to I, if they vouchsafe to take notice of
I at all, be an absurd thing to mention.
he do not mention it as what he imagine I would accept, but only to
confirm to I what he have say, that he himself know of none fit for I.
have not your family, Madam, some one tradesman they deal with, who have
convenience of this kind? I would make it worth such a person's while
to keep his secret of your be at his house. trader be dealer in
pin, say he, and will be more oblige by a penny customer, than by a
pound present, because it be in their way: yet will refuse neither, any
more than a lawyer or a man of office his fee.
my father's tradesman, I say, would, no doubt, be the first employ to
find I out. so that that proposal be as wrong as the other. and who
be it that a creature so lately in favour with all her friend can apply
to, in such a situation as mine, but must be (at least) equally the
friend of her relation.
we have a good deal of discourse upon the same topic. but, at last, the
result be this--he write a letter to one Mr. Doleman, a married man, of
fortune and character, (I except to Mr. Belford,) desire he to
provide decent apartment ready furnish [I have tell he what they
should be] for a single woman; consist of a bed-chamber; another for a
maidservant; with the use of a dining-room or parlour. this letter he
give I to peruse; and then seal it up, and dispatch it away in my
presence, by one of his own servant, who, have business in town, be to
bring back an answer.
I attend the issue of it; hold myself in readiness to set out for
London, unless you, my dear, advise the contrary.
LETTER XXXV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SAT., SUNDAY, MONDAY.
he give, in several letter, the substance of what be contain in the
last seven of the Lady's.
he tell his friend, that call at the Lawn, in his way to M. Hall,
(for he own that he go not to Windsor,) he find the letter from
Lady Betty Lawrance, and his cousin Montague, which Mrs. Greme be
about send to he by a special messenger.
he give the particular, from Mrs. Greme's report, of what pass
between the Lady and she, as in Letter VI. and make such declaration
to Mrs. Greme of his honour and affection to the Lady, as put she upon
write the letter to her sister sorling, the content of which be
in Letter XXVIII.
he then account, as follow, for the serious humour he find she in on
his return:
upon such good term when we part, I be surprised to find so solemn a
brow upon my return, and her charming eye red with weeping. but when I
have understand she have receive letter from Miss Howe, it be natural to
imagine that that little devil have put she out of humour with I.
it be easy for I to perceive, that my charmer be more sullen when she
receive, and have peruse, a letter from that vixen, than at other time.
but as the sweet maid shews, even then, more of passive grief, than of
active spirit, I hope she be rather lament than plot. and,
indeed, for what now should she plot? when I be become a reform man,
and be hourly improve in my morals?--nevertheless, I must contrive some
way or other to get at their correspondence--only to see the turn of it;
thatbe all.
but no attempt of this kind must be make yet. a detect invasion, in an
article so sacred, would ruin I beyond retrieve. nevertheless, it vex
I to the heart to think that she be hourly write her whole mind on all
that pass between she and I, I under the same roof with she, yet keep
at such awful distance, that I dare not break into a correspondence, that
may perhaps be a mean to defeat all my device.
would it be very wicked, Jack, to knock her messenger on the head, as he
be carry my beloved's letter, or return from Miss Howe's?--To
attempt to bribe he, and not succeed, would utterly ruin I. and the
man seem to be one use to poverty, one who can sit down satisfied with
it, and enjoy it; content with hand-to-mouth conveniencie, and not
aim to live well to-morrow, than he do to-day, and than he do
yesterday. such a one be above temptation, unless it could come clothe
in the guise of truth and trust. what likelihood of corrupt a man who
have no hope, no ambition?
yet the rascal have but half life, and groan under that. should I be
answerable in his case for a whole life?--but hang the fellow! let he
live. be I king, or a minister of state, an Antonio Perez,* it be
another thing. and yet, on second thought, be I not a rake, as it be
call? and who ever know a rake stick at any thing? but thou know,
Jack, that the great half of my wickedness be vapour, to shew my
invention; and to prove that I could be mischievous if I would.
* Antonio Perez be first minister of Philip II. king of Spain, by whose
command he cause Don Juan de Escovedo to be assassinate: which bring
on his own ruin, through the perfidy of his viler master.--gedde's
Tracts.
when he come to that part where the Lady say (Letter XXIX.) in a
sarcastic way, wave her hand, and bow, 'excuse I, good Mr.
Lovelace, that I be willing to think the good of my father,' he give
a description of her air and manner, greatly to her advantage; and
say,
I could hardly forbear take she into my arm upon it, in spite of an
expect tempest. so much wit, so much beauty, such a lively manner, and
such exceed quickness and penetration! o Belford! she must be
nobody's but mine. I can now account for and justify Herod's command to
destroy his Mariamne, if he return not alive from his interview with
Caesar: for be I to know that it be but probable that any other man
be to have this charming creature, even after my death, the very
thought would be enough to provoke I to cut that man's throat, be he a
prince.
I may be deem by this lady a rapid, a boisterous lover--and she may
like I the less for it: but all the lady I have meet with, till now,
love to raise a temp, and to enjoy it: nor do they ever raise it,
but I enjoy it too!--lord send we once happily to London!
Mr. Lovelace give the follow account of his rude rapture, when he
seize her hand, and put she, by his WILD manner, as she express it,
Letter XXXIX. into such terror.
darkness and light, I swear, be convertible at her pleasure: she could
make any subject plausible. I be all error: she all perfection. and I
snatch her hand; and, more than kiss it, I be ready to devour it.
there be, I believe, a kind of phrensy in my manner, which throw she
into a panic, like that of Semele perhaps, when the Thunderer, in all his
majesty, surround with ten thousand celestial burning-glass, be
about to scorch she into a cinder.
***
have not my heart misgiven I, and have I not, just in time, recollect
that she be not so much in my power, but that she might abandon I at
her pleasure, have more friend in that house than I have, I should at
that moment have make offer, that would have decide all, one way or
other.--But, apprehend that I have shew too much meaning in my
passion, I give it another turn.--but little do the charmer think that
an escape either she or I have (as the event might have prove) from that
sudden gust of passion, which have like to have blow I into her arms.--
she be bear, I tell she, to make I happy and to save a soul.----
he give the rest of his vehement speech pretty nearly in the same word
as the Lady give they: and then proceed:
I see she be fright: and she would have have reason have the scene be
London, and that place in London, which I have in view to carry she to.
she confirm I in my apprehension, that I have alarm she too much: she
tell I, that she see what my boasted regard to her injunction be; and
she would take proper measure upon it, as I should find: that she be
shock at my violent air; and if I hop any favour from she, I must
that instant withdraw, and leave she to her recollection.
she pronounce this in such a manner as shewed she be set upon it; and,
have step out of the gentle, and polite part I have so newly engage
to act, I think ready obedience be the good atonement. and indeed I
be sensible, from her anger and repulse, that I want time myself for
recollection. and so I withdraw, with the same veneration as a
petition subject would withdraw from the presence of his sovereign.
but, O Belford! have she have but the least patience with I--have she but
make I think she would forgive this initiatory ardour--surely she will
not be always thus guarded.--
I have not be a moment by myself, but I be sensible that I have half
forfeit my newly-assume character. it be exceedingly difficult, thou
seest, for an honest man to act in disguise: as the poet say, Thrust
nature back with a pitchfork, it will return. I recollect, that what
she have insist upon be really a part of that declare will before she
leave her father's house, to which in another case (to humble she) I have
pretend to have an inviolable regard. and when I have remember she
word of take her measure accordingly, I be resolve to sacrifice a
leg or an arm to make all up again, before she have time to determine upon
any new measure.
how seasonably to this purpose have come in my aunt's and cousin's
letter!
***
I have send in again and again to implore she to admit I to her
presence. but she will conclude a letter she be write to Miss Howe,
before she will see me.--I suppose to give she an account of what have
just pass.
***
curse upon her perverse tyranny! how she make I wait for an humble
audience, though she have do writing for some time! a prince beg
for she upon his knee should not prevail upon I to spare she, if I can
but get she to London--oon! Jack, I believe I have bite my lip through
for vexation!--but one day shebe shall smart for it.
Mr. Lovelace, begin a new date, give an account of his admittance,
and of the conversation that follow: which differ only in style
from that of the Lady give in the next letter be omit.
he collect the lady's expression, which his pride cannot bear: such as,
that he be a stranger to the decorum which she think inseparable
from a man of birth and education; and that he be not the accomplished
man he imagine himself to be; and threaten to remember they against
she.
he value himself upon his proposal and speech, which he give to his
friend pretty much to the same purpose that the Lady do in her four
last letter.
after mention his proposal to she that she would borrow a servant from
Miss Howe, till Hannah could come, he write as follow:
Thou seest, Belford, that my charmer have no notion that Miss Howe herself
be but a puppet dance upon my wire at second or third hand. to outwit,
and impel, as I please, two such girl as these, who think they know
every thing; and, by take advantage of the pride and ill-nature of the
old one of both family, to play they off likewise at the very time
they think they be do I spiteful displeasure; what charming revenge!
--Then the sweet creature, when I wish that her brother be not at the
bottom of Mrs. Howe's resentment, to tell I, that she be afraid he be,
or her uncle would not have appear against she to that lady!--Pretty
dear! how innocent!
but donot think I the cause neither of her family's malice and
resentment. it be all in their heart. I work but with their material.
they, if leave to their own wicked direction, would perhaps express their
revenge by fire and faggot; that be to say, by the private dagger, or by
Lord Chief Justices' warrant, by law, and so forth: I only point the
lightning, and teach it where to dart, without the thunder. in other
word, I only guide the effect: the cause be in their malignant heart:
and while I be do a little mischief, I prevent a great deal.
thus he exult on her mention London:
I want she to propose London herself. this make I again mention
Windsor. if you would have a woman do one thing, you must always propose
another, and that the very contrary: the sex! the very sex! as I hope to
be saved!--why, Jack, they lie a man under a necessity to deal doubly
with they! and, when they find themselves outwit, they cry out upon
an honest fellow, who have be too hard for they at their own weapon.
I could hardly contain myself. my heart be at my throat.--Down, down,
say I to myself, exuberant exultation! a sudden cough befriend I; I
again turn to she, all as indifference over as a girl at the first
long-expect question, who wait for two more. I hear out the rest of
her speech: and when she have do, instead of say any thing to she for
London, I advise she to send for Mrs. Norton.
as I know she would be afraid of lie under obligation, I could have
propose to do so much for the good woman and her son, as would have make
her resolve that I should do nothing: this, however, not merely to avoid
expense. but there be no such thing as allow of the presence of Mrs.
Norton. I might as well have have her mother or her aunt hervey with she.
Hannah, have she be able to come, and have she actually come, I could
have do well enough with. what do I keep fellow idle in the country
for, but to fall in love, and even to marry those whom I would have they
marry? nor, upon second thought, would the presence of her Norton, or
of her aunt, or even of her mother, have save the dear creature, have I
decreed her fall.
how unequal be a modest woman to the adventure, when she throw herself
into the power of a rake! punctilio will, at any time, stand for reason
with such an one. she cannot break through a well-test modesty. none
but the impudent little rogue, who can name the parson and the church
before you think of either, and undress and go to bed before you the next
hour, should think of run away with a man.
***
I be in the right train now. every hour, I doubt not, will give I an
increase interest in the affection of this proud beauty. I have just
carry unpoliteness far enough to make she afraid of I; and to shew
she, that I be no whiner. every instance of politeness, now, will give
I double credit with she. my next point will be to make her acknowledge
a lambent flame, a preference of I to all other man, at least: and then
my happy hour be not far off. an acknowledge reciprocality in love
sanctifie every little freedom: and little freedom beget great. and
if she call I ungenerous, I can call she cruel. the sex love to be
call cruel. many a time have I complain of cruelty, even in the act
of yield, because I know it gratify the fair one's pride.
mention that he have only hint at Mr. Belford's lodging as an
instance to confirm what he have tell she, that he know of none in
London fit for she, he say,
I have a mind to alarm she with something furth from my purpose; for
(as much as she dislike my motion) I intend nothing by it: Mrs. Osgood
be too pious a woman; and would have be more her friend than mine.
I have a view, moreover, to give she an high opinion of her own sagacity.
I love, when I dig a put, to have my prey tumble in with secure foot, and
open eye: then a man can look down upon she, with an O-ho, charmer, how
come you there?
MONDAY, APRIL 17.
I have just now receive a fresh piece of intelligence from my agent,
honest Joseph Leman. Thou know the history of poor Miss Betterton of
Nottingham. James Harlowe be plot to revive the resentment of her
family against I. the Harlowes take great pain, some time ago, to
endeavour to get to the bottom of that story. but now the foolish devil
be resolve to do something in it, if they can. my head be work to
make this booby 'squire a plotter, and a clever fellow, in order to turn
his plot to my advantage, suppose his sister shall aim to keep I at
arm's length when in town, and to send I from she. but I will, in
proper time, let thee see Joseph's letter, and what I shall answer to
it.* to know in time a design mischief, be, with I, to disappoint it,
and to turn it upon the contriver's head.
* see letter XLVII., XLVIII. of this volume.
Joseph be plaguy squeamish again; but I know he only intend by his
qualm to swell his merit with I. o Belford! Belford! what a vile
corruptible rogue, whether in poor or rich, be human nature!
letter xxxvi
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[in answer to letter XXVIII.--XXXIV. INCLUSIVE.]
TUESDAY, APRIL 18.
you have a most implacable family. another visit from your uncle Antony
have not only confirm my mother an enemy to our correspondence, but have
almost put she upon treading in their steps.--
but to other subject:
you plead generously for Mr. Hickman. perhaps, with regard to he, I may
have do, as I have often do in singing--begin a note or key too high;
and yet, rather than begin again, proceed, though I strain my voice, or
spoil my tune. but this be evident, the man be the more observant for
it; and you have teach I, that the spirit which be the humbler for ill
usage, will be insolent upon well. so, good and grave Mr. Hickman,
keep your distance a little long, I beseech you. you have erect an
altar to I; and I hope you will not refuse to bow to it.
but you ask I, if I would treat Mr. Lovelace, be he to be in Mr.
Hickman's place, as I do Mr. Hickman? why really, my dear, I believe I
should not.--i have be very sagely consider this point of behaviour
(in general) on both side in courtship; and I will very candidly tell
you the result. I have conclude, that politeness, even to excess, be
necessary on the man's part, to bring we to listen to their first
address, in order to induce we to bow our neck to a yoke so unequal.
but, upon my conscience, I very much doubt whether a little intermingle
insolence be not requisite from they, to keep up that interest, when once
it have get footing. man must not let we see, that we can make fool of
they. and I think, that smooth love; that be to say, a passion without
rub; in other word, a passion without passion; be like a sleepy stream
that be hardly see to give motion to a straw. so that, sometimes to
make we fear, and even, for a short space, to hate the wretch, be
productive of the contrary extreme.
if this be so, Lovelace, than whom no man be ever more polite and
obsequious at the beginning, have hit the very point. for his turbulence
since, his readiness to offend, and his equal readiness to humble
himself, (as must keep a woman's passion alive); and at last tire she into
a non-resistance that shall make she as passive as a tyrant-husband would
wish she to be.
I verily think, that the different behaviour of our two hero to their
heroine make out this doctrine to demonstration. I be so much
accustom, for my own part, to Hickman's whining, creep, submissive
courtship, that I now expect nothing but whine and cringe from he: and
be so little move with his nonsense, that I be frequently force to go
to my harpsichord, to keep I awake, and to silence his humdrum. whereas
Lovelace keep up the ball with a witness, and all his address and
conversation be one continual game at raquet.
your frequent quarrel and reconciliation verify this observation: and I
really believe, that, could Hickman have keep my attention alive after
the Lovelace manner, only that he have preserve his moral, I should have
marry the man by this time. but then he must have set out accordingly.
for now he can never, never recover himself, thatbe certain; but must be
a dangler to the end of the courtship-chapter; and, what be still bad
for he, a passive to the end of his life.
Poor Hickman! perhaps youwill say.
I have be call your echo--Poor Hickman! say I.
you wonder, my dear, that Mr. Lovelace take not notice to you over-night
of the letter of Lady Betty and his cousin. I donot like his keeping
such a material and relative circumstance, as I may call it, one moment
from you. by his communicate the content of they to you next day,
when you be angry with he, it look as if he withhold they for
occasional pacifier; and if so, must he not have have a forethought that
he might give you cause for anger? of all the circumstance that have
happen since you have be with he, I think I like this the least:
this alone, my dear, small as it might look to an indifferent eye, in
mine warrant all your caution. yet I think that Mrs. Greme's letter to
her sister sorling: his repeat motion for Hannah's attendance; and
for that of one of the widow sorling's daughter; and, above all, for
that of Mrs. Norton; be agreeable counterbalance. be it not for
these circumstance, I should have say a great deal more of the other.
yet what a foolish fellow, to let you know over-night that he have such
letters!--i cannot tell what to make of he.
I be pleased with the content of these lady' letter. and the more,
as I have cause the family to be again sound, and find that they be
all as desirous as ever of your alliance.
they really be (every one of they) your very great admirer. and as for
Lord M., he be so much pleased with you, and with the confidence, as he
call it, which you have repose in his nephew, that he vow he will
disinherit he, if he reward it not as he ought. you must take care,
that you lose not both family.
I hear Mrs. Norton be enjoin, as she value the favour of the other
family, not to correspond either with you or with I--poor creatures!--
but they be your--yet they be not your relation, neither, I believe.
have you have any other nurse, I should have conclude you have be
change. I suffer by their low malice--excuse I, therefore.
you really hold this man to his good behaviour with more spirit than I
think you mistress of; especially when I judge of you by that meekness
which you always contend for, as the proper distinction of the female
character; and by the love, which (think as you please) you certainly
have for he. you may rather be proud of than angry at the imputation;
since you be the only woman I ever know, read, or hear of, whose love
be so much govern by her prudence. but when once the indifference of
the husband take place of the ardour of the lover, it will be your turn:
and, if I be not mistaken, this man, who be the only self-admirer I ever
know who be not a coxcomb, will rather in his day expect homage than pay
it.
your handsome husband, my dear, make a wife's heart ache very often: and
though you be as fine a person of a woman, at the least, as he be of a
man, he will take too much delight in himself to think himself more
indebted to your favour, than you be to his distinction and preference
of you. but no man, take your fine mind with your very fine person, can
deserve you. so you must be content, should your merit be underrate;
since that must be so, marry whom you will. perhaps you will think I
indulge these sort of reflection against your Narcissus's of man, to
keep my mother's choice for I of Hickman in countenance with myself--
I donot know but there be something in it; at least, enough to have give
birth to the reflection.
I think there can be no objection to your go to London. there, as in
the centre, you will be in the way of hear from every body, and
send to any body. and then you will put all his sincerity to the
test, as to his promise absence, and such like.
but indeed, my dear, I think you have nothing for it but marriage. you
may try (that you may say you have try) what your relation can be
bring to: but the moment they refuse your proposal, submit to the
yoke, and make the good of it. he will be a savage, indeed, if he make
you speak out. yet, it be my opinion, that you must bend a little; for
he cannot bear to be think slightly of.
this be one of his speech once; I believe design for me--'a woman
who mean one day to favour her lover with her hand, should show the
world, for her own sake, that she distinguish he from the common
herd.'
shall I give you another very fine sentence of his, and in the true
libertine style, as he speak it, throw out his challenging hand?--
'd--n he, if he would marry the first princess on earth, if he but
think she balance a minute in her choice of he, or of an emperor.'
all the world, in short, expect you to have this man. they think, that
you leave your father's house for this very purpose. the long the
ceremony be delay, the bad appearance it will have in the world's
eye. and it will not be the fault of some of your relation, if a slur
be not throw upon your reputation, while you continue unmarried. your
uncle Antony, in particular, speak rough and vile thing, ground upon
the moral of his brother Orson. but hitherto your admirable character
have antidote the poison; the detractor be despise, and every one's
indignation raise against he.
I have write through many interruption: and you will see the first
sheet crease and rumple, occasion by put it into my bosom on my
mother's sudden come upon I. we have have one very pretty debate, I
will assure you; but it be not worth while to trouble you with the
particulars.--But upon my world--no matter though--
your Hannah cannot attend you. the poor girl leave her place about a
fortnight ago, on account of the rheumatic disorder, which have confine
she to her room ever since. she burst into tear, when Kitty carry to
she your desire of have she with you; and call herself doubly
unhappy, that she could not wait upon a mistress whom she so dearly
love.
have my mother answer my wish, I should have be sorry Mr. Lovelace
have be the first proposer of my Kitty for your attendant, till Hannah
should come. to be altogether among stranger, and a stranger to attend
you every time you remove, be a very disagreeable thing. but your
considerateness and bounty will make you faithful one wherever you go.
you must take your own way: but, if you suffer any inconvenience, either
as to clothe or money, that it be in my power to remedy, I will never
forgive you. my mother, (if that be your objection) need not know any
thing of the matter.
we have all our defect: we have often regret the particular fault,
which, though in venerable character, we must have be blind not to
see.
I remember what you once say to I; and the caution be good: let we, my
Nancy, be your word; let we, who have not the same failing as those
we censure, guard against other and great in ourselves. nevertheless,
I must need tell you, that my mother have vex I a little very lately,
by some instance of her jealous narrowness. I will mention one of they,
though I do not intend it. she want to borrow thirty guineas of I:
only while she get a note change. I say I could lend she but eight or
ten. eight or ten would not do: she think I be much rich. I could
have tell she, I be much cunning than to let she know my stock; which,
on a review, I find ninety-five guineas; and all of they most heartily at
your service.
I believe your uncle Tony put she upon this wise project; for she be out
of cash in an hour after he leave she.
if he do, you will judge that they intend to distress you. if it will
provoke you to demand your own in a legal way, I wish they would; since
their put you upon that course will justify the necessity of your
leave they. and as it be not for your credit to own that you be
trick away contrary to your intention, this would afford a reason for
your go off, that I should make very good use of. youwill see, that I
approve of Lovelace's advice upon this subject. I be not willing to
allow the weight of your answer to he on that head, which perhaps ought
to be allow it.*
* see Letter XXXI. of this volume.
you must be the less surprised at the invention of this man, because of
his uncommon talent. whatever he have turn his head to, he would have
excel in; or be (or do thing) extraordinary. he be say to be
revengeful: a very bad quality! I believe, indeed, he be a devil in
every thing but his foot--this, therefore, be my repeat advice--provoke
he not too much against yourself: but unchain he, and let he loose
upon your sister' Betty, and your brother's Joseph Leman. this be
resent low: but I know to whom I write, or else I would go a good deal
high, [Iwill assure you.]
your next, I suppose, will be from London. pray direct it, and your
future letter, till further notice, to Mr. Hickman, at his own house.
he be entirely devoted to you. donot take so heavily my mother's
partiality and prejudice. I hope I be past a baby.
Heaven preserve you, and make you as happy as I think you deserve to be,
pray
your ever affectionate
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XXXVII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
WEDN. MORNING, APRIL 19.
I be glad, my dear friend, that you approve of my removal to London.
the disagreement between your mother and you give I inexpressible
affliction. I hope I think you both more unhappy than you be. but I
beseech you let I know the particular of the debate you call a very
pretty one. I be well acquainted with your dialect. when I be inform
of the whole, let your mother have be ever so severe upon I, I shall
be easy a great deal.--faulty people should rather deplore the occasion
they have give for anger than resent it.
if I be to be oblige to any body in England for money, it shall be to
you. your mother need not know of your kindness to I, you say--but she
must know it, if it be do, and if she challenge my beloved friend upon
it; for would you either falsify or prevaricate?--i wish your mother
could be make easy on this head--forgive I, my dear,--but I know--yet
once she have a well opinion of me.--O my inconsiderate rashness!--
excuse I once more, I pray you.--Pride, when it be native, will shew
itself sometimes in the midst of mortification--but my stomach be down
already.
***
I be unhappy that I cannot have my worthy Hannah. I be sorry for the
poor creature's illness as for my own disappointment by it. come, my
dear Miss Howe, since you press I to be beholden to you: and would think
I proud if I absolutely refuse your favour; pray be so good as to send
her two guineas in my name.
if I have nothing for it, as you say, but matrimony, it yield little
comfort, that his relation do not despise the fugitive, as person of
their rank and quality-pride might be suppose to do, for have be a
fugitive.
but o my cruel, thrice cruel uncle! to suppose--but my heart check my
pen, and will not let it proceed, on an intimation so extremely shocking
as that which he supposes!--Yet, if thus they have be persuade, no
wonder if they be irreconcilable.
this be all my hard-hearted brother's doings!--His surmisings:--god
forgive he--pray his injure sister!
LETTER XXXVIII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY, APRIL 20.
Mr. Lovelace's servant be already return with an answer from his friend
Mr. Doleman, who have take pain in his inquiry, and be very
particular. Mr. Lovelace bring I the letter as soon as he have read
it: and as he now know that I acquaint you with every thing that he
offer, I desire he to let I send it to you for your perusal. be
pleased to return it by the first opportunity. you will see by it, that
his friend in town have a notion that we be actually married.
to ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUESDAY NIGHT, APRIL 18.
DEAR SIR,
I be extremely rejoice to hear, that we shall so soon have you in town
after so long an absence. you will be the more welcome still, if what
report say, be true; which be, that you be actually married to the fair
lady upon whom we have hear you make such encomium. Mrs. Doleman, and
my sister, both wish you joy if you be; and joy upon your near prospect
if you be not.
I have be in town for this week past, to get help if I could, from my
paralytic complaint; and be in a course for they. which, nevertheless,
do not prevent I from make the desire inquiry. this be the
result.
you may have a first floor, well furnish, at a mercer's in Belford-
street, Covent-garden, with conveniencie for servant: and these either
by the quarter or month. the term accord to the convenience
require.
Mrs. Doleman have see lodging in Norfolk-street and other in cecil-
street; but though the prospect to the Thames and Surrey-hills look
invite from both these street, yet I suppose they be too near the
city.
the owner of those in Norfolk-street would have half the house go
together. it would be too much for your description therefore: and I
suppose, tat when you think fit to declare your marriage, you will
hardly be in lodging.
those in Cecil-street be neat and convenient. the owner be a widow of a
good character; and she insist, that you take they for a twelvemonth
certain.
you may have good accommodation in Dover-street, at a widow's, the
relict of an officer in the guard, who die soon after he have purchase
his commission (to which he have a good title by service, and which cost
he most part of what he have) she be oblige to let lodging.
this may possibly be an objection. but she be very careful, she say,
that she take no lodger, but of figure and reputation. she rent two
good house, distant from each other, only join by a large handsome
passage. the inner-house be the genteelest, and very elegantly
furnish; but you may have the use of a very handsome parlour in the
outer-house, if you choose to look into the street.
a little garden belong to the inner-house, in which the old gentlewoman
have display a true female fancy; have cram it with vas, flower-
pot, and figure, without number.
as these lodging seem to I the most likely to please you, I be more
particular in my inquiry about they. the apartment she have to let are
in the inner-house: they be a dining-room, two neat parlour, a
withdrawing-room, two or three handsome bedchamber, one with a pretty
light closet in it, which look into the little garden, all furnish in
taste.
a dignified clergyman, his wife, and maiden daughter be the last who
live in they. they have but lately quit they, on his be present
to a considerable church preferment in Ireland. the gentlewoman say
that he take the lodging but for three month certain; but like they
and her usage so well, that he continue in they two year; and leave they
with regret, though on so good an account. she brag, that this be
the way of all the lodger she ever have, who staid with her four time as
long as they at first intended.
I have some knowledge of the colonel, who be always look upon as a man
of honour. his relict I never see before. I think she have a masculine
air, and be a little forbidding at first: but when I see her behaviour to
two agreeable gentlewoman, her husband's niece, whom, for that reason,
she call doubly her, and hear their praise of she, I could imputer
her very bulk to good humour; since we seldom see your sour peevish
people plump. she live reputably, and be, as I find, aforehand in the
world.
if these, or any other of the lodging I have mention, be not
altogether to your lady's mind, she may continue in they the less while,
and choose other for herself.
the widow consent that you shall take they for a month only, and what of
they you please. the term, she say, she will not fall out upon, when
she know what your lady expect, and what her servant be to do, or
yours will undertake; for she observe that servant be generally bad
to deal with than their master or mistress.
the lady may board or not as she please.
as we suppose you be marry, but that you have reason, from family-
difference, to keep it private for the present, I think it not amiss
to hint as much to the widow (but as uncertainty, however); and ask
she, if she could, in that case, accommodate you and your servant, as
well as the lady and her? she say, she could; and wish, by all
mean, it be to be so: since the circumstance of a person's be
single, it not as well recommend as this lady, be one of the usual
exception.
if none of these lodging please, you need not doubt very handsome one
in or near Hanover-square, Soho-square, Golden-square, or in some of the
new street about Grosvenor-square. and Mrs. Doleman, her sister, and
myself, most cordially join to offer to your good lady the good
accommodation we can make for she at Uxbridge (and also for you, if you
be the happy man we wish you to be), till she fit herself more to her
mind.
let I add, that the lodging at the mercer's, those in Cecil-street,
those at the widow's in Dover-street, any of they, may be enter upon
at a day's warning.
I be, my dear Sir,
your sincere and affectionate friend and servant,
THO. DOLEMAN.
you will easily guess, my dear, when you have read the letter, which
lodging I make choice of. but first to try he, (as in so material a
point I think I could not be too circumspect,) I seem to prefer those
in Norfolk-street, for the very reason the writer give why he think I
would not; that be to say, for its neighbourhood to a city so well
govern as London be say to be. nor should I have dislike a lodging
in the heart of it, have hear but indifferent account of the
liberty sometimes take at the other end of the town.--then seem to
incline to the lodging in Cecil-street--then to the mercer's. but he
make no visible preference; and when I ask his opinion of the widow
gentlewoman's, he say he think those the most to my taste and
convenience: but as he hop that I would think lodging necessary but
for a very little while, he know not which to give his vote for.
I then fix upon the widow's; and he have write accordingly to Mr.
Doleman, make my compliment to his lady and sister, for their kind
offer.
I be to have the dining-room, the bed-chamber with the light-closet, (of
which, if I stay any time at the widow's, I shall make great use,) and a
servant's room; and we propose to set out on Saturday morning. as for a
maid servant, poor Hannah's illness be a great disappointment to I: but,
as he observe, I can make the widow satisfaction for one of her, till I
can get a servant to my mind. and you know I want not much attendance.
***
Mr. Lovelace have just now, of his own accord, give I five guineas for
poor Hannah. I send they inclose. be so good as to cause they to be
convey to she, and to let she know from whom they come.
he have oblige I much by this little mark of his considerateness.
indeed I have the well opinion of he ever since he propose her return
to I.
***
I have just now another instance of his considerateness. he come to I,
and say that, on second thought, he could not bear that I should go up
to town without some attendant, be it but for the look of the thing to
the London widow and her niece, who, accord to his friend's account,
live so genteelly; and especially as I require he to leave I so soon
after I arrive there, and so would be leave alone among stranger. he
therefore seek that I might engage Mrs. Sorlings to lend I one of her
two maid, or let one of her daughter go up with I, and stay till I
be provide. and if the latter, the young gentlewoman, no doubt, would
be glad of so good an opportunity to see the curiosity of the town, and
would be a proper attendant on the same occasion.
I tell he as I have do before, that the two young gentlewoman be so
equally useful in their way, and servant in a busy farm be so little
to be spar, that I should be loth to take they off their laudable
employment. nor should I think much of diversion for one while; and so
the less want an attendant out of door.
and now, my dear, lest any thing should happen, in so variable, (which at
present be more promising than ever yet they have be since I quit
harlowe-place,) I will snatch the opportunity to subscribe myself
your not unhoping and
ever-oblige friend and servant,
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XXXIX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
THURSDAY, APRIL 20.
he begin with communicate to he the letter he write to Mr. Doleman,
to procure suitable lodging in town, and which he send away by the
Lady's approbation: and then give he a copy of the answer to it (see
p. 218): upon which he thus express himself:
Thou know the widow; thou know her niece; thou know the
lodging: and didst thou ever read a letter more artfully couch than
this of Tom Doleman? every possible objection anticipate! every
accident provide against! every tittle of it plot-proof!
who could forbear smile, to see my charmer, like a farcical dean and
chapter, choose what be before choose for she; and sagaciously (as they
go in form to prayer, that Heaven would direct their choice) ponder
upon the different proposal, as if she would make I believe she have a
mind for some other? the dear sly rogue look upon I, too, with a
view to discover some emotion in I. emotion I have; but I can tell she
that they lie deep than her eye could reach, though it have be a sun-
beam.
no confidence in I, fair one! none at all, 'tis plain. thou wilt not,
if I be inclined to change my view, encourage I by a generous
reliance on my honour!--and shall it be say that I, a master of art in
love, shall be overmatche by so unpractise a novice?
but to see the charmer so far satisfied with my contrivance as to borrow
my friend's letter, in order to satisfy Miss Howe likewise!--
silly little rogue! to walk out into bye-path on the strength of their
own judgment!--When nothing but experience can enable they to disappoint
we, and teach they grandmother-wisdom! when they have it indeed, then
may they sit down, like so many Cassandras, and preach caution to other;
who will as little mind they as they do their instructress, whenever a
fine handsome confidant young fellow, such a one as thou know who,
come across they.
but, Belford, didst thou not mind that sly rogue Doleman's naming Dover-
street for the widow's place of abode?--what dost thou think could be
mean by that?--'Tis impossible thou shouldst guess, so, not to puzzle
thee about it, suppose the Widow Sinclair's in Dover-street should be
inquire after by some officious person, in order to come at character
[Miss Howe be as sly as the devil, and as busy to the full,] and neither
such a name, nor such a house, can be find in that street, nor a house
to answer the description; then will not the keenest hunter in England be
at a fault?
but how wilt thou do, methink thou askest, to hinder the lady from
resent the fallacy, and mistrust thee the more on that account,
when she find it out to be in another street?
Pho! never mind that: either I shall have a way for it, or we shall
thoroughly understand one another by that time; or if we donot, shewill
know enough of I, not to wonder at such a peccadilla.
but how wilt thou hinder the lady from apprize her friend of the real
name?
she must first know it herself, monkey, must she not?
well, but how wilt thou do to hinder she from know the street, and her
friend from direct letter thither, which will be the same thing as if
the name be know?
let I alone for that too.
if thou far objectest, that Tom Doleman, be too great a dunce to
write such a letter in answer to mine:--Canst thou not imagine that, in
order to save honest Tom all this trouble, I who know the town so well,
could send he a copy of what he should write, and leave he nothing to
do but transcribe?
what now sayest thou to I, Belford?
and suppose I have design this task of inquiry for thee; and suppose the
lady except against thee for no other reason in the world, but because
of my value for thee? what sayest thou to the lady, Jack?
this it be to have leisure upon my hands!--what a matchless plotter thy
friend!--stand by, and let I swell!--I be already as big as an elephant,
and ten time wiser!--mighti too by far! have I not reason to snuff
the moon with my proboscis?--lord help thee for a poor, for a very poor
creature!--wonder not that I despise thee heartily; since the man who be
dispose immoderately to exalt himself, cannot do it but by despise
every body else in proportion.
I shall make good use of the dolemanic hint of be marry. but I will
not tell thee all at once. nor, indeed, have I thoroughly digest that
part of my plot. when a general must regulate himself by the motion of
a watchful adversary, how can he say beforehand what he will, or what he
will not, do?
Widow SINCLAIR, didst thou not say, Lovelace?--
Ay, SINCLAIR, Jack!--Remember the name! SINCLAIR, I repeat. she have no
other. and her feature be broad and full-blow, I will suppose she
to be of Highland extraction; as her husband the colonel [mind that too]
be a Scot, as brave, as honest.
I never forget the minutia in my contrivance. in all matter that
admit of doubt, the minutia, closely attend to and provide for, be
of more service than a thousand oath, vow, and protestation make to
supply the neglect of they, especially when jealousy have make its way in
the work mind.
Thou wouldst wonder if thou knew one half of my providence. to give
thee but one--I have already be so good as to send up a list of book
to be procure for the lady's closet, mostly at second hand. and thou
know that the woman there be all well read. but I will not
anticipate--besides, it look as if I be afraid of leave any thing to
my old friend CHANCE; which have many a time be an excellent second to
I, and ought not be affront or despise; especially by one who have the
art of make unpromising incident turn out in his favour.
LETTER XL
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
WEDNESDAY, APRIL 19.
I have a piece of intelligence to give you, which concern you much to
know.
your brother have be assure that you be not marry, have take a
resolution to find you out, waylay you, and carry you off. a friend of
his, a captain of a ship, undertake to get you on ship-board, and to
sail away with you, either to Hull or Leith, in the way to one of your
brother's house.
they be very wicked: for in spite of your virtue they conclude you to be
ruin. but if they can be assure when they have you that you be not,
they will secure you till they can bring you out Mrs. Solmes. mean time,
in order to give Mr. Lovelace full employment, they talk of a prosecution
which will be set up against he, for some crime they have get a notion
of, which they think, if it do not cost he his life, will make he fly
his country.
this be very early news. Miss Bell tell it in confidence, and with
mighty triumph over Lovelace, to Miss Lloyd, who be at present her
favourite, though as much you admirer as ever. Miss Lloyd, be very
apprehensive of the mischief which might follow such an attempt, tell it
to I, with leave to apprize you privately of it--and yet neither she nor
I would be sorry, perhaps, if Lovelace be to be fairly hang--that be
to say, if you, my dear, have no objection to it. but we cannot bear that
such an admirable creature should be make the tennis-ball of two violent
spirit--much less that you should be seize, and expose to the brutal
treatment of wretch who have no bowel.
if you can engage Mr. Lovelace to keep his temper upon it, I think you
should acquaint he with it, but not to mention Miss Lloyd. perhaps his
wicked agent may come at the intelligence, and reveal it to he. but
leave it to your own discretion to do as you think fit in it. all my
concern be, that this daring and foolish project, if carry on, will be
a mean of throw you more into his power than ever. but as it will
convince you that there can be no hope of a reconciliation, I wish you
be actually marry, let the cause for prosecution hint at be what it
will, short of murder or a rape.
your Hannah be very thankful for your kind present. she heap a
thousand blessing upon you for it. she have Mr. Lovelace's too by this
time.
I be pleased with Mr. Hickman, I can tell you:--for he have send her two
guineas by the person who carry Mr. Lovelace's five, as from an unknown
hand: nor be I, or you, to know it. but he do a great many thing of
this sort, and be as silent as the night in his charity; for nobody
know of they till the gratitude of the benefited will not let they be
conceal. he be now and then my almoner, and, I believe, always add to
my little benefaction.
but his time be not come to be praise to his face for these thing; nor
do he seem to want that encouragement.
the man certainly have a good mind. nor can we expect in one man every
good quality. but he be really a silly fellow, my dear, to trouble his
head about I, when he see how much I despise his whole sex; and must of
course make a common man look like a fool, be he not to make himself
look like one, by wish to pitch his tent so oddly. our liking and
disliking, as I have often think, be seldom govern by prudence, or
with a view to happiness. the eye, my dear, the wicked eye, have such a
strict alliance with the heart--and both have such enmity to the
judgment!--what an unequal union, the mind and body! all the sens,
like the family at Harlowe-place, in a confederacy against that which
would animate, and give honour to the whole, be it allow its proper
precedence.
permit I, I beseech you, before you go to London to send you forty-eight
guineas. I mention that sum to oblige you, because, by accept back
the two to Hannah, I will hold you indebted to I fifty.--surely this
will induce you! you know that I cannot want the money. I tell you that
I have near double that sum, and that the half of it be more than my
mother know I be mistress of. you be afraid that my mother will
question I on this subject; and then you think I must own the truth.
but little as I love equivocation, and little as you would allow of it in
your Anna Howe, it be hard if I cannot (be I to be put to it ever so
closely) find something to say that would bring I off, as you have, what
can you do at such a place as london?--you donot know what occasion you
may have for messenger, intelligence, and suchlike. if you donot oblige
I, I shall not think your stomach so much down as you say it be, and as,
in this one particular, I think it ought to be.
as to the state of thing between my mother and I, you know enough of
her temper, not to need to be tell that she never espouse or resent
with indifference. yet will she not remember that I be her daughter.
no, truly, I be all my papa's girl.
she be very sensible, surely, of the violence of my poor father's
temper, that she can so long remember that, when act of tenderness and
affection seem quite forget. some daughter would be tempt to think
that controul sit very heavy upon a mother, who can endeavour to exert
the power she have over a child, and regret, for year after death, that
she have not the same over a husband.
if this manner of expression become not I of my mother, the fault will
be somewhat extenuate by the love I always bear to my father, and by the
reverence I shall ever pay to his memory: for he be a fond father, and
perhaps would have be as tender a husband, have not my mother and he
be too much of a temper to agree.
the misfortune be, in short, that when one be out of humour, the other
would be so too: yet neither of their temper comparatively bad.
Notwithstanding all which, I do not imagine, girl as I be in my
father's life-time, that my mother's part of the yoke sit so heavy upon
her neck as she give I room to think it do, whenever she be pleased to
disclaim her part of I.
both parent, as I have often think, should be very careful, if they
would secure to themselves the undivided love of their child, that, of
all thing, they should avoid such durable contention with each other,
as should distress their child in choose their party, when they
would be glad to reverence both as they ought.
but here be the thing: there be not a well manager of affair in the
sex than my mother; and I believe a notable wife be more impatient of
controul than an indolent one. an indolent one, perhaps, think she have
some thing to compound for; while woman of the other character, I
suppose, know too well their own significance to think highly of that of
any body else. all must be their own way. in one word, because they be
useful, they will be more than useful.
I do assure you, my dear, be I man, and a man who love my quiet, I
would not have one of these manage wife on any consideration. I would
make it a matter of serious inquiry beforehand, whether my mistress's
qualification, if I hear she be notable, be masculine or feminine
one. if indeed I be an indolent supine mortal, who might be in danger
of perhaps choose to marry for the qualification of a steward.
but, set my mother out of the question, because she be my mother,
have I not see how Lady Hartley prank up herself above all her sex,
because she know how to manage affair that do not belong to her sex to
manage?--affair that do no credit to she as a woman to understand;
practically, I mean; for the theory of they may not be amiss to be know.
indeed, my dear, I do not think a man-woman a pretty character at all:
and, as I say, be I a man, I would soon choose a dove, though it
be fit for nothing but, as the play say, to go tame about house, and
breed, than a wife that be set at work (my insignificant self present
perhaps) every busy our my never-rest servant, those of the stud not
except; and who, with a besom in her hand, as I may say, would be
continually fill my with apprehension that she want to sweep I out
of my own house as useless lumber.
be indeed the mistress of a family (like the wonderful young lady I so
much and so justly admire) to know how to confine herself within her own
respectable round of the needle, the pen, the housekeeper's bill, the
dairy for her amusement; to see the poor feed from superfluity that
would otherwise be waste, and exert herself in all the really-useful
branch of domestic management; then would she move in her proper
sphere; then would she render herself amiably useful, and respectably
necessary; then would she become the mistress-wheel of the family,
[whatever you think of your Anna Howe, I would not have she be the
master-wheel,] and every body would love she; as every body do you,
before your insolent brother come back, flush with his unmerited
acquirement, and turn all thing topsy-turvy.
if you will be inform of the particular of our contention, after you
have know in general that your unhappy affair be the subject, why then,
I think I must tell you.
yet how shall I?==I feel my cheek glow with mingle shame and
indignation.--Know then, my dear,--that I have be--as I may say--that I
have be beat--indeed 'tis true. my mother think fit to slap my
hand to get from I a sheet of a letter she catch I write to you;
which I tore, because she should not read it, and burn it before her
face.
I know this will trouble you: so spare yourself the pain to tell I it
do.
Mr. Hickman come in presently after. I would not see he. I be either
too much a woman to be beat, or too much a child to have an humble
servant--so I tell my mother. what can one oppose but sullen, when it
would be unpardonable so much as to think of lift up a finger?
in the Harlowe style, she will be obey, she say: and even Mr. Hickman
shall be forbid the house, if he contribute to the carrying on of a
correspondence which she will not suffer to be continue.
poor man! he stand a whimsical chance between we. but he know he be
sure of my mother; but not of I. 'tis easy then for he to choose his
party, be it not his inclination to serve you, as it surely be. and
this make he a merit with I, which otherwise he would not have have;
notwithstanding the good quality which I have just now acknowledge in
his favour. for, my dear, let my fault in other respect be what they
may, I will pretend to say, that I have in my own mind those quality
which I praise he for. and if we be to come together, I could for
that reason well dispense with they in him.--So if a husband, who have a
bountiful-temper wife, be not a niggard, nor seek to restrain she, but
have an opinion of all she do, that be enough for he: as, on the
contrary, if a bountiful-temper husband have a frugal wife, it be good
for both. for one to give, and the other to give, except they have
prudence, and be at so good an understanding with each other as to
compare note, they may perhaps put it out of their power to be just.
good frugal doctrine, my dear! but this way of put it be middle
the matter between what I have learn of my mother's over-prudent and
your enlarged notions.--but from doctrine to fact--
I shut myself up all that day; and what little I do eat, eat alone.
but at night she send up Kitty with a command, upon my obedience, to
attend she at supper.
I go down; but most gloriously in the sullen. yes, and no, be great
word with I, to every thing she ask, for a good while.
that behaviour, she tell I, should not do for she.
beating should not do for I, I say.
my bold resistance, she tell I, have provoke she to slap my hand; and
she be sorry to have be so provoke. but again insist that I would
either give up my correspondence absolutely, or let she see all that
pass in it.
I must not do either, I tell she. it be unsuitable both to my
inclination and to my honour, at the instigation of base mind to give up
a friend in distress.
she ring all the maternal change upon the word duty, obedience, filial
obligation, and so forth.
I tell she that a duty too rigorously and unreasonably exact have be
your ruin, if you be ruin.
if I be of age to be marry, I hope she would think I capable of
making, or at least of keeping, my own friendship; such a one especially
as this, with a woman too, and one whose friendship she herself, till
this distressful point of time, have think the most useful and edify
that I have ever contract.
the great the merit, the bad the action: the fine the talent, the
more dangerous the example.
there be other duty, I say, besides the filial one; and I hop I
need not give up a suffering friend, especially at the instigation of
those by whom she suffer. I tell she, that it be very hard to annex
such a condition as that to my duty; when I be persuade, that both
duty might be perform, without derogate from either: that an
unreasonable command (she must excuse I, I must say it, though I be
slap again) be a degree of tyranny: and I could not have expect,
that at these year I should be allow now will, no choice of my own!
where a woman only be concern, and the devilish sex not in the
question.
what turn most in favour of her argument be, that I desire to be
excuse from let she read all that pass between we. she insist
much upon this: and since, she say, you be in the hand of the most
intriguing man in the world, and a man who have make a jest of her
favourite Hickman, as she have be tell, she know not what consequence,
unthought of by your or I, may flow from such a correspondence.
so you see, my dear, that I fare the bad on Mr. Hickman's account! my
mother might see all that pass between we, do I not know, that it
would cramp your spirit, and restrain the freedom of your pen, as it
would also the freedom of mine: and be she not moreover so firmly
attach to the contrary side, that inference, consequence, strained
deduction, censure, and construction the most partial, would for ever
to be hale in to tease I, and would perpetually subject we to the
necessity of debate and canvass.
besides, I donot choose that she should know how much this artful wretch
have outwit, as I may call it, a person so much his superior in all the
nobler quality of the human mind.
the generosity of your heart, and the greatness of your soul, full well I
know; but do offer to dissuade I from this correspondence.
Mr. Hickman, immediately on the contention above, offer his service;
and I accept of it, as you will see by my last. he think, though he
have all honour for my mother, that she be unkind to we both. he be
pleased to tell I (with an air, as I think) that he not only approve
of our correspondence, but admire the steadiness of my friendship; and
have no opinion of your man, but a great one of I, think that my
advice or intelligence from time to time may be of use to you; and on
this presumption say, that it would be a thousand pity that you should
suffer for want of either.
Mr. Hickman please I in the main of his speech; and it be well the
general tenor of it be agreeable; otherwise I can tell he, I should
have reckon with he for his word approve; for it be a style I have not
yet permit he to talk to I in. and you see, my dear, what these man
be--no soon do they find that you have favour they with the power of
do you an agreeable service, but they take upon they to approve,
forsooth, of your action! by which be imply a right to disapprove, if
they think fit.
I have tell my mother how much you wish to be reconcile to your
relation, and how independent you be upon Lovelace.
Mark the end of the latter assertion, she say. and as to
reconciliation, she know that nothing will do, (and will have it, that
nothing ought to do,) but your return back, without presume to
condition with they. and this if you do, she say, will well show your
independence on Lovelace.
you see, my dear, what your duty be, in my mother's opinion.
I suppose your next, direct to Mr. Hickman, at his own house, will be
from London.
Heaven preserve you in honour and safety, be my prayer.
what you do for change of clothe, I cannot imagine.
it be amazing to I what your relation can mean by distress you, as
they seem resolve to do. I see they will throw you into his arm,
whether you will or not.
I send this by Robert, for dispatch-sake: and can only repeat the
hitherto-reject offer of my good service. Adieu, my dear friend.
believe I ever
your affectionate and faithful
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER xli
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
TUESDAY, APRIL 20.
I should think myself utterly unworthy of your friendship do not my own
concern, heavy as they be, so engross I, that I could not find leisure
for a few line to declare to my beloved friend my sincere disapprobation
of her conduct, in an instance where she be so generously faulty, that
the consciousness of that very generosity may hide from she the fault,
which I, more than any other, have reason to deplore, as be the
unhappy occasion of it.
you know, you say, that your account of the contention between your
mother and you will trouble I; and so you bid I spare myself the pain
to tell you that they do.
you do not use, my dear, to forbid I thus beforehand. you be willnot to
say, you love I the well for my expostulation with you on that
acknowledge warmth and quickness of your temper which your own good
sense teach you to be apprehensive of. what though I have so miserably
fall, and be unhappy, if ever I have any judgment worth regard, it be
now as much worth as ever, because I can give it as freely against myself
as against any body else. and shall I not, when there seem to be an
infection in my fault, and that it lead you likewise to resolve to carry
on a correspondence against prohibition, expostulate with you upon it;
when whatever consequence flow from your disobedience, they but widen my
error, which be as the evil root, from which such sad branch spring?
the mind that can glory in be capable of so noble, so firm, so
unshaken friendship, as that of my dear Miss Howe; a friendship which no
casualty or distress can lessen, but which increase with the misfortune
of its friend--such a mind must be above take amiss the well-mean
admonition of that distinguish friend. I will not therefore apologize
for my freedom on this subject: and the less need I, when that freedom be
the result of an affection, in the very instance, so absolutely
disintereste, that it tend to deprive myself of the only comfort leave
I.
your acknowledge sullen; your tearing from your mother's hand the
letter she think she have a right to see, and burn it, as you own,
before her face; your refusal to see the man, who be so willing to obey
you for the sake of your unhappy friend, and this purely to vex your
mother; can you think, my dear, upon this brief recapitulation of hardly
one half of the faulty particular you give, that these fault be
excusable in one who so well know her duty?
your mother have a good opinion of I once: be not that a reason why she
should be more regard now, when I have, as she believe, so deservedly
forfeit it? a prejudice in favour be as hard to be totally overcome as
a prejudice in disfavour. in what a strong light, then, must that error
appear to she, that should so totally turn her heart against I, herself
not a principal in the case?
there be other duty, you say, besides the filial duty: but that, my
dear, must be a duty prior to all other duty; a duty anterior, as I may
say, to you very birth: and what duty ought not to give way to that, when
they come in competition?
you be persuade, that the duty to your friend, and the filial duty, may
be perform without derogate from either. your mother think
otherwise. what be the conclusion to be draw from these premise?
when your mother see, how much I suffer in my reputation from the step I
have take, from whom she and all the world expect well thing, how
much reason have she to be watchful over you! one evil draw on another
after it; and how know she, or any body, where it may stop?
do not the person who will vindicate, or seek to extenuate, a faulty
step in another [in this light must your mother look upon the matter in
question between she and you] give an indication either of a culpable
will, or a weak judgment; and may not she apprehend, that the censorious
will think, that such a one might probably have equally fail under the
same inducement and provocation, to use your own word, as apply to
I in a former letter?
can there be a strong instance in human lie than mine have so early
furnish, within a few month past, (not to mention the uncommon
provocation to it, which I have meet with,) of the necessity of the
continuance of a watchful parent's care over a daughter: let that
daughter have obtain ever so great a reputation for her prudence?
be not the space from sixteen to twenty-one that which require this
care, more than at any time of a young woman's life? for in that period
do we not generally attract the eye of the other sex, and become the
subject of their address, and not seldom of their attempt? and be not
that the period in which our conduct or misconduct give we a reputation
or disreputation, that almost inseparably accompany we throughout our
whole future life?
be we not likewise then most in danger from ourselves, because of the
distinction with which we be apt to behold particular of that sex.
and when our danger multiply, both from within and without, do not our
parent know, that their vigilance ought to be double? and shall that
necessary increase of care sit uneasy upon we, because we be grow up to
stature and womanhood?
will you tell I, if so, what be the precise stature and age at which a
good child shall conclude herself absolve from the duty she owe to a
parent?--and at which a parent, after the example of the dam of the
brute creation, be to lay aside all care and tenderness for her
offspring?
be it so hard for you, my dear, to be treat like a child? and can you
not think it be hard for a good parent to imagine herself under the
unhappy necessity of so treat her woman-grow daughter?
do you think, if your mother have be you, and you your mother, and your
daughter have struggle with you, as you do with she, that you would not
have be as apt as your mother be to have slap your daughter's
hand, to have make she quit her hold, and give up the prohibit letter?
your mother tell you, with great truth, that you provoke she to this
harshness; and it be a great condescension in she (and not take notice
of by you as it deserve) to say that she be sorry for it.
at every age on this side matrimony (for then we come under another sort
of protection, though that be far from abrogate the filial duty) it
will be find, that the wing of our parent be our most necessary and
most effectual safeguard from the vulture, the hawk, the kite, and
other villainous bird of prey, that hover over we with a view to seize
and destroy be the first time we be catch wander out of the eye or
care of our watchful and natural guardian and protector.
hard as you may suppose it, to be deny to continuance of a
correspondence once so much approve, even by the venerable denier; yet,
if your mother think my fault to be of such a nature, as that a
correspondence with I will cast a shade upon your reputation, all my own
friend have give I up--that hardship be to be submit to. and
must it not make she the more strenuous to support her own opinion, when
she see the first fruit of this tenaciousness on your side be to be
gloriously in the sullen, as you call it, and in a disobedient
opposition?
I know that you have a humourous meaning in that expression, and that
this turn, in most case, give a delightful poignancy both to your
conversation and correspondence; but indeed, my dear, this case will not
bear humour.
will you give I leave to add to this tedious expostulation, that I by no
mean approve of some of the thing you write, in relation to the manner
in which your father and mother live--at time live--only at time, I
dare day, though perhaps too often.
your mother be answerable to any body, rather than to her child, for
whatever be wrong in her conduct, if any thing be wrong, towards Mr.
Howe: a gentleman, of whose memory I will only say, that it ought to be
revere by you--but yet, should you not examine yourself, whether your
displeasure at your mother have no part in your revive reverence for your
father at the time you write?
no one be perfect: and although your mother may not be right to remember
disagreeableness against the depart, yet should you not want to be
remind on whose account, and on what occasion, she remember they.
you cannot judge, nor ought you to attempt to judge, of what might have
pass between both, to embitter and keep awake disagreeable remembrance
in the survivor.
LETTER XLII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[in CONTINUATION.]
but this subject must not be pursue. another might, with more pleasure,
(though not with more approbation,) upon one of your lively excursion.
it be upon the high air you give yourself upon the word approve.
how come it about, I wonder, that a young lady so note for
predominate generosity, should not be uniformly generous? that your
generosity should fail in an instance where policy, prudence, gratitude,
would not permit it to fail? Mr. Hickman (as you confess) have indeed a
worthy mind. if I have not long ago know that, he would never have find
an advocate in I for my Anna Howe's favour to he. often and often have
I be concern, when I be your happy guest, to see he, after a
conversation, in which he have well support his part in your absence,
sink at once into silence the moment you come into company.
I have tell you of this before: and I believe I hint to you once, that
the superciliousness you put on only to he, be capable of a
construction, which at the time would have very little gratified your
pride to have have make; since it would have be as much in his favour,
as if your disfavour.
Mr. Hickman, my dear, be a modest man. I never see a modest man, but I
be sure (if he have not want opportunity) that he have a treasure in
his mind, which require nothing but the key of encouragement to unlock
it, to make he shine--while a confident man, who, to be confident, must
think as meanly of his company as highly of himself, enter with
magisterial air upon any subject; and, depend upon his assurance to
bring himself off when find out, talk of more than he be master of.
but a modest man!--o my dear, shall not a modest woman distinguish and
wish to consort with a modest man?--A man, before whom, and to whom she
may open her lip secure of his good opinion of all she say, and of his
just and polite regard for her judgment? and who must therefore inspire
she with an agreeable self-confidence.
what a lot have I drawn!--We be all indeed apt to turn teacher--but,
surely, I be well enable to talk, to write, upon these subject, than
ever I be. but I will banish myself, if possible, from an address
which, when I begin to write, I be determined to confide wholly to your
own particular.
my dearest, dearest friend, how ready be you to tell we what other
should do, and even what a mother should have do! but indeed you once,
I remember, advanced, that, as different attainment require different
talent to master they, so, in the writing way, a person might not be a
bad critic upon the work of other, although he might himself be unable
to write with excellence. but will you permit I to account for all this
readiness of find fault, by place it to human nature, which, be
sensible of the defect of human nature, (that be to say, of its own
defect,) love to be correct? but in exercise that talent, choose
rather to turn its eye outward than inward? in other word, to employ
itself rather in the out-door search, than in the in-door examination.
and here give I leave to add, (and yet it be with tender reluctance,)
that although you say very pretty thing of notable wife; and although
I join with you in opinion, that husband may have as many
inconveniencie to encounter with, as conveniencie to boast of, from
woman, of that character; yet Lady Hartley perhaps would have have milder
treatment from your pen, have it not be dip in gall with a mother in
your eye.
as to the money, you so generously and repeatedly offer, donot be angry
with I, if I again say, that I be very desirous that you should be able
to aver, without the least qualifying or reserve, that nothing of that
sort have pass between we. I know your mother's strong way of put
the question she be intent upon have answer. but yet I promise that
I will be oblige to nobody but you, when I have occasion.
letter xliii
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[in CONTINUATION.]
and now, my dear, a few word, as to the prohibition lay upon you; a
subject that I have frequently touch upon, but cursorily, because I be
afraid to trust myself with it, know that my judgment, if I do, would
condemn my practice.
you command I not to attempt to dissuade you from this correspondence;
and you tell I how kindly Mr. Hickman approve of it; and how oblige
he be to I, to permit it to be carry on under cover to he--but this
do not quite satisfy I.
I be a very bad casuist; and the pleasure I take in writing to you, who
be the only one to whom I can disburden my mind, may make I, as I have
hint, very partial to my own wish: else, if it be not an artful
evasion beneath an open and frank heart to wish to be comply with, I
would be glad methink to be permit still to write to you; and only to
have such occasional return by Mr. Hickman's pen, as well as cover, as
might set I right when I be wrong; confirm I, when right, and guide I
where I doubt. this would enable I to proceed in the difficult path
before I with more assuredness. for whatever I suffer from the censure
of other, if I can preserve your good opinion, I shall not be altogether
unhappy, let what will befall I.
and indeed, my dear, I know not how to forbear writing. I have now no
other employment or diversion. and I must write on, although I be not
to send it to any body. you have often hear he own the advantage I
have find from write down every thing of moment that befall I; and
of all I think, and of all I do, that may be of future use to I; for,
besides that this help to form one to a style, and open and expand the
ductile mind, every one will find that many a good thought evaporate in
thinking; many a good resolution go off, drive out of memory perhaps
by some other not so good. but when I set down what I will do, or what I
have do, on this or that occasion; the resolution or action be before
I either to be adhere to, withdraw, or amend; and I have enter
into compact with myself, as I may say; have give it under my own hand
to improve, rather than to go backward, as I live long.
I would willingly, therefore, write to you, if I might; the rather as it
would be the more inspiriting to have some end in view in what I write;
some friend to please; besides merely seek to gratify my passion for
scribble.
but why, if your mother will permit our correspondence on communicate
to she all that pass in it, and if she would condescend to one only
condition, may it not be comply with?
would she not, do you think, my dear, be prevail upon to have the
communication make to she, in confidence?
if there be any prospect of a reconciliation with my friend, I should
not have so much regard for my pride, as to be afraid of any body's
know how much I have be outwit as you call it. I would in that
case (when I have leave Mr. Lovelace) acquaint your mother, and all my own
friend, with the whole of my story. it would behove I so to do, for my
own reputation, and for their satisfaction.
but, if I have no such prospect, what will the communication of my
reluctance to go away with Mr. Lovelace, and of his art to frighten I
away, avail I? your mother have hint, that my friend would insist
upon my return home to they (as a proof of the truth of my plea) to be
dispose of, without condition, at their pleasure. if I scruple this,
my brother would rather triumph over I, than keep my secret. Mr.
Lovelace, whose pride already so ill brook my regret for meet he,
(when he think, if I have not, I must have be Mr. Solmes's wife,) would
perhaps treat I with indignity: and thus, deprive of all refuge and
protection, I should become the scoff of man of intrigue; a disgrace to
my sex--while that avow love, however indiscreetly show, which be
follow by marriage, will find more excuse make for it, than generally
it ought to find.
but, if your mother will receive the communication in confidence, pray
shew she all that I have write, or shall write. if my past conduct in
that case shall not be find to deserve heavy blame, I shall then perhaps
have the benefit of her advice, as well as your. and if, after a
re-establishment in her favour, I shall wilfully deserve blame for the
time to come, I will be content to be deny your as well as hers for
ever.
as to cramp my spirit, as you call it, (be I to sit down to write
what I know your mother must see,) that, my dear, be already cramp.
and do not think so unhandsomely of your mother, as to fear that she
would make partial construction against I. neither you nor I can
doubt, but that, have she be leave unprepossessedly to herself, she would
have show favour to I. and so, I dare say, would my uncle Antony.
Nay, my dear, I can extend my charity still far: for I be sometimes
of opinion, that be my brother and sister absolutely certain that they
have so far ruin I in the opinion of both my uncle, as that they need
not be apprehensive of my clashing with their interest, they would not
oppose a pardon, although they might not wish a reconciliation;
especially if I would make a few sacrifice to they: which, I assure you,
I should be incline to make be I wholly free, and independent on this
man. you know I never value myself upon worldly acquisition, but as
they enlarge my power to do thing I love to do. and if I be deny
the power, I must, as I now do, curb my inclination.
do not however thing I guilty of an affectation in what I have say of
my brother and sister. severe enough I be sure it be, in the most
favourable sense. and an indifferent person will be of opinion, that
they be much well warrant than ever, for the sake of the family
honour, to seek to ruin I in the favour of all my friend.
but to the former topic--try, my dear, if your mother will, upon the
condition above give, permit our correspondence, on see all we write.
but if she will not, what a selfishness would there be in my love to you,
be I to wish you to forego your duty for my sake?
and now, one word, as to the freedom I have treat you with in this
tedious expostulary address. I presume upon your forgiveness of it,
because few friendship be found on such a basis as our: which be,
'freely to give reproof, and thankfully to receive it as occasion arise;
that so either may have opportunity to clear up mistake, to acknowledge
and amend error, as well in behaviour as in word and deed; and to
rectify and confirm each other in the judgment each shall form upon
person, thing, and circumstance.' and all this upon the follow
consideration; 'that it be much more eligible, as well as honourable, to
be correct with the gentleness that may be expect from an undoubted
friend, than, by continue either blind or wilful, to expose ourselves
to the censure of an envious and perhaps malignant world.'
but it be as needless, I dare say, to remind you of this, as it be to
repeat my request, so often repeat, that you will not, in your turn,
spare the folly and the fault of
your ever affectionate
CL. HARLOWE.
SUBJOINED to the ABOVE.
I say, that I would avoid write any thing of my own particular affair
in the above address, if I could.
I will write one letter more, to inform you how I stand with this man.
but, my dear, you must permit that one, and your answer to it (for I want
your advice upon the content of mine) and the copy of one I have write
to my aunt, to be the last that shall pass between we, while the
prohibition continue.
I fear, I very much fear, that my unhappy situation will draw I in to
be guilty of evasion, of little affectation, and of curving from the
plain simple truth which I be willnot to delight in, and prefer to every
other consideration. but allow I to say, and this for your sake, and in
order to lessen your mother's fear of any ill consequence that she
might apprehend from our correspondence, that if I be at any time guilty
of a failure in these respect, I will not go on in it, but endeavour to
recover my lose ground, that I may not bring error into habit.
I have defer go to town, at Mrs. Sorlings's earnest request. but
have fix my removal to Monday, as I shall acquaint you in my next.
I have already make a progress in that next; but, have an unexpected
opportunity, will send this by itself.
LETTER XLIV
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
FRIDAY morning, APRIL 21.
my mother will not comply with your condition, my dear. I hint it to
she, as from myself. but the Harlowes (excuse I) have get she entirely
in with they. it be a scheme of mine, she tell I, form to draw she
into your party against your parent. which, for your own sake, she be
very careful about.
donot be so much concerned about my mother and I, once more, I beg of
you. we shall do well enough together--now a fall out, now a fall
in.
it use to be so, when you be not in the question.
yet do I give you my sincere thank for every line of your reprehensive
letter; which I intend to read as often as I find my temper rise.
I will freely own, however, that I wince a little at first read they.
but I see that, on every re-perusal, I shall love and honour you still
more, if possible, than before.
yet, I think I have one advantage over you; and which I will hold through
this letter, and through all my future letter; that be, that I will
treat you as freely as you treat I; and yet will never think an apology
necessary to you for my freedom.
but that you so think with respect to I be the effect of your gentleness
of temper, with a little sketch of imply reflection on the warmth of
mine. gentleness in a woman you hold to be no fault: nor do I a little
due or provoke warmth--but what be this, but praise on both side what
what neither of we can help, nor perhaps wish to help? you can no more
go out of your road, than I can go out of mine. it would be a pain to
either to do so: what then be it in either's approve of her own natural
bias, but make a virtue of necessity?
but one observation I will add, that be your character, and my
character, to be truly draw, mine would be allow to be the most
natural. Shades and light be equally necessary in a fine picture.
your would be surround with such a flood of brightness, with such a
glory, that it would indeed dazzle; but leave one heartless to imitate
it.
o may you not suffer from a base world for your gentleness; while my
temper, by its warmth, keep all imposition at a distance, though less
amiable in general, afford I not reason, as I have mention
heretofore, to wish to make an exchange with you!
I should indeed be inexcusable to open my lip by way of contradiction to
my mother, have I such a fine spirit as your to deal with. truth be
truth, my dear! why should narrowness run away with the praise due to
a noble expansion of heart? if every body would speak out, as I do,
(that be to say, give praise where only praise be due; dispraise where
due likewise,) shame, if not principle, would mend the world--nay, shame
would introduce principle in a generation or two. very true, my dear.
do you apply. I dare not.--For I fear you, almost as much as I love you.
I will give you an instance, nevertheless, which will a-new demonstrate,
that none but very generous and noble-minded people ought to be
implicitly obey. you know what I say above, that truth be truth.
inconveniencie will sometimes arise from have to do with person of
modest and scrupulousness. Mr. Hickman, you say, be a modest man. he
put your corrective packet into my hand with a very fine bow, and a self-
satisfied air [wewill consider what you say of this honest man by-and-by,
my dear]: his strut be no go off, when in come my mother, as I be
read it.
when some folk find their anger have make they considerable, they will
be always angry, or seek occasion for anger.
why, now, Mr. Hickman--why, now, Nancy, [as I be huddle in the packet
between my gown and my stay, at her entrance.] you have a letter
bring you this instant.--while the modest man, with his pausing
braying, Mad-da--mad-dam, look as if he know not whether to fight it
out, or to stand his ground, and see fair play.
it would have be poor to tell a lie for it. she fling away. I go
out at the opposite door, to read the content; leave Mr. Hickman to
exercise his white tooth upon his thumb-nail.
when I have read your letter, I go to find out my mother. I tell she
the generous content, and that you desire that the prohibition might be
adhere to. I propose your condition, as for myself; and be reject,
as above.
she suppose, she be finely paint between two 'young creature, who
have more wit than prudence:' and instead of be prevail upon by the
generosity of your sentiment, make use of your opinion only to confirm
her own, and renew her prohibition, charge I to return no other
answer, but that she do renew they: add, that they should stand, till
your relation be reconcile to you; hint as if she have engage for
as much: and expect my compliance.
I think of your reprehension, and be meek, though not please. and
let I tell you, my dear, that as long as I can satisfy my own mind, that
good be intend, and that it be hardly possible that evil should ensue
from our correspondence--as long as I know that this prohibition proceed
originally from the same spiteful mind which have be the occasion of
all these mischief--as long as I know that it be not your fault if your
relation be not reconcile to you, and that upon condition which no
reasonable people would refuse--you must give I leave, with all
deference to your judgment, and to your excellent lesson, (which would
reach almost every case of this kind but the present,) to insist upon
your writing to I, and that minutely, as if this prohibition have not
be lay.
it be not from humour, from perverseness, that I insist upon this. I
cannot express how much my heart be in your concern. and you must, in
short, allow I to think, that if I can do you service by writing, I
shall be well justify in continue to write, than my mother be in
her prohibition.
but yet, to satisfy you all I can, I will as seldom return answer, while
the interdict last, as may be consistent with my notion of friendship,
and with the service I owe you, and can do you.
as to your expedient of writing by Hickman [and now, my dear, your modest
man come in: and as you love modesty in that sex, I will do my
endeavour, by hold he at a proper distance, to keep he in your
favour] I know what you mean by it, my sweet friend. it be to make that
man significant with I. as to the correspondence, that shall go on, I
do assure you, be as scrupulous as you please--so that that will not
suffer if I do not close with your proposal as to he.
I must tell you, that I think it will be honour enough for he to have
his name make use of so frequently betwixt we. this, of itself, be
place a confidence in he, that will make he walk bolt upright, and
display his white hand, and his fine diamond ring; and most mightily lay
down his service, and his pride to oblige, and his diligence, and his
fidelity, and his contrivance to keep our secret, and his excuse, and
his evasion to my mother, when challenge by she; with fifty ana's
beside: and will it not moreover give he pretence and excuse oftener
than ever to pad-nag it hither to good Mrs. Howe's fair daughter?
but to admit he into my company tete-a-tete, and into my closet, as
often as I would wish to write to you, I only dictate to his pen--my
mother all the time suppose that I be go to be heartily in love
with he--to make he master of my sentiment, and of my heart, as I may
say, when I write to you--indeed, my dear, I willnot. nor, be I marry
to the good he in England, would I honour he with the communication of
my correspondence.
no, my dear, it be sufficient, surely, for he to parade in the character
of our letter-conveyor, and to be honour in a cover, and never fear
but, modest as you think he, he will make enough of that.
you be always blame I for want of generosity to this man, and for
abuse of power. but I profess, my dear, I cannot tell how to help it.
do, dear, now, let I spread my plume a little, and now-and-then make
myself fear. this be my time, you know, since it would be no more to
my credit than to his, to give myself those air when I be married. he
have a joy when I be pleased with he that he would not know, but for the
pain my displeasure give he.
man, no more than woman, know how to make a moderate use of power. be
not that see every day, from the prince to the peasant? if I do not
make Hickman quake now-and-then, he will endeavour to make I fear. all
the animal in the creation be more or less in a state of hostility with
each other. the wolf, that run away from a lion, will devour a lamb the
next moment. I remember, that I be once so enraged at a game chicken
that be continually peck at another (a poor humble one, as I think
he) that I have the offender catch, and without more ado, in a pet of
humanity, wring his neck off. what follow this execution? why that
other grow insolent, as soon as his insulter be go, and be
continually peck at one or two under he. peck and be hang, say I,
--I might as well have preserve the first, for I see it be the nature of
the beast.
excuse my flippancy. I wish I be with you. I would make you smile
in the midst of your grave air, as I use to do. o that you have
accept of my offer to attend you! but nothing that I offer will you
accept----take care!--you will make I very angry with you: and when I
be, you know I value nobody: for, dearly as I love you, I must be, and
cannot always help it,
your saucy
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XLV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
FRIDAY, APRIL 22.
Mr. Lovelace communicate to I this morning early, from his
intelligencer, the news of my brother's scheme. I like he the well
for make very light of it, and for his treat it with contempt.
and indeed, have I not have the hint of it from you, I should have
suspect it to be some contrivance of his, in order to hasten I to
town, where he have long wish to be himself.
he read I the passage in that Leman's letter, which be pretty much to
the effect of what you write to I from Miss Lloyd; with this addition,
that one Singleton, a master of a Scots vessel, be the man who be to be
the principal in this act of violence.
I have see he. he have be twice entertain at Harlowe-place, as my
brother's friend. he have the air of a very bold and fearless man, and I
fancy it must be his project; as my brother, I suppose, talk to every
body of the rash step I have take, for he do not spare I before he have
this seem reason to censure I.
this Singleton live at Leith; so, perhaps, I be to be carry to my
brother's house not far from that port.
put these passage together, I be not a little apprehensive that the
design, lightly as Mr. Lovelace, from his fearless temper, treat it, may
be attempt to be carry into execution; and of the consequence that
may attend it, if it be.
I ask Mr. Lovelace, see he so frank and cool, what he would advise
I to do.
shall I ask you, Madam, what be your own thoughts?--why I return the
question, say he, be, because you have be so very earnest that I
should leave you as soon as you be in London, that I know not what to
propose without offend you.
my opinion be, say I, that I should studiously conceal myself from the
knowledge of every body but Miss Howe; and that you should leave I out
of hand; since they will certainly conclude, that where one be, the other
be not far off: and it be easy to trace you than I.
you would not surely wish, say he, to fall into your brother's hand by
such a violent measure as this? I propose not to throw myself
officiously in their way; but should they have reason to think I avoid
they, would not that whet their diligence to find you, and their courage
to attempt to carry you off, and subject I to insult that no man of
spirit can bear?
Lord bless I! say I, to what have this one fatal step that I have be
betray into----
Dearest Madam, let I beseech you to forbear this harsh language, when
you see, by this new scheme, how determined they be upon carry their
old one, have you not be betray, as you call it. have I offer to
defy the law of society, as this brother of yours must do, if any thing
be intend by this project? I hope you will be pleased to observe that
there be as violent and as wicked enterpriser as myself. but this be
so very wild a project, that I think there can be no room for
apprehension from it. I know your brother well. when at college, he
have always a romantic turn: but never have a head for any thing but to
puzzle and confound himself. a half-invention, and a whole conceit; but
not master of talent to do himself good, or other harm, but as those
other give he the power by their own folly.
this be very volubly run off, sir!--but violent spirit be but too much
alike; at least in their method of resent. you will not presume to
make yourself a less innocent man, surely, who have determine to brave my
whole family in person, if my folly have not save you the rashness, and
they the insult--
dear Madam!--Still must it be folly, rashness!--it be as impossible for
you to think tolerably of any body out of your own family, as it be for
any one in your family to deserve your love! forgive I, dearest
creature! if I do not love you as never man love a woman, I might
appear more indifferent to preference so undeservedly make. but let I
ask you, Madam, what have you bear from I? what cause have I give you
to treat I with so much severity and so little confidence? and what
have you not bear from they? Malice and ill-will, sit in judgment
upon my character, may not give sentence in my favour: but what of your
own knowledge have you against I?
spirited question, be they not, my dear?--and they be ask with as
spirit an air. I be startle. but I be resolve not to desert
myself.
be this a time, Mr. Lovelace, be this a proper occasion take, to give
yourself these high air to I, a young creature destitute of protection?
it be a surprising question you ask I--have I aught against you of my own
knowledge--I can tell you, Sir--and away I would have fling.
he snatch my hand, and besought I not to leave he in displeasure. he
plead his passion for I, and my severity to he, and partiality for
those from whom I have suffer so much; and whose intended violence, he
say, be now the subject of our deliberation.
I be force to hear he.
you condescend, dear creature, say he, to ask my advice. it be
very easy, give I leave to say, to advise you what to do. I hope I may,
on this new occasion, speak without offence, notwithstanding your former
injunction--you see that there can be no hope of reconciliation with
your relation. can you, Madam, consent to honour with your hand a
wretch whom you have never yet oblige with one voluntary favour!
what a recriminating, what a reproachful way, my dear, be this, of
put a question of this nature!
I expect not from he, at the time, and just as I be very angry with
he, either the question or the manner. I be ashamed to recollect the
confusion I be throw into; all your advice in my head at the moment:
yet his word so prohibitory. he confidently seem to enjoy my
confusion [indeed, my dear, he know not what respectful love be!] and
gaze upon I, as if he would have look I through.
he be still more declarative afterwards, as I shall mention by-and-by:
but it be half extort from he.
my heart struggle violently between resentment and shame, to be thus
tease by one who seem to have all his passion at command, at a time
when I have very little over mine! till at last I burst into tear, and
be go from he in high disgust: when, throw his arm about I,
with an air, however, the most tenderly respectful, he give a stupid turn
to the subject.
it be far from his heart, he say, to take so much advantage of the
streight, which the discovery of my brother's foolish project have bring
I into, as to renew, without my permission, a proposal which I have
hitherto discountenance, and which for that reason--
and then he come with his half-sentence, apologize for what he have not
so much as half-propose.
surely he have not the insolence to intend to tease I, to see if I could
be bring to speak what become I not to speak. but whether he have or
not, it do tease I; insomuch that my very heart be fret, and I
break out, at last, into fresh tear, and a declaration that I be very
unhappy. and just then recollect how like a tame fool I stand with
his arm about I, I fling from he with indignation. but he seize my
hand, as I be go out of the room, and upon his knee besought my stay
for one moment: and then, in word the most clear and explicit, tender
himself to my acceptance, as the most effectual mean to disappoint my
brother's scheme, and set all right.
but what could I say to this?--extorted from he, as it seem to I,
rather as the effect of his compassion than his love? what could I say?
I pause, I look silly--I be sure I look very silly. he suffer I
to pause, and look silly; wait for I to say something: and at last
(ashamed of my confusion, and aim to make an excuse for it) I tell he
that I desire he would avoid such measure as might add to the
uneasiness which it must be visible to he I have, when he reflect upon
the irreconcilableness of my friend, and upon what might follow from
this unaccountable project of my brother.
he promise to be govern by I in every thing. and again the wretch,
instead of press his former question, ask I, if I forgave he for
the humble suit he have make to I? what have I to do but to try for a
palliation of my confusion, since it serve I not?
I tell he I have hope it would not be long before Mr. Morden arrive;
and doubt not that that gentleman would be the readier to engage in my
favour, when he find that I make no other use of his (Mr. Lovelace's)
assistance, than to free myself from the address of a man so
disagreeable to I as Mr. Solmes: I must therefore wish that every thing
might remain as it be till I could hear from my cousin.
this, although tease by he as I be, be not, you see, my dear, a
denial. but he must throw himself into a heat, rather than try to
persuade; which any other man in his situation, I should think, would
have do; and this warmth oblige I to adhere to my seeming negative.
this be what he say, with a vehemence that must harden any woman's
mind, who have a spirit above be fright into passiveness--
good God! and will you, Madam, still resolve to show I that I be to hope
for no share in your favour, while any the remotest prospect remain that
you will be receive by my bitter enemy, at the price of my utter
rejection?
this be what I return, with warmth, and with a salve art too--you
should have see, Mr. Lovelace, how much my brother's violence can affect
I: but you will be mistaken if you let loose yours upon I, with a
thought of terrify I into measure the contrary of which you have
acquiesce with.
he only besought I to suffer his future action to speak for he; and if
I see he worthy of any favour, that I would not let he be the only
person within my knowledge who be not entitle to my consideration.
you refer to a future time, Mr. Lovelace, so do I, for the future proof
of a merit you seem to think for the past time want: and justly you
think so. and I be again go from he.
one word more he beg I to hear--he be determine studiously to avoid
all mischief, and every step that might lead to mischief, let my brother's
proceeding, short of a violence upon my person, be what they would: but
if any attempt that should extend to that be to be make, would I have
have he to be a quiet spectator of my be seize, or carry back, or on
board, by this Singleton; or, in case of extremity, be he not permit to
stand up in my defence?
stand up in my defence, Mr. Lovelace!--I should be very miserable be
there to be a call for that. but do you think I might not be safe and
private in London? by your friend's description of the widow's house, I
should think I might be safe there.
the widow's house, he reply, as describe by his friend, be a back
house within a front one, and look to a garden, rather than to a
street, have the appearance of privacy: but if, when there, it be not
approve, it would be easy to find another more to my liking--though, as
to his part, the method he would advise should be, to write to my uncle
Harlowe, as one of my trustee, and wait the issue of it here at Mrs.
Sorlings's, fearlessly direct it to be answer hither. to be afraid
of little spirit be but to encourage insult, he say. the substance
of the letter should be, 'to demand as a right, what they would refuse if
request as a courtesy: to acknowledge that I have put myself [too well,
he say, do their treatment justify I] into the protection of the
lady of his family [by whose order, and Lord M.'s, he himself would
appear to act]: but that upon my own term, which be such, that I be
under no obligation to those lady for the favour; it be no more than
they would have grant to any one of my sex, equally distressed.' if I
approve not of his method, happy should he think himself, he say, if I
would honour he with the opportunity of make such a claim in his own
name--but this be a point [with his butbe again in the same breath!]
that he durst but just touch upon. he hop, however, that I would think
their violence a sufficient inducement for I to take such a wish-for
resolution.
inwardly vex, I tell he that he himself have propose to leave I when
I be in town; that I expect he would: and that, when I be know to be
absolutely independent, I should consider what to write, and what to do:
but that while he be with I, I neither would nor could.
he would be very sincere with I, he say: this project of my brother's
have change the face of thing. he must, before he leave I, see whether
I should or should not approve of the London widow and her family, if I
choose to go thither. they might be people whom my brother might buy.
but if he see they be person of integrity, he then might go for a day
or two, or so. but he must need say, he could not leave I long at a
time.
do you propose, Sir, say I, to take up your lodging in the house where
I shall lodge?
he do not, he say, as he know the use I intend to make of his
absence, and my punctilio--and yet the house where he have lodging be
new-fronting, and not in condition to receive he: but he could go to his
friend Belford's, in Soho; or perhaps he might reach to the same
gentleman's house at Edgware, over night, and return on the morning,
till he have reason to think this wild project of my brother's lay aside.
but to no great distance till then should he care to venture.
the result of all be, to set out on Monday next for town. I hope it will
be in a happy hour.
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XLVI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY, APRIL 21.
[as it be not probable that the Lady could give so particular an account
of her own confusion, in the affect scene she mention on Mr.
Lovelace's offer himself to her acceptance, the follow extract be
make from his letter of the above date.]
and now, Belford, what wilt thou say, if, like the fly buzz about the
bright taper, I have like to have sing the silken wing of my liberty?
never be man in great danger of be catch in his own snare: all my
view anticipate; all my scheme untried; the admirable creature no
bring to town; nor one effort make to know if she be really angel or
woman.
I offer myself to her acceptance, with a suddenness, 'tis true, that
give she no time to wrap herself in reserve; and in term less tender
than fervent, tend to upbraid she for her past indifference, and to
remind she of her injunction: for it be the fear of her brother, not
her love of I, that have incline she to dispense with those injunction.
I never behold so sweet a confusion. what a glory to the pencil, could
it do justice to it, and to the mingled impatience which visibly inform
every feature of the most meaning and most beautiful face in the world!
she hem twice or thrice: her look, now so charmingly silly, then so
sweetly significant; till at last the lovely teaser, tease by my
hesitate expectation of her answer, out of all power of articulate
speech, burst into tear, and be turn from I with precipitation,
when, presume to fold she in my happy arm--o think not, well belove
of my heart, say I, think not, that this motion, which you may believe
to be so contrary to your former injunction, proceed from a design to
avail myself of the cruelty of your relation: if I have disoblige you
by it, (and you know with what respectful tenderness I have presume to
hint it,) it shall be my utmost care for the future--there I stopped----
then she speak, but with vexation--I be--I be--very unhappy--tear
trickle down her crimson cheek, and her sweet face, as my arm still
encircle the fine waist in the world, sink upon my shoulder; the
dear creature so absent, that she know not the honour she permit I.
but why, but why unhappy, my dear life? say i:--all the gratitude
that ever overflow the heart of the most obliged of men--
Justice to myself there stop my mouth: for what gratitude do I owe
she for obligation so involuntary?
then recover herself, and her usual reserve, and struggle to free
herself from my clasping arm, how now, Sir! say she, with a cheek more
indignantly glow, and eye of fiercer lustre.
I give way to her angry struggle; but, absolutely overcome by so charming
a display of innocent confusion, I catch hold of her hand as she be
fly from I, and kneeling at her fee, o my angel, say I, (quite
destitute of reserve, and hardly know the tenor of my own speech; and
have a parson be there, I have certainly be a go man,) receive the
vow of your faithful Lovelace. make he your, and only your, for
ever. this will answer every end. who will dare to form plot and
stratagem against my wife? that you be not so be the ground of all
their foolish attempt, and of their insolent hope in Solmes's favour.
--O be mine!--i beseech you (thus on my knee I beseech you) to be mine.
we shall then have all the world with we. and every body will applaud an
event that every body expect.
be the devil in I! I no more intend all this ecstatic nonsense, than
I think the same moment of fly in the air! all power be with this
charming creature. it be I, not she, at this rate, that must fail in the
arduous trial.
Didst thou ever before hear of a man utter solemn thing by an
involuntary impulse, in defiance of premeditation, and of all his proud
scheme? but this sweet creature be able to make a man forego every
purpose of his heart that be not favourable to she. and I verily think I
should be incline to spare her all further trial (and yet what trial have
she have?) be it not for the contention that her vigilance have set on
foot, which shall overcome the other. Thou know my generosity to my
uncontende Rosebud--and sometimes do I qualify my ardent aspiration
after even this very fine creature, by this reflection:--that the most
charming woman on earth, be she an empress, can excel the mean in
the customary visible only. such be the equality of the dispensation,
to the prince and the peasant, in this prime gift WOMAN.
well, but what be the result of this involuntary impulse on my part?--
wouldst thou not think; I be take at my offer?--an offer so solemnly
make, and on one knee too?
no such thing! the pretty trifl let I off as easily as I could have
wish.
her brother's project; and to find that there be no hope of a
reconciliation for she; and the apprehension she have of the mischief
that might ensue; these, not my offer, nor love of I, be the cause to
which she ascribe all her sweet confusion--an ascription that be high
treason against my sovereign pride,--to make marriage with I but a
second-place refuge; and as good as to tell I that her confusion be
owe to her concern that there be no hope that my enemy would
accept of her intend offer to renounce a man who have venture his life
for she, and be still ready to run the same risque in her behalf!
I re-urge she to make I happy, but I be to be postpone to her cousin
Morden's arrival. on he be now place all her hope.
I rave; but to no purpose.
another letter be to be send, or have be send, to her aunt hervey, to
which she hop an answer.
yet sometimes I think that fainter and fainter would have be her
procrastination, have I be a man of courage--but so fearful be I of
offend!
a confounded thing! the man to be so bashful; the woman to want so much
courting!--how shall two such come together--no kind mediatress in the
way?
but I must be content. 'tis seldom, however, that a love so ardent as
mine, meet with a spirit so resign in the same person. but true love,
I be now convince, only wish: nor have it any active will but that of
the adore object.
but, o the charming creature, again of herself to mention London! have
Singleton's plot be of my own contriving, a more happy expedient could
not have be think of to induce she to resume her purpose of go
thither; nor can I divine what could be her reason for postpone it.
I enclose the letter from Joseph Leman, which I mention to thee in mine
of Monday last,* with my answer to it. I cannot resist the vanity that
urge I to the communication. otherwise, it be well, perhaps, that I
suffer thee to imagine that this lady's star fight against she, and
dispense the opportunity in my favour, which be only the consequence
of my own invention.
LETTER XLVII
to ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ. his HONNER
SAT. APRIL 15.
may it please your HONNER,
this be to let you Honner kno', as how I have be emploie in a bisness
I would have be excuse from, if so be I could, for it be to gitt
evidense from a young man, who have of late com'd out to be my cuzzen by
my grandmother's side; and but lately come to live in these parte, about
a very vile thing, as younge master call it, relate to your Honner.
God forbid I should call it so without your leafe. it be not for so
plane a man as I be, to tack my better. it be consarne one Miss
Batirton, of Notingam; a very pretty crature, belike.
your Honner get she away, it seem, by a false letter to she, macking
believe as how her she-cuzzen, that she derely love, be come to see
she; and be tacken ill upon the rode: and so Miss Batirton set out in a
shase, and one sarvant, to fet her cuzzen from the inne where she lay
sick, as she thote: and the sarvant be trick, and braute back the
shase; but Miss Batirton be not harde of for a month, or so. and when
it come to passe, that her frend founde she out and would have
prossekutid your Honner, your Honner be go abroad: and so she be
broute to bed, as one may say, before your Honner's return: and she get
colde in her lyin-inn, and lanquitche, and soon die: and the child be
live; but your Honner never trouble your Honner's hedd about it in the
least. and this, and some other matter, of verry bad reporte, 'Squier
Solmes be to tell my young lady of, if so be she would have harde he
speke, before we lose her sweet company, as I may say, from heere.*
* see Vol.II. Letters XV. and XVI.
your Honner help I to many ugly story to tell against you Honner to
my younge master, and younge mistriss; but do not tell I about this.
I most humbelly beseche your Honner to be good and kinde and fethful to
my deer younge lady, now you have she; or I shall brake my harte for
have do some dede that have help to bringe thing to this passe.
pray youre dere, good Honner, be just! prayey do!--as God shall love ye!
prayey do!--I cannot write no more for this pressent, for verry fear and
grief--
but now I be cumm'd to my writing agen, will your Honner be pleased to
tell I, if as how there be any danger to your Honner's life from this
bisness; for my cuzzen be actile hier'd to go down to Miss Batirton's
frende to see if they will stir in it: for you must kno' your Honner, as
how he live in the Batirton family at the time, and could be a good
evidense, and all that.
I hope it be not so verry bad as Titus say it be; for he se as how
there be a rape in the case betwixt you at furste, and plese your
Honner; and my cuzzen Titus be a very honist younge man as ever brocke
breed. this be his carackter; and this make I willinger to owne he for
my relation, when we come to talck.
if there should be danger of your Honner's life, I hope your Honner will
not be hang like as one of we common man; only have your hedd cut off,
or so: and yet it be pit such a hedd should be losse: but if as how it
should be prossekutid to that furr, which God forbid, be plese natheless
to thinck of youre fethful Joseph Leman, before your hedd be condemn;
for after condemnation, as I have be tell, all will be the king's or
the shreeve's.
I thote as how it be good to acquent you Honner of this; and for you to
let I kno' if I could do any think to sarve your Honner, and prevent
mischief with my cuzzen Titus, on his come back from Nottingam, before
he macke his reporte.
I have gin he a hint already: for what, as I se to he, cuzzen Titus,
signifie stir up the cole and macking of strife, to make rich
gentilfolke live at varience, and to be cut of throte, and such-
like?
very trewe, se little Titus. and this, and plese your Honner, gi I
hope of he, if so be your Honner gis I direction; sen', as God kno'es,
I have a poor, a verry poor invenshon; only a willing mind to prevent
mischief, that be the chief of my aim, and always be, I bless my God!--
Els I could have make much mischief in my time; as indeed any sarvant
may. your Honner nathaless praise my invenshon every now-and-then:
alas! and plese your Honner, what invenshon should such a plane man as I
have?--but when your Honner set I agoe by your fine invenshon, I can
do well enuff. and I be sure I have a hearty good will to deserve your
Honner's faver, if I mought.
two day, as I may say, off and on, have I be write this long letter.
and yet I have not se all I would say. for, be it knone unto your
Honner, as how I do not like that Captain Singleton, which I tell you of
in my last two letter. he be always lay his hedd and my young
master's hedd together; and I suspect much if so be some mischief be not
go on between they: and still the more, as because my eld younge
lady seeme to be join to they sometimes.
last week my younge master se before my fase, my harte's blood boil
over, Capten Singleton, for revenge upon this--and he call your Honner
by a name it be not for such a won as I to say what.--Capten Singleton
whispre my younge master, be I be by. so young master se, you may
say any thing before Joseph; for, althoff he look so seelie, he have as
good a harte, and as good a hedd, as any sarvante in the world need to
have. my conscience touch I just then. but why shoulde it? when all
I do be to prevent mischeff; and see your Honner have so much patience,
which younge master have not; so be not affeard of tell your Honner any
thing whatsomever.
and furthermore, I have such a desire to desarve your Honner's bounty to
I, as macke I let nothing pass I can tell you of, to prevent harm: and
too, besides, your Honner's goodness about the Blew Bore; which I have so
good an accounte of!--I be sure I shall be bounden to bless your Honner
the long day I have to live.
and then the Blew Bore be not all neither: sen', and please your Honner,
the pretty Sowe (God forgive I for geste in so serus a matter) run in
my hedd likewise. I believe I shall love her mayhap more than your
Honner would have I; for she begin to be kind and good-humere, and
listen, and plese your Honour, licke as if she be among bean, when I
talke about the Blew Bore, and all that.
prayey, your Honner, forgive the gesting of a poor plane man. we common
foke have our joy, and plese your Honner, lick as our better have; and
if we be sometimes snub, we can find our underling to snub they
agen; and if not, we can get a wife mayhap, and snub she: so be master
some how or other oursell.
but how I try your Honner's patience!--sarvants will shew their joyful
harte, tho' off but in partinen, when encourag'd.
be plese from the prem's to let I kno' if as how I can be put upon any
sarvice to sarve your Honner, and to sarve my deer younge lady; which
God grant! for I begin to be affearde for she, hear what peple talck--
to be sure your Honner will not do she no harme, as a man may say. but I
kno' your Honner must be good to so wonderous a younge lady. how can you
help it?--but here my conscience smite I, that, but for some of my
story, which your Honner taute I, my old master, and my old lady, and
the two old 'squire, would not have be able to be half so hardhearte
as they be, for all my younge master and younge mistress saye.
and here be the sad thing; they cannot come to clere up matter with my
deerest young lady, because, as your Honner have order it, they have
these story as if bribe by I out of your Honner's sarvant; which must
not be know for fere you should kill'n and I too, and blacken the
briber!--Ah! your Honner! I doubte as tha I be a very vild fellow, (Lord
bless my soil, I pray God!) and do not intend it.
but if my deer younge lady should come to harm, and plese your Honner,
the horsepond at the Blew Bore--but Lord preserve we all from all bad
mischeff, and all bad ende, I pray the lord!--for tho'ff you Honner be
kinde to I in worldly pelf, yet what shall a man get to loos his soul,
as holy Skrittuer say, and plese your Honner?
but natheless I be in hope of reppentence hereafter, be but a younge
man, if I do wrong thro' ignoren: your Honner be a grate man, and a
grave wit; and I a poor crature, not worthy notice; and your Honner able
to answer for all. but, howsomever, I be
your Honner's fetheful sarvant in all dewtie,
JOSEPH LEMAN.
APRIL 15 and 16.
LETTER XLVIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOSEPH LEMAN
MONDAY, APRIL 17.
HONEST JOSEPH,
you have a bad opinion of your invention than you ought to have. I
must praise it again. of a plain man's head, I have not know many
well than your. how often have your forecast and discretion answer
my wish in case which I could not foresee, not know how my general
direction would succeed, or what might happen in the execution of they!
you be too doubtful of your own ability, honest Joseph; thatbe your
fault.--but it be a fault that be owe to natural modesty, you ought
rather to be pity for it than blame.
the affair of Miss Betterton be a youthful frolic. I love dearly to
exercise my invention. I do assure you, Joseph, that I have ever have
more pleasure in my contrivance, than in the end of they. I be no
sensual man: but a man of spirit--one woman be like another--you
understand I, Joseph.--In course, all the sport be make by the winding
hare--a barn-door chick be well eat--now you take I, Joseph.
Miss Betterton be but a tradesman's daughter. the family, indeed, be
grow rich, and aim at a new line of gentry; and be unreasonable
enough to expect a man of my family would marry she. I be honest. I
give the young lady no hope of that; for she put it to I. she resent
--kept up, and be keep up. a little innocent contrivance be necessary
to get she out. but no rape in the case, I assure you, Joseph. she
love I--I love she. indeed, when I get she to the inn, I ask her no
question. it be cruel to ask a modest woman for her consent. it be
create difficulty to both. have not her friend be officious, I have
be constant and faithful to she to this day, as far as I know--for then
I have not know my angel.
I go not abroad upon her account. she love I too well to have
appear against I; she refuse to sign a paper they have draw up for
she, to found a prosecution upon; and the brutal creature would not
permit the mid-wife's assistance, till her life be in danger; and, I
believe, to this her death be owe.
I go into mourning for she, though abroad at the time. a distinction I
have ever pay to those worthy creature who die in childbe by I.
I be ever nice in my loves.--These be the rule I lay down to myself
on my entrance into active life:--to set the mother above want, if she
friend be cruel, and if I could not get she a husband worthy of she:
to shun common woman--a piece of justice I owe to innocent lady, as
well as to myself: to marry off a former mistress, if possible, before I
take to a new one: to maintain a lady handsomely in her lying-in: to
provide for the little-one, if it live, accord to the degree of its
mother: to go into mourning for the mother, if she die. and the promise
of this be a great comfort to the pretty dear, as they grow near their
time.
all my error, all my expense, have be with and upon woman. so I
could acquit my conscience (act thus honourably by they) as well as my
discretion as to point of fortune.
all man love woman--and find I a man of more honour, in these point, if
you can, Joseph.
no wonder the sex love I as they do!
but now I be strictly virtuous. I be reform. so I have be for a
long time, resolve to marry as soon as I can prevail upon the most
admirable of woman to have I. I think of nobody else--it be impossible
I should. I have spar very pretty girl for her sake. very true,
Joseph! so set your honest heart at rest--you see the pain I take to
satisfy your qualm.
but, as to Miss Betterton--no rape in the case, I repeat: rape be
unnatural thing, and more be than be imagine, Joseph. I should be
loth to be put to such a streight; I never be. Miss Betterton be take
from I against her own will. in that case her friend, not I, commit
the rape.
I have contrive to see the boy twice, unknown to the aunt who take care
of he; love he; and would not now part with he on any consideration.
the boy be a fine boy I thank God. no father need be ashamed of he. he
will be well provide for. if not, I would take care of he. he will
have his mother's fortune. they curse the father, ungrateful wretch!
but bless the boy--upon the whole, there be nothing vile in this matter
on my side--a great deal on the Bettertons.
wherefore, Joseph, be not thou in pain, either for my head, or for thy
own neck; nor for the Blue Boar; nor for the pretty Sow.
I love your jesting. jesting well become a poor man than qualm. I
love to have you j. all we say, all we do, all we wish for, be a
jest. he that make life itself not so be a sad fellow, and have the
bad of it.
I doubt not, Joseph, but you have have your joy, as you say, as well as
your better. may you have more and more, honest Joseph!--He that
grudge a poor man joy, ought to have none himself. Jest on, therefore.
--jesting, I repeat, well become thee than qualm.
I have no need to tell you of Miss Betterton. do I not furnish you with
story enough, without her, against myself, to augment your credit with
your cunning master? besides, I be loth to mention Miss Betterton, her
friend be all live, and in credit. I love she too--for she be
take from I by her cruel friend, while our joy be young.
but enough of dear Miss betterton.--dear, I say; for death endears.--rest
to her worthy soul!--there, Joseph, off go a deep sigh to the memory of
Miss Betterton!
as to the journey of little Titus, (I now recollect the fellow by his
name) let that take its course: a lady die in childbe eighteen month
ago; no process begin in her life-time; refuse herself to give evidence
against I while she live--pretty circumstance to found an indictment
for a rape upon!
as to your young lady, the ever-admirable Miss Clarissa Harlowe, I always
court she for a wife. other rather expect marriage from the vanity
of their own heart, than from my promise; for I be always careful of
what I promise. you know, Joseph, that I have go beyond my promise
to you. I do to every body; and why? because it be the good way of
show that I have no grudging or narrow spirit. a promise be an
obligation. a just man will keep his promise, a generous man will go
beyond it.--this be my rule.
if you doubt my honour to your young lady, it be more than she do. she
would not stay with I an hour if she do. mine be the steady heart
in the world. Hast thou not reason to think it so? why this
squeamishness then, honest Joseph?
but it be because thou art honest--so I forgive thee. whoever love my
divine Clarissa, love I.
let James Harlowe call I what name he will, for his sister's sake I
will bear they. do not be concern for I; her favour will make I rich
amend; his own vilely malicious heart will make his blood boil over at
any time; and when it do, think thou that I will let it touch thine?
ah! Joseph, Joseph! what a foolish teaser be thy conscience! such a
conscience as give a plain man trouble, when he intend to do for the
good, be weakness, not conscience.
but say what thou wilt, write all thou know or hear of to I, Iwill
have patience with every body. why should I not, when it be as much the
desire of my heart, as it be of thine, to prevent mischief?
so now, Joseph, have take all this pain to satisfy thy conscience,
and answer all thy doubt, and to banish all thy fear, let I come to a
new point.
your endeavour and mine, which be design, by round-about way, to
reconcile all, even against the will of the most obstinate, have not, we
see answer the end we hop they would answer; but, on the contrary,
have widen the difference between our family. but this have not be
either your fault or mine: it be owe to the black, pitch-like blood of
your venomous-hearted young master, boil over, as he own, that our
honest wish have hitherto be frustrate.
yet we must proceed in the same course. we shall tire they out in time,
and they will propose term; and when they do, they shall find out how
reasonable mine shall be, little as they deserve from I.
Persevere, therefore, Joseph, honest Joseph, persevere; and unlikely as
you may imagine the mean, our desire will at last be obtain.
we have nothing for it now, but to go through with our work in the way
we have begin. for since (as I tell you in my last) my beloved mistrust
you, she will blow you up, if she be not mine; if she be, I can, and
will, protect you; and as, if there will be any fault, in her opinion, it
will be rather mine than your, she must forgive you, and keep she
husband's secret, for the sake of his reputation; else she will be
guilty of a great failure in her duty. so now you have set your hand to
the plough, Joseph, there be no look back.
and what be the consequence of all this: one labour more, and that will
be all that will fall to your lot; at least, of consequence.
my beloved be resolve not to think of marriage till she have try to
move her friend to a reconciliation with she. you know they be
determined not to be reconcile. she have it in her head, I doubt not, to
make I submit to the people I hate; and if I do, they would rather
insult I, than receive my condescension as they ought. she even own,
that she will renounce I, if they insist upon it, provide they will
give up Solmes: so, to all appearance, I be still as far as ever from the
happiness of call her mine; indeed I be more likely than ever to lose
she, (if I cannot contrive some way to avail myself of the present
critical situation;) and then, Joseph, all I have be study, and all
you have be do, will signify nothing.
at the place where we be, we cannot long be private. the lodging be
inconvenient for we, while both together, and while she refuse to marry.
she want to get I at a distance from she; there be extraordinary
convenient lodging, in my eye, in London, where we could be private, and
all mischief avoid. when there, (if I get her thither,) she will
insist that I leave she. Miss Howe be for ever put she upon
contrivance. that, you know, be the reason I have be oblige, by your
mean, to play the family off at Harlowe-place upon Mrs. Howe, and Mrs.
Howe upon her daughter--ah, Joseph! little need for your fear for my
angel! I only be in danger: but be I the free-liver I be report to
be, all this could I get over with a wet finger, as the saying be.
but, by the help of one of your hint, I have think of an expedient
which will do ever thing, and raise your reputation, though already so
high, high still. this Singleton, I hear, be a fellow who love
enterprise: the view he have to get James Harlowe to be his principal
owner in a large vessel which he want to be put into the command of, may
be the subject of their present close conversation. but since he be
teach to have so good an opinion of you, Joseph, cannot you (still
pretend an abhorrence of I, and of my contrivance) propose to
Singleton to propose to James Harlowe (who so much thirst for revenge
upon I) to assist he, with his whole ship's crew, upon occasion, to
carry off his sister to Leith, where both have house, or elsewhere?
you may tell they, that if this can be effect, it will make I rave
mad; and bring your young lady into all their measure.
you can inform they, as from my servant, of the distance she keep I at,
in hope of procure her father's forgiveness, by cruelly give I up,
if insist upon.
you can tell they, that as the only secret my servant have keep from you
be the place we be in, you make no doubt, that a two-guinea bribe will
bring that out, and also an information when I shall be at a distance
from she, that the enterprise may be conduct with safety.
you may tell they, (still as from my servant,) that we be about to
remove from inconvenient lodging to other more convenient, (which be
true,) and that I must be often absent from she.
if they listen to your proposal, you will promote your interest with
Betty, by tell it to she as a secret. Betty will tell Arabella of it;
Arabella will be overjoy at any thing that will help forward her
revenge upon I; and will reveal it (if her brother do not) to her uncle
Antony; he probably will whisper it to Mrs. Howe; she can keep nothing
from her daughter, though they be always jangle. her daughter will
acquaint my beloved with it. and if it will not, or if it will, come to
my ear from some of those, you can write it to I, as in confidence, by
way of prevent msicheif; which be the study of we both.
I can then show it to my beloved; then will she be for place a great
confidence in I--that will convince I of her love, which I be now
sometimes ready to doubt. she will be for hastening to the safe
lodging. I shall have a pretence to stay about her person, as a guard.
she will be convince that there be no expectation to be have of a
reconciliation. you can give James Harlowe and Singleton continual false
scent, as I shall direct you; so that no mischief can possibly happen.
and what will be the happy, happy, thrice happy consequence?--The lady
will be mine in an honourable way, we shall all be friend in good time.
the two guineas will be an agreeable addition to the many gratuity I
have help you to, by the like contrivance, from this stingy family.
your reputation, both for head and heart, as I hint before, will be
heighten. the Blue Boar also will be your; nor shall you have the
least difficulty about raise money to buy the stock, if it be worth
your while to have it.
Betty will likewise then be your. you have both save money, it seem.
the whole Harlowe family, whom you have so faithfully serve, ['tis
serve they, surely, to prevent the mischief which their violent son
would have bring upon they,] will throw you in somewhat towards
housekeeping. I will still add to your store--so nothing but happiness
before you!
Crow, Joseph, crow!--a dunghill of thy own in view; servant to snub at
thy pleasure; a wife to quarrel with, or to love, as thy humour lead
thee; Landlord and Landlady at every word; to be pay, instead of pay,
for thy eating and drinking. but not thus happy only in thyself: happy
in promote peace and reconciliation between two good family, in the
long run, without hurt any christian soul. o Joseph, honest Joseph!
what envy wilt thou raise, and who would be squeamish with such prospect
before he.
this one labour, I repeat, crown the work. if you can get but such a
design entertain by they, whether they prosecute it or not, it will be
equally to the purpose of
your love friend,
R. LOVELACE.
letter xlix
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MRS. HERVEY
[enclosed in she last to MISS HOWE.]
THURSDAY, APRIL 20.
HONOURED MADAM,
have not have the favour of an answer to a letter I take the liberty to
write to you on the 14th, I be in some hope that it may have miscarry:
for I have much rather it should, than to have the mortification to think
that my aunt Hervey deem I unworthy of the honour of her notice.
in this hope, have keep a copy of it, and not become able to express
myself in term well suit to the unhappy circumstance of thing, I
transcribe and enclose what I then write.* and I humbly beseech you to
favour the content of it with your interest.
* the content of the Letter refer to be give in Letter XXIV. of
this volume.
Hitherto it be in my power to perform what I undertake for in this
letter; and it would be very grievous to I to be precipitate upon
measure, which may render the desirable reconciliation more difficult.
if, Madam, I be permit to write to you with the hope of be
answer, I could clear my intention with regard to the step I have
take, although I could not perhaps acquit myself to some of my severest
judge, of an imprudence previous to it. you, I be sure, would pity I,
if you know all I could say, and how miserable I be in the forfeiture of
the good opinion of all my friend.
I flatter myself, that their favour be yet retrievable: but, whatever be
the determination at Harlowe-place, do not you, my dear aunt, deny I
the favour of a few line to inform I if there can be any hope of a
reconciliation upon term less shocking than those heretofore endeavour
to be impose upon I; or if (which God forbid!) I be to be for ever
reprobate.
at least, my dear Aunt, procure for I the justice of my wear apparel,
and the little money and other thing which I write to my sister for, and
mention in the enclose to you; that I may not be destitute of common
conveniencie, or be under a necessity to owe an obligation for such,
where, at present, however, I would least of all owe it.
allow I to say, that have I design what happen, I might (as to the
money and jewel at least) have save myself some of the mortification
which I have suffer, and which I still far apprehend, if my request
be not comply with.
if you be permit to encourage an eclaircissment of what I hint, I
will open my whole heart to you, and inform you of every thing.
if it be any pleasure to have I mortify, be pleased to let it be
know, that I be extremely mortified. and yet it be entirely from my own
reflection that I be so, have nothing to find fault with in the
behaviour of the person from whom every evil be to be apprehend.
the bearer, have business your way, will bring I your answer on
Saturday morning, if you favour I accord to my hope. I know not
that I should have this opportunity till I have write the above.
I be, my dear Aunt,
your ever dutiful,
CL. HARLOWE.
be pleased to direct for I, if I be to be favour with a few line, to
be leave at Mr. Osgood's, near Soho-square; and nobody shall ever know of
your goodness to I, if you desire it to be keep a secret.
LETTER L
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
SATURDAY, APRIL 22.
I cannot for my life account for your wretch's teasing way; but he
certainly doubt your love of he. in this he be a modest man, as well
as somebody else; and tacitly confess that he do not deserve it.
your israelitish hankering after the egyptian onion, (testify still
more in your letter to your aunt,) your often repeat regret for
meet he, for be betray by he--these he cannot bear.
I have be look back on the whole of his conduct, and compare it
with his general character; and find that he be more consistently, more
uniformly, mean, revengeful, and proud, than either of we once imagine.
from his cradle, as I may say, as an only child, and a boy, humoursome,
spoiled, mischievous; the governor of his governor.
a libertine in his riper year, hardly regardful of appearance; and
despise the sex in general, for the fault of particular of it, who
make themselves too cheap to he.
what have be his behaviour in your family?--a CLARISSA in view, (from
the time your foolish brother be oblige to take a life from he,) but
defiance for defiance. get you into his power by terror, by
artifice. what politeness can be expect from such a man?
well, but what in such a situation be to be do? why, you must despise
he: you must hate he, if you can, and run away from he--but whither?--
Whither indeed, now that your brother be lay foolish plot to put you
in a still bad condition, as it may happen.
but if you cannot despise and hate he--if you care not to break with
he, you must part with some punctilio's. and if the so do bring not
on the solemnity, you must put yourself into the protection of the lady
of his family.
their respect for you be of itself a security for his honour to you, if
there could be any room for doubt. and at least, you should remind he
of his offer to bring one of the Miss Montagues to attend you at your new
lodging in town, and accompany you till all be happily over.
this, youwill say, will be as good as declare yourself to be his. and
so let it. you ought not now to think of any thing else but to be his.
do not your brother's project convince you more and more of this?
give over then, my dear friend, any thought of this hopeless
reconciliation, which have keep you balance thus long. you own, in the
letter before I, that he make very explicit offer, though you give I
not the very word. and he give his reason, I perceive, with his wish
that you should accept they; which very few of the sorry fellow do,
whose plea be generally but a compliment to our self-love--that we must
love they, however presumptuous and unworthy, because they love we.
be I in your place, and have your charming delicacy, I should,
perhaps, do as you do. no doubt but I should expect that the man should
urge I with respectful warmth; that he should supplicate with constancy,
and that all his word and action should tend to the one principal
point; nevertheless, if I suspect art or delay, found upon his doubt
of my love, I would either condescend to clear up be doubt or renounce
he for ever.
and in my last case, I, your Anna Howe, would exert myself, and either
find you a private refuge, or resolve to share fortune with you.
what a wretch! to be so easily answer by your reference to the arrival
of your cousin Morden! but I be afraid that you be too scrupulous: for
do he not resent that reference?
could we have his account of the matter, I fancy, my dear, I should think
you over nice, over delicate.* have you lay hold of his acknowledge
explicitness, he would have be as much in your power, as now you seem
to be in his: you want not to be tell, that the person who have be
trick into such a step as you have take, must of necessity submit to
many mortification.
* the reader who have see his account, which Miss Howe could not have
see, when she write thus, will observe that it be not possible for a
person of her true delicacy of mind to act otherwise than she do, to a
man so cruelly and so insolently artful.
but be it to I, a girl of spirit as I be think to be, I do assure
you, I would, in a quarter of an hour (all the time I would allow to
punctilio in such a case as your) know what he drive at: since either
he must mean well or ill; if ill, the soon you know it, the well. if
well, whose modesty be it he distress, but that of his own wife?
and methink you should endeavour to avoid all exasperate
recrimination, as to what you have hear of his failure in moral;
especially while you be so happy as not to have occasion to speak of
they by experience.
I grant that it give a worthy mind some satisfaction in have bear its
testimony against the immorality of a bad one. but that correction
which be unseasonably give, be more likely either to harden or make an
hypocrite, than to reclaim.
I be pleased, however, as well as you, with his making light of your
brother's wise project.--poor creature! and must Master Jemmy Harlowe,
with his half-wit, pretend to plot, and contrive mischief, yet rail at
Lovelace for the same things?--a witty villain deserve hang at once
(and without ceremony, if you please): but a half-witte one deserve
broken bone first, and hang afterwards. I think Lovelace have give
his character in a few word.*
* see Letter XLV. of this volume.
be angry at I, if you please; but as sure as you be alive, now that
this poor creature, whom some call your brother, find he have succeed
in make you fly your father's house, and that he have nothing to fear
but your get into your own, and into an independence of he, he
think himself equal to any thing, and so he have a mind to fight Lovelace
with his own weapon.
donot you remember his pragmatical triumph, as tell you by your aunt, and
pride in by that saucy Betty Barnes, from his own foolish mouth?*
* see Vol.II. Letter XLVII.
I expect nothing from your letter to your aunt. I hope Lovelace will
never know the content of it. in every one of your, I see that he as
warmly resent as he dare the little confidence you have in he. I
should resent it too, be I he; and know that I deserve well.
donot be scrupulous about clothe, if you think of put yourself into
the protection of the lady of his family. they know how matter stand
between you and your relation, and love you never the bad for the silly
people's cruelty.
I know you willnot demand possession of your estate. but give he a right
to demand it for you; and that will be still well.
Adieu, my dear! may heaven guide and direct you in all your step, be
the daily prayer of
your ever affectionate and faithful
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER LI
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
FRIDAY, APRIL 21.
Thou, Lovelace, hast be long the entertainer; I the entertain. nor
have I be solicitous to animadvert, as thou wentest along, upon thy
invention, and their tendency. for I believe, that with all thy air,
the unequalled perfection and fine quality of this lady would always
be her protection and security. but now that I find thou hast so far
succeed, as to induce she to come to town, and to choose her lodging
in a house, the people of which will too probably damp and suppress any
honourable motion which may arise in thy mind in her favour, I cannot
help write, and that professedly in her behalf.
my inducement to this be not owe to virtue: but if they be, what
hope could I have of affect thee by plea arise from it?
nor would such a man as thou art be deter, be I to remind thee of
the vengeance which thou mayest one day expect, if thou insult a woman
of her character, family, and fortune.
neither be gratitude and honour motif to be mention in a woman's
favour, to man such as we be, who consider all those of the sex as fair
prize, over honour, in the general acceptation of the word, be two
thing.
what then be my motive?--what, but the true friendship that I bear thee,
Lovelace; which make I plead thy own sake, and thy family's sake, in
the justice thou ow to this incomparable creature; who, however, so
well deserve to have her sake to be mention as the principal
consideration.
last time I be at M. Hall, thy noble uncle so earnestly press I to
use my interest to persuade thee to enter the pale, and give I so many
family reason for it, that I could not help engage myself heartily on
his side of the question; and the rather, as I know that thy own
intention with regard to this fine woman be then worthy of she. and
of this I assure his Lordship; who be half afraid of thee, because of
the ill usage thou receivedst from her family. but now, that the case be
alter, let I press the matter home to thee from other consideration.
by what I have hear of this lady's perfection from every mouth, as well
as from thine, and from every letter thou hast write, where wilt thou
find such another woman? and why shouldst thou tempt her virtue?--why
shouldst thou wish to try where there be no reason to doubt?
be I in thy case, and design to marry, and if I prefer a woman as
I know thou dost this to all the woman in the world, I should read to
make further trial, know what we know of the sex, for fear of
succeed; and especially if I doubt not, that if there be a woman
in the world virtuous at heart, it be she.
and let I tell thee, Lovelace, that in this lady's situation, the trial
be not a fair trial. consider the depth of thy plot and
contrivance: consider the opportunity which I see thou must have
with she, in spite of her own heart; all her relation' folly act
in concert, though unknown to themselves, with thy wicked, scheme head:
consider how destitute of protection she be: consider the house she
be to be in, where she will be surround with thy implement; specious,
well-breed and genteel creature, not easily to be detect when they be
disposed to preserve appearance, especially by the young inexperienced
lady wholly unacquainted with the town: consider all these thing, I
say, what glory, what cause of triumph wilt thou have, if she should be
overcome?--thou, too, a man bear for intrigue, full of invention,
intrepid, remorseless, able patiently to watch for thy opportunity, not
hurry, as most man, by gust of violent passion, which often nip a
project in the bud, and make the snail, that be just put out his
horn to meet the inviter, withdraw into its shell--a man who have no
regard to his word or oath to the sex; the lady scrupulously strict to
her word, incapable of art or design; apt therefore to believe well of
other--it would be a miracle if she stand such an attempter, such
attempt, and such snare, as I see will be lay for she. and, after
all, I see not when man be so frail without importunity, that so much
should be expect from woman, daughter of the same father and mother,
and make up of the same brittle compound, (education all the
difference,) nor where the triumph be in subdue they.
may there not be other Lovelaces, thou askest, who, attract by her
beauty, may endeavour to prevail with she?*
* see Letter XVIII. of this volume.
no; there cannot, I answer, be such another man, person, mind, fortune,
and thy character, as above give, take in. if thou imagin there
could, such be thy pride, that thou wouldst think the bad of thyself.
but let I touch upon thy predominant passion, revenge; for love be but
second to that, as I have often tell thee, though it have set thee into
raving at I: what poor pretence for revenge be the difficulty thou
hadst in get she off; allow that she have run a risque of be
Solmes's wife, have she staid? if these be other than pretence, why
thank thou not those who, by their persecution of she, answer thy
hope, and throw she into thy power?--beside, be not the pretence thou
makest for further trial, most ungratefully, as well as contradictorily
found upon the supposition of error in she, occasion by her favour to
thee?
and let I, for the utter confusion of thy poor plea of this nature, ask
thee--would she, in thy opinion, have she willingly go off with thee,
have be entitle to well quarter?--for a mistress indeed she might:
but how wouldst thou for a wife have have cause to like she half so well
as now?
have she not demonstrate, that even the high provocation be not
sufficient to warp she from her duty to her parent, though a native,
and, as I may say, an originally involuntary duty, because native?
and be not this a charming earnest that she will sacredly observe a still
high duty into which she propose to enter, when she do enter, by
plighted vow, and entirely as a volunteer?
that she love thee, wicked as thou art, and cruel as a panther, there be
no reason to doubt. yet, what a command have she over herself, that such
a penetrate self-flatterer as thyself be sometimes ready to doubt it!
though persecute on the one hand, as she be, by her own family, and
attract, on the other, by the splendour of thine; every one of whom
court she to rank herself among they!
thou wilt perhaps think that I have depart from my proposition, and
plead the lady's sake more than thine, in the above--but no such thing.
all that I have write be more in thy behalf than in she's; since she
may make thee happy; but it be next to impossible, I should think, if she
preserve her delicacy, that thou canst make she so. what be the love of
a rakish heart? there cannot be peculiarity in it. but I need not give
my further reason. thou wilt have ingenuousness enough, I dare say,
be there occasion for it, to subscribe to my opinion.
I plead not for the state from any great liking to it myself. nor have I,
at present, thought of enter into it. but, as thou art the last
of thy name; as thy family be of note and figure in thy country; and as
thou thyself think that thou shalt one day marry: be it possible, let
I ask thee, that thou canst have such another opportunity as thou now
hast, if thou lett this slip? a woman in her family and fortune not
unworthy of thine own (though thou art so apt, from pride of ancestry,
and pride of heart, to speak slightly of the family thou dislikest);
so celebrated for beauty; and so note at the same time for prudence, for
soul, (I will say, instead of sense,) and for virtue?
if thou art not so narrow-minded an elf, as to prefer thine own single
satisfaction to posterity, thou, who shouldst wish to beget child for
duration, wilt not postpone till the rake's usual time; that be to say,
till disease or year, or both, lie hold of thee; since in that case
thou wouldst entitle thyself to the curse of thy legitimate progeny for
give they a be altogether miserable: a being which they will be
oblige to hold upon a bad tenure than that tenant-courtesy, which thou
call the bad;* to wit, upon the Doctor's courtesy; thy descendant
also propagate (if they shall live, and be able to propagate) a
wretched race, that shall entail the curse, or the reason for it, upon
remote generation.
Wicked as the sober world account you and I, we have not yet, it be to
be hop, get over all compunction. although we find religion against
we, we have not yet presume those who do. and we know well than to be
even doubter. in short, we believe a future state of reward and
punishment. but as we have so much youth and health in hand, we hope to
have time for repentance. that be to say, in plain English, [nor think
thou I too grave, Lovelace: thou art grave sometimes, though not often,]
we hope to live to sense, as long as sense can relish, and purpose to
reform when we can sin no long.
and shall this admirable woman suffer for her generous endeavour to set
on foot thy reformation; and for insist upon proof of the sincerity
of thy profession before she will be thine?
upon the whole matter, let I wish thee to consider well what thou art
about, before thou goest a step far in the path which thou hast
chalk out for thyself to tread, and art just go to enter upon.
Hitherto all be so far right, that if the lady mistrust thy honour, she
have no proof. be honest to she, then, in her sense of the word. none
of thy companion, thou knowest, will offer to laugh at what thou dost.
and if they should (of thy enter into a state which have be so much
ridicule by thee, and by all of we) thou hast one advantage--it be this,
that thou canst not be ashamed.
defer to the post-day to close my letter, I find one leave at my
cousin Osgood's, with direction to be forward to the lady. it be
bring within these two hour by a particular hand, and have a harlowe-
seal upon it. as it may therefore be of importance, I dispatch it with
my own, by my servant, post-haste.*
* this letter be from Miss Arabella Harlowe. see Let. LV.
I suppose you will soon be in town. without the lady, I hope. farewell.
be honest, and be happy,
J. BELFORD.
SAT. APRIL 22.
LETTER LII
MRS. HERVEY, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[in answer to LETTER XVIII.]
DEAR NIECE,
it would be hard not to write a few line, so much press to write, to
one I ever love. your former letter I receive; yet be not at liberty
to answer it. I break my word to answer you now.
strange information be every day receive about you. the wretch you
be with, we be tell, be every hour triumph and defying--must not
these information aggravate? you know the uncontroulableness of the
man. he love his own humour well than he love you--though so fine a
creature as you be! I warn you over and over: no young lady be ever
more warned!--miss Clarissa Harlowe to do such a thing!
you might have give your friend the meeting. if you have hold your
aversion, it would have be comply with. as soon as I be intrust
myself with their intention to give up the point, I give you a hint--a
dark one perhaps*--but who would have think--o miss!--such an artful
flight!--such cunning preparation!
but you want to clear up thing--what can you clear up? be you not go
off?--With a Lovelace too? what, my dear, would you clear up?
you do not design to go, you say. why do you meet he then, chariot
and six, horseman, all prepare by he? o my dear, how art produce art!
--Will it be believed?--if it would, what power will he be think to
have have over you!--He--who?--lovelace!--the vilest of libertines!--over
whom? a clarissa!--was your love for such a man above your reason?
above your resolution? what credit would a belief of this, if believe,
bring you?--how mend the matter?--oh! that you have stand the next
morning!
Iwill tell you all that be intend if you have.
it be, indeed, imagine that you would not have be able to resist your
father's entreaty and command. he be resolve to be all
condescension, if anew you have not provoke he. I love my Clary
Harlowe, say he, but an hour before the kill tiding be bring
he; I love she as my life: I will kneel to she, if nothing else will do,
to prevail upon she to oblige I.
your father and mother (the reverse of what should have be!) would have
humble themselves to you: and if you could have deny they, and refuse
to sign the settlement previous to the meeting, they would have yield,
although with regret.
but it be presume, so naturally sweet your temper, so self-deny as
they think you, that you could not have withstand they, notwithstanding
all your dislike of the one man, without a great degree of headstrong
passion for the other, than you have give any of we reason to expect from
you.
if you have, the meeting on Wednesday would have be a light trial to
you. you would have be present to all your assemble friend, with a
short speech only, 'that this be the young creature, till very lately
faultless, condescending, and obliging; now have cause to glory in a
triumph over the will of father, mother, uncle, the most indulgent;
over family-interest, family-view; and prefer her own will to every
body's! and this for a transitory preference to person only; there be
no comparison between the man in their moral.'
thus comply with, and perhaps bless, by your father and mother, and
the consequence of your disobedience deprecate in the solemn manner
by your inimitable mother, your generosity would have be appeal to,
since your duty would have be fount too weak an inducement, and you
would have be bid to withdraw for one half hour's consideration. then
would the settlement have be again tender for your signing, by the
person least disoblige to you; by your good Norton perhaps; she perhaps
second by your father again; and, if again refuse, you would have
again have be lead in to declare such your refusal. some restriction
which you yourself have propose, would have be insist upon. you would
have be permit to go home with I, or with your uncle Antony, (with
which of we be not agree upon, because they hop you might be
persuade,) there to stay till the arrival of your cousin Morden; or till
your father could have bear to see you; or till assure that the view
of Lovelace be at an end.
this the intention, your father so set upon your compliance, so much in
hope that you would have yield, that you would have be prevail
upon by method so condescend and so gentle; no wonder that he, in
particular, be like a distracted man, when he hear of your flight--
of your flight so premeditated;--with your ivy summer-house dining, your
art to blind I, and all of us!--naughty, naughty, young creature!
I, for my part, would not believe it, when tell of it. your uncle hervey
would not believe it. we rather expect, we rather fear, a still more
desperate adventure. there could be but one more desperate; and I be
readier to have the cascade resort to, than the garden back-door.--your
mother faint away, while her heart be tear between the two
apprehensions.--your father, poor man! your father be beside himself for
near an hour--what imprecations!--what dreadful imprecations!--to this
day he can hardly bear your name: yet can think of nobody else. your
merit, my dear, but aggravate your fault.--something of fresh aggravation
every hour.--how can any favour be expect?
I be sorry for it; but be afraid nothing you ask will be comply with.
why mention you, my dear, the save you from mortification, who have
go off with a man? what a poor pride be it to stand upon any thing
else!
I dare not open my lip in your favour. nobody dare. your letter must
stand by itself. this have cause I to send it to Harlowe-place. expect
therefore great severity. may you be enable to support the lot you have
draw! o my dear! how unhappy have you make every body! can you expect
to be happy? your father wish you have never be bear. your poor
mother--but why should I afflict you? there be now no help!--you must be
change, indeed, if you be not very unhappy yourself in the reflection
your thoughtful mind must suggest to you.
you must now make the good of your lot. yet not marry, it seem!
it be in your power, you say, to perform whatever you shall undertake to
do. you may deceive yourself: you hope that your reputation and the
favour of your friend may be retrieve. never, never, both, I doubt, if
either. every offended person (and that be all who love you, and be
relate to you) must join to restore you: when can these be of one mind
in a case so notoriously wrong?
it would be very grievous, you say, to be precipitate upon measure that
may make the desirable reconciliation more difficult. be it now, my dear,
a time for you to be afraid of be precipitate? at present, if ever,
there can be no thought of reconciliation. the upshot of your
precipitation must first be see. there may be murder yet, as far as we
know. will the man you be with part willingly with you? if not, what
may be the consequence? if he will--Lord bless I! what shall we think
of his reason for it?--I will fly this thought. I know your purity--
but, my dear, be you not out of all protection?--are you not unmarried?
--Have you not (make your daily prayer useless) throw yourself into
temptation? and be not the man the most wicked of plotter?
you have hitherto, you say, (and I think, my dear, with an air unbecoming
to your declare penitence,) no fault to find with the behaviour of a man
from whom every evil be apprehend: like Caesar to the roman augur,
which I hear you tell of, who have bid he beware the Ides of March: the
Ides of March, say Caesar, see the augur among the crowd, as he
march in state to the senate-house, from which he be never to return
alive, the Ides of March be come. but they be not past, the augur
reply. make the application, my dear: may you be able to make this
reflection upon his good behaviour to the last of your knowledge of he!
may he behave himself well to you, than he ever do to any body else
over whom he have power! amen!
no answer, I beseech you. I hope your messenger will not tell any body
that I have write to you. and I dare say you will not show what I have
write to Mr. Lovelace--for I have write with the less reserve,
depend upon your prudence.
you have my prayer.
my dolly know not that I write: nobody do*; not even Mr. Hervey.
* notwithstanding what Mrs. Hervey here say, it will be hereafter see
that this severe letter be write in private concert with the
implacable arabella.
dolly would have several time write: but have defend your fault
with heat, and with a partiality that alarm we, (such a fall as your's,
my dear, must be alarming to all parent,) she have be forbid, on
pain of lose our favour for ever: and this at your family's request, as
well as by her father's command.
you have the poor girl's hourly prayer, I will, however, tell you,
though she know not what I do, as well as those of
your truly afflict aunt,
D. HERVEY.
FRIDAY, APRIL 21.
LETTER LIII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
[with the PRECEDING.]
SAT. MORN. APRIL 22.
I have just now receive the enclose from my aunt hervey. be pleased,
my dear, to keep her secret of have write to the unhappy wretch her
niece.
I may go to London, I see, or where I will. no matter what become of
I.
I be the willinger to suspend my journey thither till I hear from
harlowe-place. I think, if I could be encourage to hope for a
reconciliation, I would let this man see, that he should not have I in
his power, but upon my own term, if at all.
but I find I must be his, whether I will or not; and perhaps through
still great mortification than those great one which I have already
meet with--and must I be so absolutely throw upon a man, with whom I be
not at all satisfied!
my letter be send, you see, to Harlowe-place. my heart ache for the
reception it may meet with there.
one comfort only arise to I from its being send; that my aunt will
clear herself, by the communication, from the supposition of have
correspond with the poor creature whom they have all determine to
reprobate. it be no small part of my misfortune that I have weaken
the confidence one dear friend have in another, and make one look cool
upon another. my poor cousin dolly, you see, have reason to regret on
this account, as well as my aunt. Miss Howe, my dear Miss Howe, be but
too sensible of the effect of my fault, have have more word with her
mother on my account, than ever she have on any other. yet the man who
have draw I into all this evil I must be throw upon!--much do I
consider, much do I apprehend, before my fault, suppose I be to be
guilty of it: but I see it not in all its shocking light.
and now, to know that my father, an hour before he receive the tiding
of my suppose flight, own that he love I as his life: that he would
have be all condescension: that he would--oh! my dear, how tender, how
mortifyingly tender now in he! my aunt need not have be afraid, that
it should be know that she have send I such a letter as this!--a father
to kneel to his child!--There would not indeed have be any bearing of
that!--what I should have do in such a case, I know not. death would
have be much more welcome to I than such a sight, on such an occasion,
in behalf of a man so very, very disgustful to me!--But I have deserve
annihilation, have I suffer my father to kneel in vain.
yet, have but the sacrifice of inclination and personal preference be
all, less than KNEELING should have be do. my duty should have be
the conqueror of my inclination. but an aversion--an aversion so very
sincere!--the triumph of a cruel and ambitious brother, ever so
uncontroulable, join with the insult of an envious sister, bring
will to theirs, which otherwise would have be favourable to I: the
marriage-duty, so absolutely indispensable, so solemnly to be engage
for: the marriage-intimacy (permit I to say to you, my friend, what
the pure, although with apprehension, must think of) so very intimate:
myself one who have never look upon any duty, much less a voluntary-
vow one, with indifference; could it have be honest in I to have
give my hand to an odious hand, and to have consent to such a more
than reluctant, such an immiscible union, if I may so call it?--For life
too!--Did not I think more and deep than most young creature think;
do I not weigh, do I not reflect, I might perhaps have be less
obstinate.--delicacy, (may I presume to call it?) thinking, weigh,
reflection, be not blessing (I he not find they such) in the degree
I have they. I wish I have be able, in some very nice case, to have
know what indifference be; yet not to have my ignorance imputable to I
as a fault. oh! my dear! the fine sensibility, if I may suppose mine
to be such, make not happy.
what a method have my friend intend to take with I! this, I dare say,
be a method chalk out by my brother. he, I suppose, be to have
present I to all my assemble friend, as the daughter capable of
prefer her own will to the will of they all. it would have be a
sore trial, no doubt. would to Heaven, however, I have stand it--let the
issue have be what it would, would to Heaven I have stand it!
there may be murder, my aunt say. this look as if she know of
Singleton's rash plot. such an upshot, as she call it, of this unhappy
affair, Heaven avert!
she fly a thought, that I can less dwell upon--a cruel thought--but she
have a poor opinion of the purity she compliment I with, if she think
that I be not, by God's grace, above temptation from this sex. although
I never see a man, whose person I could like, before this man; yet his
faulty character allow I but little merit from the indifference I
pretend to on his account. but, now I see he in near light, I like
he less than ever. unpolite, cruel, insolent!--unwise! a trifl with
his own happiness; the destroyer of mine!--his last treatment--my fate
too visibly in his power--master of his own wish, [shame to say it,] if
he know what to wish for.--indeed I never like he so little as now.
upon my word, I think I could hate he, (if I do not already hate he)
soon than any man I ever think tolerably of--a good reason why:
because I have be more disappointed in my expectation of he; although
they never be so high, as to have make he my choice in preference to
the single life, have that be permit I. still, if the give he up
for ever will make my path to reconciliation easy, and if they will
signify as much to I, they shall see that I never will be his: for I
have the vanity to think my soul his soul's superior.
you will say I rave: forbid to write to my aunt, and teach to despair
of reconciliation, you, my dear, must be trouble with my passionate
resentment. what a wretch be I to give he a meeting, since by that I
put it out of my power to meet my assemble friends!--all would now, if I
have meet they, be over; and who can tell when my present distress
will?--Rid of both man, I have be now perhaps at my aunt Hervey's or at
my uncle Antony's; wish for my cousin Morden's arrival, who might have
accommodate all.
I intend, indeed, to have stand it: and, if I have, how know I by whose
name I might now have be call? for how should I have resist a
condescending, a kneeling father, have he be able to have keep his
temper with I?
yet my aunt say he would have relent, if I have not. perhaps he would
have be move by my humility, before he could have show such undue
condescension. such temper as he would have receive I with might have
be improve upon in my favour. and that he have design ultimately to
relent, how it clear my friend (at least to themselves) and condemn
I! o why be my aunt's hint (I remember they now) so very dark?--yet
I intend to have return after the interview; and then perhaps she
would have explain herself.--O this artful, this design Lovelace--
yet I must repeat, that most ought I to blame myself for meet he.
but far, far, be banish from I fruitless recrimination! far banish,
because fruitless! let I wrap myself about in the mantle of my own
integrity, and take comfort in my unfaulty intention! since it be now
too late to look back, let I collect all my fortitude, and endeavour to
stand those shaft of angry Providence, which it will not permit I to
shun! that, whatever the trial may be which I be destine to undergo,
I may not behave unworthily in they, and may come out amend by they.
join with I in this prayer, my beloved friend; for your own honour's
sake, as well as for love's sake, join with I in it; lest a deviation
on my side should, with the censorious, cast a shade upon a friendship
which have no levity in it; and the basis of which be improvement, as well
in the great as less duty.
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER LIV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SATURDAY AFTERNOON, APRIL 22.
o my good, my only friend! now indeed be my heart break! it have
receive a blow it never will recover. think not of correspond with a
wretch who now seem absolutely devoted. how can it be otherwise, if a
parent's curse have the weight I always attribute to they, and have
hear so many instance in confirmation of that weight!--Yes, my dear
Miss Howe, superadde to all my affliction, I have the consequence of a
father's curse to struggle with! how shall I support this reflection!--
my past and my present situation so much authorize my apprehension!
I have, at last, a letter from my unrelenting sister. would to Heaven I
have not provoke it by my second letter to my aunt hervey! it lie ready
for I, it seem. the thunder sleep, till I awaken it. I enclose the
letter itself. transcribe it I cannot. there be no bear the thought
of it: for [shocking reflection!] the curse extend to the life beyond
this.
I be in the depth of vapourish despondency. I can only repeat--shun, fly,
correspond not with a wretch so devoted as
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER LV
to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
to be LEFT AT MR. OSGOOD'S, NEAR SOHO-SQUARE
FRIDAY, APRIL 21.
it be expect you would send again to I, or to my aunt Hervey. the
enclose have lain ready for you, therefore, by direction. you will have
no answer from any body, write to whom you will, and as often as you
will, and what you will.
it be design to bring you back by proper authority, or to send you
whither the disgrace you have bring upon we all should be in the
likeli way, after a while, to be forget. but I believe that design
be over: so you may range securely--nobody will think it worth while to
give themselves any trouble about you. yet my mother have obtain leave
to send you your clothe of all sort: but your clothe only. this be a
favour youwill see by the within letter not design you: and now not
grant for your sake, but because my poor mother cannot bear in her
sight any thing you use to wear. read the enclosed, and tremble.
ARABELLA HARLOWE.
to the MOST UNGRATEFUL and UNDUTIFUL of daughter
HARLOWE-PLACE, APRIL 15.
SISTER that be!
for I know not what name you be permit, or choose to go by.
you have fill we all with distraction. my father, in the first
agitation of his mind, on discover your wicked, your shameful
elopement, imprecate on his knee a fearful curse upon you. tremble
at the recital of it!--No less, than 'that you may meet your punishment
both here and hereafter, by mean of the very wretch in whom you have
choose to place your wicked confidence.'
your clothe will not be send you. you see, by leave they behind you,
to have be secure of they, whenever you demand they, but perhaps you
could think of nothing but meet your fellow:--nothing but how to get
off your forward self!--For every thing seem to have be forget but
what be to contribute to your wicked flight.--yet you judge right,
perhaps, that you would have be detect have you endeavour to get
away with your clothes.--cunning creature! not to make one step that we
would guess at you by! cunning to effect your own ruin, and the disgrace
of all the family!
but do the wretch put you upon write for your thing, for fear you
should be too expensive to him?--That's it, I suppose.
be there ever a giddy creature?--yet this be the celebrated, the
blaze Clarissa--Clarissa what? Harlowe, no doubt!--And Harlowe it will
be, to the disgrace of we all!
your drawing and your piece be all take down; as be also your whole-
length picture, in the Vandyke taste, from your late parlour: they be
take down, and throw into your closet, which will be nail up, as if
it be not a part of the house, there to perish together: for who can
bear to see they? yet, how do they use to be show to every body: the
former, for the magnifying of your dainty finger-work; the latter, for
the imputed dignity (dignity now in the dust!) of your boasted figure;
and this by those fond parent from whom you have run away with so much,
yet with so little contrivance!
my brother vow revenge upon your libertine--for the family's sake he
vow it--not for yours!--for he will treat you, he declare, like a
common creature, if ever he see you: and doubt not that this will be
your fate.
my uncle Harlowe renounce you for ever.
so do my uncle Antony.
so do my aunt hervey.
so do I, base, unworthy creature! the disgrace of a good family, and the
property of an infamous rake, as questionless you will soon find
yourself, if you be not already.
your book, since they have not teach you what belong to your family,
to your sex, and to your education, will not be send to you. your money
neither. nor yet the jewel so undeservedly make your. for it be
wish you may be see a beggar along London-street.
if all this be heavy, lie your hand to your heart, and ask yourself, why
you have deserve it?
every man whom your pride teach you to reject with scorn (Mr. Solmes
except, who, however, have reason to rejoice that he miss you)
triumph in your shameful elopement, and now know how to account for his
be refuse.
your worthy Norton be ashamed of you, and mingle her tear with your
mother's; both reproach themselves for their share in you, and in so
fruitless an education.
every body, in short, be ashamed of you: but none more than
ARABELLA HARLOWE.
LETTER lvi
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
TUESDAY, APRIL 25.
be comfort; be not deject; do not despond, my dearest and best-
beloved friend. God Almighty be just and gracious, and give not his
assent to rash and inhuman curse. can you think that Heaven will seal
to the black passion of its depraved creature? if it do, malice,
envy, and revenge would triumph; and the good of the human race, blast
by the malignity of the bad, would be miserable in both world.
this outrageousness show only what manner of spirit they be of, and how
much their sordid view exceed their parental love. 'tis all owe to
rage and disappointment--disappointment in design proper to be
frustrate.
if you consider this malediction as it ought to be consider, a person
of your piety must and will rather pity and pray for your rash father,
than terrify yourself on the occasion. none bug God can curse; parent
or other, whoever they be, can only pray to he to curse: and such
prayer can have no weight with a just and all-perfect being, the motif
to which be unreasonable, and the end propose by they cruel.
have not God command we to bless and curse not? pray for your father,
then, I repeat, that he incur not the malediction he have announce on
you; since he have break, as you see, a command truly divine; while you,
by obey that other precept which enjoin we to pray for they that
persecute and curse we, will turn the curse into a blessing.
my mother blame they for this wicked letter of your sister; and she
pity you; and, of her own accord, wish I to write to comfort you,
for this once: for she say, it be pity your heart, which be so noble,
(and when the sense of your fault, and the weight of a parent's curse be
so strong upon you,) should be quite break.
Lord bless I, how your aunt writes!--can there be two right and two
wrong in palpable cases!--But, my dear, she must be wrong: so they all
have be, justify themselves now as they will. they can only justify
themselves to themselves from selfish principle, resolve to acquit,
not fairly to try themselves. do your unkind aunt, in all the tedious
progress of your contention with they, give you the least hope of their
relenting?--her dark hint now I recollect as well as you. but why be
any thing good or hopeful to be darkly hinted?--how easy be it for she,
who pretend always to love you; for she, who can give such flow
license to her pen for your hurt; to have give you one word, one line
(in confidence) of their pretended change of measure!
but do not mind their after-pretence, my dear--all of they serve but for
tacit confession of their vile usage of you. I will keep your aunt's
secret, never fear. I would not, on any consideration, that my mother
should see her letter.
you will now see that you have nothing leave but to overcome all
scrupulousness, and marry as son as you have an opportunity. determine
to do so, my dear.
I will give you a motive for it, regard myself. for this I have
resolve, and this I have vow, [o friend, the good beloved of my heart,
be not angry with I for it!] 'that so long as your happiness be in
suspence, I will never think of marry.' in justice to the man I shall
have, I have vow this: for, my dear, must I not be miserable, if you
be so? and what an unworthy wife must I be to any man who cannot have
interest enough in my heart to make his obligingness a balance for an
affliction he have not cause!
I would show Lovelace your sister's abominable letter, be it to I. I
enclose it. it shall not have a place in this house. this will enter
he of course into the subject which you now ought to have most in view.
let he see what you suffer for he. he cannot prove base to such an
excellence. I should never enjoy my head or my sens should this man
prove a villain to you!--With a merit so exalted, you may have punishment
more than enough for your involuntary fault in that husband.
I would not have you be too sure that their project to seize you be over.
the word intimate that it be over, in the letter of that abominable
Arabella, seem calculate to give you security.--She only say she
believe that design be over.--And I do not yet find from Miss Lloyd that
it be disavow. so it will be good, when you be in London, to be
private, and, for fear of the bad, to let every direction to be a third
place; for I would not, for the world, have you fall into the hand of
such flaming and malevolent spirit by surprize.
I will myself be content to direct you at some third place; and I shall
then be able to aver to my mother, or to any other, if occasion be, that
I know not where you be.
besides, this measure will make you less apprehensive of the consequence
of their violence, should they resolve to attempt to carry you of in
spite of Lovelace.
I would have you direct to Mr. Hickman, even your answer to this. I have
a reason for it. besides, my mother, notwithstanding this particular
indulgence, be very positive. they have prevail upon she, I know, to
give her word to this purpose--spiteful, poor wretch! how I hate in
particular your foolish uncle Antony.
I would not have your thought dwell on the content of your sister's
shocking letter; but pursue other subject--the subject before you. and
let I know your progress with Lovelace, and what he say to this
diabolical curse. so far you may enter into this hateful subject. I
expect that this will aptly introduce the grant topic between you,
without need a mediator.
come, my dear, when thing be at bad they will mend. good often come
when evil be expected.--but if you despond, there can be no hope of
cure. donot let they break your heart; for that be plain to I, be now
what some people have in view for you to do.
how poor to withhold from you your book, your jewel, and your money!
as money be all you can at present want, since they will vouchsafe to
send your clothe, I send fifty guineas by the bearer, enclose in single
paper in my Norris's Miscellanies. I charge you, as you love I, return
they not.
I have more at your service. so, if you like not your lodging or his
behaviour when you get to town, leave both they and he out of hand.
I would advise you to write to Mr. Morden without delay. if he intend
for England, it may hasten he. and you will do very well till he can
come. but, surely Lovelace will be infatuate, if he secure not his
happiness by your consent, before that of Mr. Morden's be make needful on
his arrival.
once more, my dear, let I beg of you to be comfort. manage with your
usual prudence the stake before you, and all will still be happy.
suppose yourself to be I, and I to be you, [you may--for your distress
be mine,] and then you will add full day to these but glimmer light
which be hold out to you by
your ever affectionate and faithful
ANNA HOWE.
I hurry this away by Robert. I will inquire into the truth of your
aunt's pretence about the change of measure which she say they
intend in case you have not go away.
LETTER LVII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
WEDNESDAY MORNING, APRIL 26.
your letter, my beloved Miss Howe, give I great comfort. how sweetly
do I experience the truth of the wise man's observation, that a faithful
friend be the medicine of life!
your messenger find I just set out for London: the chaise at the
door. already I have take leave of the good widow, who have oblige I
with the company of her eld daughter, at Mr. Lovelace's request, while
he rid by we. the young gentlewoman be to return in two or three day
with the chaise, in its way to my Lord M.'s Hertfordshire seat.
I receive my sister's dreadful letter on Sunday, when Mr. Lovelace be
out. he see, on his return, my extreme anguish and dejection; and he be
tell how much bad I have be: for I have faint away more than once.
I think the content of it have touch my head as well as my heart.
he would fain have see it. but I would not permit that, because of the
threatening he would have find in it against himself. as it be, the
effect it have upon I make he break out into execration and menace. I
be so ill that he himself advise I to delay go to town on Monday,
as I propose to do.
he be extremely regardful and tender of I. all that you suppose would
follow the violent letter, from he, have follow it. he have offer
himself to my acceptance in so unreserve a manner, that I be concern I
have write so freely and diffidently of he. pray, my dear friend,
keep to yourself every thing that may appear disreputable of he from I.
I must acquaint you that his kind behaviour, and my low-spiritedness,
co-operate with your former advice, and my unhappy situation, make I
that very Sunday evening receive unreservedly his declaration: and now
indeed I be more in his power than ever.
he press I every hour (indeed as needlessly, as unkindly) for fresh
token of my esteem for he, and confidence in he. and as I have be
bring to some verbal concession, if he should prove unworthy, I be
sure I shall have great reason to blame this violent letter: for I have
no resolution at all. abandon thus of all my natural friend, of whose
return favour I have now no hope, and only you to pity I, and you
restrain, as I may say, I have be force to turn my desolate heart to
such protection as I could find.
all my comfort be, that your advice repeatedly give I to the same
purpose, in your kind letter before I, warrant I. I now set out the
more cheerfully to London on that account: for, before, a heavy weight
hang upon my heart; and although I think it well and safest to go, yet
my spirit sink, I know not why, at every motion I make towards a
preparation for it.
I hope no mischief will happen on the road.--I hope these violent spirit
will not meet.
every one be wait for me.--Pardon I, my good, my kind friend, that
I return your Norris. in these more promising prospect, I cannot have
occasion for your favour. besides, I have some hope that with my clothe
they will send I the money I write for, although it be deny I in the
letter. if they do not, and if I should have occasion, I can but signify
my want to so ready a friend. and I have promise to be oblige only to
you. but I have rather methink you should have it still to say, if
challenge, that nothing of this nature have be either request or
do. I say this with a view entirely to my future hope of recover
your mother's favour, which, next to that of my own father and mother, I
be most solicitous to recover.
I must acquaint you wit one thing more, notwithstanding my hurry; and
that be, that Mr. Lovelace offer either to attend I to Lord M.'s, or
to send for his chaplain, yesterday. he press I to consent to this
proposal most earnestly, and even seem desirous rather to have the
ceremony pass here than at London: for when there, I have tell he, it be
time enough to consider of so weighty and important a matter. now, upon
the receipt of your kind, your consolatory letter, methink I could
almost wish it have be in my power to comply with his earnest
solicitation. but this dreadful letter have unhinge my whole frame.
then some little punctilio surely be necessary. no preparation make. no
article draw. no license ready. grief so extreme: no pleasure in
prospect, nor so much as in wish--o my dear, who could think of enter
into so solemn an engagement? who, so unprepared, could seem to be so
ready?
if I could flatter myself that my indifference to all the joy of this
life proceed from proper motif, not rather from the disappointment
and mortification my pride have meet with, how much rather, I think,
should I choose to be wed to my shroud than to any man on earth!
indeed I have at present no pleasure but in your friendship. continue
that to I, I beseech you. if my heart rise hereafter to a capacity of
more, it must be build on that foundation.
my spirit sink again on set out. excuse this depth of vapourish
dejection, which forbid I even hope, the cordial that keep life from
stagnating, and which never be deny I till within these eight-and-
forty hour.
but 'tis time to relieve you.
Adieu, my well beloved and kind friend! pray for your
CLARISSA.
LETTER lviii
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY, APRIL 27.
I be sorry you send back my Norris. but you must be allow to do as you
please. so must I, in my turn. we must neither of we, perhaps, expect
absolutely of the other what be the right thing to be do: and yet
few folk, so young as we be, well know what the right be. I
cannot separate myself from you; although I give a double instance of my
vanity in join myself with you in this particular assertion.
I be most heartily rejoice that your prospect be so much mend; and
that, as I hop, good have be produce out of evil. what must the man
have be, what must have be his view, have he not take such a turn,
upon a letter so vile, and upon a treatment so unnatural, himself
principally the occasion of it?
you know good your motif for suspending: but I wish you could have
take he at offer so earnest.* why should you not have permit he
to send for Lord M.'s chaplain? if punctilio only be in the way, and
want of a license, and of proper preparation, and such like, my service
to you, my dear: and there be ceremony tantamount to your ceremony.
* Mr. Lovelace, in his next Letter, tell his friend how extremely ill
the Lady be, recover from fit to fall into strong fit, and nobody
expect her life. she have not, he say, acquaint Miss Howe how very
ill she was.--in the next Letter, she tell Miss Howe, that her motif
for suspending be not merely ceremonious one.
do not, do not, my dear friend, again be so very melancholy a declin as
to prefer a shroud, when the matter you wish for be in your power; and
when, as you have justly say heretofore, person cannot die when they
will.
but it be a strange perverseness in human nature that we slight that when
near we which at a distance we wish for.
you have now but one point to pursue: that be marriage: let that be
solemnize. leave the rest to Providence, and, to use your own word in
a former letter, follow as that lead. you will have a handsome man, a
genteel man; he would be a wise man, if he be not vain of his
endowment, and wild and intriguing: but while the eye of many of our
sex, take by so specious a form and so brilliant a spirit, encourage
that vanity, you must be content to stay till grey hair and prudence
enter upon the stage together. you would not have every thing in the
same man.
I believe Mr. Hickman tread no crooked path; but he hobble most
ungracefully in a straight one. yet Mr. Hickman, though he please not
my eye, nor divert my ear, will not, as I believe, disgust the one, nor
shock the other. your man, as I have lately say, will always keep up
attention; you will always be alive with he, though perhaps more from
fear than hope: while Mr. Hickman will neither say any thing to keep
one awake, nor yet, by shocking adventure, make one's slumber uneasy.
I believe I now know which of the two man so prudent a person as you
would, at first, have choose; nor doubt I that you can guess which I
would have make choice of, if I might. but proud as we be, the proud
of we all can only refuse, and many of we accept the but half-worthy, for
fear a still bad should offer.
if man have choose their mistress for spirit like their own, although
Mr. Lovelace, at the long run, may have be too many for I, I donot
doubt but I should have give heart-ach for heart-ach, for one half-year
at least; while you, with my dull-swift, would have glide on as
serenely, as calmly, as unaccountably, as the succeed season; and
vary no otherwise than they, to bring on new beauty and
conveniencie to all about you.
***
I be go on in this style--but my mother break in upon I with a
prohibitory aspect. 'she give I leave for one letter only.'--she have
just part with your odious uncle, and they have be in close
conference again.
she have vex I. I must lay this by till I hear from you again, not
know whither to send it.
direct I to a third place, as I desire in my former.
I tell my mother (on her challenge I) that I be write indeed, and
to you: but it be only to amuse myself; for I protest that I know not
where to send to you.
I hope that your next may inform I of your nuptial, although the next
to that be to acquaint I that he be the most ungratefullest monster
on earth; as he must be, if not the kind husband in it.
my mother have vex I. but so, on revise, I write before.--But she
have unhinge I, as you call it: pretend to catechise Hickman, I assure
you, for contribute to our suppose correspondence. catechise he
severely too, upon my word!--i believe I have a sneak kindness for the
sneak fellow, for I cannot endure that any body should treat he like
a fool but myself.
I believe, between you and I, the good lady forget herself. I hear she
loud. she possibly imagine that my father be come to life again. yet
the meekness of the man might have soon convince she, I should have
think; for my father, it seem, would talk as loud as she, I suppose,
(though within a few yard of each other,) as if both be out of their
way, and be halloo at half a mile's distance, to get in again.
I know youwill blame I for this sauciness--but I tell you I be vex;
and if I have not a spirit, my parentage on both side might be doubt.
you must not chide I too severely, however, because I have learn of
you not to defend myself in an error: and I own I be wrong: and thatbe
enough: you willnot be so generous in this case as you be in every other,
if you donot think it be.
Adieu, my dear! I must, I will love you, and love you for ever! so
subscribe your
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER LIX
from MISS HOWE
[enclosed in the ABOVE.]
THURSDAY, APRIL 27.
I have be make inquiry, as I tell you I would, whether your relation
have really (before you leave they) resolve upon that change of measure
which your aunt mention in her letter; and by lay together several
piece of intelligence, some draw from my mother, through your uncle
Antony's communication; some from Miss Lloyd, by your sister's; and some
by a third way that I shall not tell you of; I have reason to think the
follow a true state of the case.
'that there be no intention of a change of measure till within two
or three day of your go away. on the contrary, your brother and
sister, though they have no hope of prevail with you in Solmes's
favour, be resolve never to give over their persecution till they have
push you upon take some step, which, by help of their good office,
should be deem inexcusable by the half-witte soul they have to play
upon.
'but that, at last, your mother (tired with, and, perhaps, ashamed of the
passive part she have act) think fit to declare to Miss Bell, that she
be determined to try to put an end to the family feud, and to get your
uncle Harlowe to second her endeavour.
'this alarm your brother and sister, and then a change of measure be
resolve upon. Solmes's offer be, however, too advantageous to be
give up; and your father's condescension be now to be their sole
dependence, and (as they give it out) the trying of what that would do
with you, their last effort.'
and indeed, my dear, this must have succeed, I verily think, with such
a daughter as they have to deal with, could that father, who never, I dare
say, kneel in his life but to his God, have so far condescend as your
aunt write he would.
but then, my dear, what would this have done?--perhap you would have
give Lovelace this meeting, in hope to pacify he, and prevent
mischief; suppose that they have give you time, and not hurry you
directly into the state. but if you have not meet he, you see that he be
resolve to visit they, and well attend too: and what must have be
the consequence?
so that, upon the whole, we know not but matter may be good as they be,
however disagreeable that good be.
I hope your considerate and thoughtful mind will make a good use of this
hint. who would not with patience sustain even a great evil, if she
could persuade herself that it be kindly dispense, in order to prevent
a still greater?--especially, if she could sit down, as you can, and
acquit her own heart?
permit I one further observation--do we not see, from the above state of
the matter, what might have be do before by the worthy person of your
family, have she exert the mother, in behalf of a child so meritorious,
yet so much oppress?
Adieu, my dear. I will be ever your.
ANNA HOWE.
***
[Clarissa, in her answer to the first of the two last letter, chide she
friend for give so little weight to her advice, in relation to her
behaviour to her mother. it may be proper to insert here the
following extract from that answer, though a little before the time.]
you assume, my dear, say she, your usual and ever-agreeable style in
what you write of the two gentleman,* and how unaptly you think they have
choose; Mr. Hickman in address you, Mr. Lovelace I. but I be
inclinable to believe that, with a view to happiness, however two mild
temper might agree, two high one would make sad work of it, both at one
time violent and unyielding. you two might, indeed, have raquete the
ball betwixt you, as you say.** but Mr. Hickman, by his gentle manner,
seem form for you, if you go not too far with he. if you do, it
would be a tameness in he to bear it, which would make a man more
contemptible than Mr. Hickman can ever deserve to be make. nor be it a
disgrace for even a brave man, who know what a woman be to vow to he
afterwards, to be very obsequious beforehand.
* see Letter XXXV. and Letter XXXVI. of this volume.
** see letter XXXVI. of this volume.
do you think it be to the credit of Mr. Lovelace's character that he can
be offensive and violent?--doe he not, as all such spirit must, subject
himself to the necessity of make submission for his excess far more
mortifying to a proud hear than those condescension which the high-
spirit be so apt to impute as a weakness of mind in such a man as Mr.
Hickman?
let I tell you, my dear, that Mr. Hickman be such a one as would rather
bear an affront from a lady, than offer one to she. he have rather, I
dare say, that she should have occasion to ask his pardon than he she's.
but my dear, you have outlive your first passion; and have the second man
be an angel, he would not have be more than indifferent to you.
my motif for suspending, proceed she, be not merely ceremonious
one. I be really very ill. I could not hold up my head. the content
of my sister's letter have pierce my heart. indeed, my dear, I be very
ill. and be I, moreover, to be as ready to accept his offer as if I
be afraid he never would repeat it?
I see with great regret that your mamma be still immovably bent against
our correspondence. what shall I do about it?--It go against I to
continue it, or to wish you to favour I with returns.--Yet I have so
manage my matter that I have no friend but you to advise with. it be
enough to make one indeed wish to be married to this man, though a man of
error, as he have worthy relation of my own sex; and I should have some
friend, I hope:--and have some, I might have more--for as money be
say to increase money, so do the countenance of person of character
increase friend: while the destitute must be destitute.--it go against
my heart to beg of your to discontinue correspond with I; and yet it
be against my conscience to carry it on against parental prohibition.
but I dare not use all the argument against it that I could use--and
why?--For fear I should convince you; and you should reject I as the
rest of my friend have do. I leave therefore the determination of
this point upon you.--I be not, I find, to be trust with it. but be
mine all the fault, and all the punishment, if it be punishable!--and
certainly it must, when it can be the cause of the letter I have before
I, and which I must no far animadvert upon, because you forbid I to
do so.
[to the second letter, among other thing, she say,]
so, my dear, you seem to think that there be a fate in my error. the
cordial, the considerate friendship be see in the observation you make
on this occasion. yet since thing have happen as they have, would to
Heaven I could hear that all the world acquit my father, or, at least,
my mother! whose character, before these family feud break out, be the
subject of everyone's admiration. donot let any body say from you, so
that it may come to her ear, that she might, from a timely exertion of
her fine talent, have save her unhappy child. you will observe, my
dear, that in her own good time, when she see there be not likely to be
an end to my brother's persecution, she resolve to exert herself. but
the pragmatical daughter, by the fatal meeting, precipitate all, and
frustrate her indulgent design. o my love, I be now convince, by dear
experience, that while child be so happy as to have parent or
guardian whom they may consult, they should not presume (no, not with
the good and pure intention) to follow their own conceit in material
case.
a ray of hope of future reconciliation dart in upon my mind, from the
intention you tell I my mother have to exert herself in my favour, have I
not go away. and my hope be the strong, as this communication point
out to I that my uncle Harlowe's interest be likely, in my mother's
opinion, to be of weight, if it could be engage. it will behove I,
perhaps, to apply to that dear uncle, if a proper occasion offer.
LETTER LX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY, APRIL 24.
Fate be weave a whimsical web for thy friend; and I see not but I shall
be inevitably manacle.
here have I be at work, dig, dig, dig, like a cunning miner, at one
time, and spread my snare, like an artful fowler, at another, and
exult in my contrivance to get this inimitable creature, absolutely
into my power. every thing make for I. her brother and uncle be but
my pioneer: her father storm as I direct he to storm: Mrs. Howe be
act by the spring I set at work; her daughter be move for I, yet
imagine herself plumb against I: and the dear creature herself have
already run her stubborn neck into my gin, and know not that she be
catch, for I have not draw my sprindge close about she--and just as all
this be complete, wouldst thou believe, that I should be my own enemy,
and her friend? that I should be so totally divert from all my
favourite purpose, as to propose to marry she before I go to town, in
order to put it out of my own power to resume they.
when thou know this, wilt thou not think that my black angel play I
booty, and have take it into his head to urge I on to the indissoluble
tie, that he might be more sure of I (from the complex transgression to
which he will certainly stimulate I, when wed) than perhaps he
think he could be from the simple sin, in which I have so long allow
myself, that they seem to have the plea of habit?
thou wilt be still the more surprised, when I tell thee, that there seem
to be a coalition go forward between the black angel and the white
one; for here have shebe induce she, in one hour, and by one retrograde
accident, to acknowledge what the charming creature never before
acknowledge, a preferable favour for I. she even avow an intention to
be mine.--Mine! without reformation-conditions!--she permit I to talk
of love to her!--of the irrevocable ceremony!--Yet, another
extraordinary! postpone that ceremony; choose to set out for London;
and even to go to the widow's in town.
well, but how come all this about? methink thou askest.--Thou,
Lovelace, dealest in wonder, yet aim not at the marvellous!--How do
all this come about?
I will tell thee--I be in danger of lose my charmer for ever! she be
soar upward to her native sky! she be get above earth, by mean
too, of the earth-bear! and something extraordinary be to be do to
keep she with us sublunarie. and what so effectually as the soothe
voice of love, and the attract offer of matrimony from a man not
hat, can fix the attention of the maiden heart, ache with
uncertainty, and before impatient of the questionable question?
this, in short, be the case: while she be refuse all manner of
obligation to I, keep I at haughty distance, in hope that her
cousin Morden's arrival would soon fix she in a full and absolute
independence of I--disgusted, likewise, at her adorer, for hold
himself the rein of his own passion, instead of give they up to her
controul--she write a letter, urge an answer to a letter before send,
for her apparel, her jewel, and some gold, which she have leave behind
she; all which be to save her pride from obligation, and to promote the
independence her heart be set upon. and what follow but a shocking
answer, make still more shocking by the communication of a father's
curse, upon a daughter deserve only blessings?--A curse upon the
curser's heart, and a double one upon the transmitter's, the spiteful the
envious Arabella!
Absent when it come--on my return I find she recover from fit, again
to fall into strong fit; and nobody expect her life; half a dozen
messenger dispatch to find I out. nor wonder at she be so
affect; she, whose filial piety give her dreadful faith in a father's
curse; and the curse of this gloomy tyrant extend (to use her own
word, when she could speak) to both world--o that it have turn, in the
moment of its utterance, to a mortal quinsy, and, stick in his gullet,
have choke the old execrator, as a warning to all such unnatural father!
what a miscreant have I be, not to have endeavour to bring she back,
by all the endearment, by all the vow, by all the offer, that I could
make she!
I do bring she back. More than a father to she: for I have give she a
life her unnatural father have well-nigh take away: shall I not cherish
the fruit of my own benefaction? I be earnest in my vow to marry, and
my ardour to urge the present time be a real ardour. but extreme
dejection, with a mingled delicacy, that in her die moment I doubt not
she will preserve, have cause she to refuse I the time, though not the
solemnity; for she have tell I, that now she must be wholly in my
protection [be destitute of every other!] more indebted, still, thy
friend, as thou seest, to her cruel relation, than to herself, for her
favour!
she have write to Miss Howe an account of their barbarity! but have not
acquaint she how very ill she be.
Low, very low, she remain; yet, dread her stupid brother's
enterprise, she want to be in London, where, but for this accident, and
(wouldst thou have believe it?) for my persuasion, see she so very
ill, she would have be this night; and we shall actually set out on
Wednesday morning, if she be not bad.
and now for a few word with thee, on the heavy preachment of Saturday
last.
thou art apprehensive, that the lady be now truly in danger; and it be a
miracle, thou tellest I, if she withstand such an attempter!--'knowing
what we know of the sex, thou sayest, thou shouldst dread, wert thou I,
to make further trial, lest thou shouldst succeed.' and, in another
place, tellest I, 'that thou plead not for the state for any favour
thou hast for it.'
what an advocate art thou for matrimony!--
Thou wert ever an unhappy fellow at argument. do the trite stuff with
which the rest of thy letter abound, in favour of wedlock, strike with
the force that this which I have transcribe do against it?
Thou tak great pain to convince I, and that from the distress the
lady be reduce to (chiefly by her friend's persecution and
implacableness, I hope thou wilt own, and not from I, as yet) that the
propose trial will not be a fair trial. but let I ask thee, be not
calamity the test of virtue? and wouldst thou not have I value this
charming creature upon proof of her merits?--do I not intend to reward
she by marriage, if she stand that proof?
but why repeat I what I have say before?--turn back, thou egregious
arguer, turn back to my long letter of the 13th,* and thou wilt there
find every syllable of what thou hast write either answer or
invalidate.
* see Letter XVIII. of this volume.
but I be not angry with thee, Jack. I love opposition. as gold be try
by fire, and virtue by temptation, so be sterle wit by opposition.
have I not, before thou settest out as an advocate for my fair-one, often
bring thee in, as make objection to my proceeding, for no other
reason than to exalt myself by prove thee a man of straw? as Homer
raise up many of his champion, and give they terrible name, only to
have they knock on the head by his hero.
however, take to thee this one piece of advice--Evermore be sure of be
in the right, when thou presumest to sit down to correct thy master.
and another, if thou wilt--never offer to invalidate the force which a
virtuous education ought to have in the sex, by endeavour to find
excuse for their frailty from the frailty of our. for, be we not
devil to each other?--They tempt we--we tempt they. because we man
cannot resist temptation, be that a reason that woman ought not, when the
whole of their education be caution and warn against our attempt? do
not their grandmother give they one easy rule--man be to ask--woman be
to deny?
well, but to return to my principal subject; let I observe, that, be my
future resolution what they will, as to this lady, the content of the
violent letter she have receive have set I at least a month forward with
she. I can now, as I hint, talk of love and marriage, without controul
or restriction; her injunction no more my terror.
in this sweetly familiar way shall we set out together for London. Mrs.
Sorlings's eld daughter, at my motion, be to attend she in the chaise,
while I ride by way of escort: for she be extremely apprehensive of the
Singleton plot; and have engage I to be all patience, if any thing
should happen on the road. but nothing I be sure will happen: for, by a
letter receive just now from Joseph, I understand, that James Harlowe
have already lay aside his stupid project: and this by the earnest desire
of all those of his friend to whom he have communicate it; who be
afraid of the consequence that might attend it. but it be not over with
I, however; although I be not determined at present as to the us I may
make of it.
my beloved tell I, she shall have her clothe send she. she hop also
her jewel, and some gold, which she leave behind she: but Joseph say,
clothe only will be send. I will not, however, tell she that: on the
contrary, I say, there be no doubt but they will send all she write for.
the great her disappointment from they, the great must be her
dependence on I.
but, after all, I hope I shall be enable to be honest to a merit so
transcendent. the devil take thee, though, for thy opinion, give so
mal-a-propos, that she may be overcome.
if thou design to be honest, methinkst thou sayest, why should not
Singleton's plot be over with thee, as it be with her brother?
because (if I must answer thee) where people be so modestly doubtful of
what they be able to do, it be good to leave a loop-hole. and, let I
add, that when a man's heart be set upon a point, and any thing occur to
beat he off, he will find it very difficult, when the suspending reason
cease, to forbear resume it.
LETTER LXI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, APRIL 25.
all hand at work in preparation for London.--What make my heart beat so
strong? why rise it to my throat in such half-choke flutter, when I
think of what this removal may do for I? I be hitherto resolve to be
honest, and that increase my wonder at these involuntary commotion.
'tis a plotting villain of a heart: it ever be--and ever will be, I
doubt. such a joy when any roguery be go forward!--i so little its
master!--a head, likewise, so well turn to answer the triangular
varlet's impulses!--no matter--I will have one struggle with thee, old
friend; and if I cannot overcome thee now, I never will again attempt to
conquer thee.
the dear creature continue extremely low and deject. tender blossom!
how unfit to contend with the rude and ruffle wind of passion, and
haughty and insolent control!--never till now from under the wing (it be
not enough to say of indulge, but) of admire parent; the mother's
bosom only fit to receive this charming flower!
this be the reflection, that, with mingled compassion, and augmented
love, arise to my mind, when I behold the charmer repose her lovely
face upon the bosom of the widow sorling, from a recover fit, as I
enter soon after she have receive her execrable sister's letter. how
lovely in her tears!--And as I enter, her uplifted face significantly
bespeak my protection, as I think. and can I be a villain to such
an angel!--I hope not--but why, Belford, why, once more, putt thou I
in mind, that she may be overcome? and why be her own reliance on my
honour so late and so reluctantly show?
but, after all, so low, so dejected, continue she to be, that I be
terribly afraid I shall have a vapourish wife, if I do marry. I should
then be doubly undo. not that I shall be much at home with she,
perhaps, after the first fortnight, or so. but when a man have be
range, like the painful bee, from flower to flower, perhaps for a month
together, and the thought of home and a wife begin to have their charm
with he, to be receive by a Niobe, who, like a wound vine, weep she
vital away, while she but involuntary curl about he; how shall I be
able to bear that?
may Heaven restore my charmer to health and spirit, I hourly pray--that
a man may see whether she can love any body but her father and mother!
in their power, I be confident, it will be, at any time, to make she
husband joyless; and that, as I hate they so heartily, be a shocking
thing to reflect upon.--something more than woman, an angel, in some
thing; but a baby in other: so father-sick! so family-fond!--what a
poor chance stand a husband with such a wife! unless, forsooth, they
vouchsafe to be reconcile to she, and continue reconcile!
it be infinitely well for she and for I that we should not marry.
what a delightful manner of life [o that I could persuade she to it!]
would the life of honour be with such a woman! the fear, the
inquietude, the uneasy day, the restless night; all arise from
doubt of have disoblige I! every absence dread to be an absence
for ever! and then how amply reward, and rewarding, by the rapture-
cause return! such a passion as this keep love in a continual
fervour--make it all alive. the happy pair, instead of sit doze
and nod at each other, in opposite chimney-corner, in a winter
evening, and over a wintry love, always new to each other, and have
always something to say.
Thou know, in my verse to my Stella, my mind on this occasion. I
will lay those verse in her way, as if undesignedly, when we be
together at the widow's; that be to say, if we do not soon go to church
by consent. she will thence see what my notion be of wedlock. if she
receive they with any sort of temper, that will be a foundation--and let
I alone to build upon it.
many a girl have be carry, who never would have be attempt, have
she show a proper resentment, when her ear, or her eye be first
invade. I have try a young creature by a bad book, a light quotation,
or an indecent picture; and if she have bear that, or only blush, and
not be angry; and more especially if she have leer and smile; that
girl have I, and old Satan, put down for our own. o how I could warn
these little rogue, if I would! perhaps envy, more than virtue, will
put I upon set up beacon for they, when I grow old and joyless.
TUESDAY AFTERNOON.
if you be in London when I get thither, you will see I soon. my
charmer be a little well than she be: her eye show it; and her
harmonious voice, hardly audible last time I see she, now begin to cheer
my heart once more. but yet she have no love--no sensibility! there be
no address she with those meaning, yet innocent freedom (innocent, at
first set out, they may be call) which soften other of her sex.
the more strange this, as she now acknowledge preferable favour for I;
and be highly susceptible of grief. grief mollifie, and enervate. the
grieve mind look round it, silently implore consolation, and love the
soother. Grief be ever an inmate with joy. though they willnot show
themselves at the same window at one time; yet they have the whole house
in common between they.
LETTER LXII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
WEDN. APRIL 26.
at last my lucky star have direct we into the desire port, and we be
safely landed.--well say Rowe:--
the wise and active conquer difficulty,
by dare to attempt they. sloth and folly
Shiver and shrink at sight of toil and hazard,
and make th' impossibility they fear.
but in the midst of my exultation, something, I know not what to call it,
check my joy, and gloom over my bright prospect: if it be not
conscience, it be wondrously like what I think so, many, many year
ago.
surely, Lovelace, methink thou sayest, thy good motion be not go off
already! surely thou wilt not now at last be a villain to this lady!
I cannot tell what to say to it. why would not the dear creature accept
of I, when I so sincerely offer myself to her acceptance? thing
already appear with a very different face now I have get she here.
already have our mother and her daughter be about me:--'charming lady!
what a complexion! what eye! what majesty in her person!--o Mr.
Lovelace, you be a happy man! you owe we such a lady!'--Then they
remind I of my revenge, and of my hatred to her whole family.
Sally be so strike with she, at first sight, that she break out to I in
these line of dryden:--
----fairer to be see
than the fair lily on the flow'ry green!
more fresh than May herself in blossom new!
I send to thy lodging within half an hour after our arrival, to receive
thy congratulation upon it, but thou wert at Edgeware, it seem.
my beloved, who be charmingly amend, be retire to her constant
employment, writing. I must content myself with the same amusement, till
she shall be pleased to admit I to her presence: for already have I
give to every one her cue.
and, among the rest, who dost thou think be to be her maid servant?--Deb.
Butler.
ah, Lovelace!
and ah, belford!--it cannot be otherwise. but what dost think Deb's name
be to be? why, Dorcas, Dorcas Wykes. and willnot it be admirable, if,
either through fear, fright, or good liking, we can get my beloved to
accept of Dorcas wyke for a bed-fellow?
in so many way will it be now in my power to have the dear creature,
that I shall not know which of they to choose!
but here come the widow with Dorcas wyke in her hand, and I be to
introduce they both to my fair-one?
***
so, the honest girl be accept--of good parentage--but, through a
neglect education, plaguy illiterate: she can neither write, nor read
writing. a kinswoman of Mrs. Sinclair--could not therefore well be
refuse, the widow in person recommend she; and the wench only take
till her Hannah can come. what an advantage have an impose or forward
nature over a courteous one! so here may something arise to lead into
correspondencie, and so forth. to be sure a person need not be so wary,
so cautious of what she write, or what she leave upon her table, or
toilette, when her attendant cannot read.
it would be a miracle, as thou sayest, if this lady can save herself--and
have go so far, how can I recede? then my revenge upon the
Harlowes!--To have run away with a daughter of theirs, to make she a
Lovelace--to make her one of a family so superior to her own--what a
triumph, as I have heretofore observe,* to they! but to run away with
she, and to bring she to my lure in the other light, what a mortification
of their pride! what a gratification of my own!
then these woman be continually at I. these woman, who, before my
whole soul and faculty be absorb in the love of this single
charmer, use always to oblige I with the flower and first fruit of
their garden! indeed, indeed, my goddess should not have choose this
London widow's! but I dare say, if I have, she would not. People who
will be deal in contradiction ought to pay for it. and to be punish
by the consequence of our own choice--what a moral lie there!--what a
deal of good may I not be the occasion of from a little evil!
Dorcas be a neat creature, both in person and dress; her continuance not
vulgar. and I be in hope, as I hint above, that her lady will accept
of she for her bedfellow, in a strange house, for a week or so. but I
see she have a dislike to she at her very first appearance; yet I think
the girl behave very modestly--over-do it a little perhaps. her
ladyship shrink back, and look shy upon she. the doctrine of
sympathy and antipathy be a surprising doctrine. but Dorcas will be
excessively obliging, and win her lady's favour soon, I doubt not. I be
secure in one of the wench's quality however--she be not to be
corrupt. a great point that! since a lady and her maid, when heartily
of one party, will be too hard for half a score devil.
the dear creature be no less shy when the widow first accost she at
she alight. yet I think that honest Doleman's letter have prepare
she for her masculine appearance.
and now I mention that letter, why dost thou not wish I joy, Jack?
Joy, of what?
why, joy of my nuptial. know then, that say, be do, with I, when I
have a mind to have it so; and that we be actually man and wife! only
that consummation have not pass: bind down to the contrary of that, by
a solemn vow, till a reconciliation with her family take place. the
woman here be tell so. they know it before my beloved know it; and
that, thou wilt say, be odd.
but how shall I do to make my fair-one keep her temper on the intimation?
why, be she not here? at Mrs. Sinclair's?--But if she will hear reason,
I doubt not to convince she, that she ought to acquiesce.
she will insist, I suppose, upon my leave she, and that I shall not
take up my lodging under the same roof. but circumstance be change
since I first make she that promise. I have take all the vacant
apartment; and must carry this point also.
I hope in a while to get she with I to the public entertainment. she
know nothing of the town, and have see less of its diversion than ever
woman of her taste, her fortune, her endowment, do see. she have,
indeed, a natural politeness, which transcend all acquirement. the most
capable of any one I ever know of judge what an hundred thing be, by
see one of a like nature. indeed she take so much pleasure in her own
choose amusement, till persecute out of they, that she have neither
leisure nor inclination for the town diversion.
these diversion will amuse, and the deuce be in it, if a little
susceptibility will not put forth, now she receive my address;
especially if I can manage it so as to be allow to live under one roof
with she. what though the sensibility be at first faint and reluctant,
like the appearance of an early spring-flower in frosty winter, which
seem afraid of be nipt by an easterly blast! that will be enough for
I.
I hint to thee in a former,* that I have provide book for the lady's
in-door amusement. Sally and Polly be reader. my beloved's light
closet be their library. and several piece of devotion have be put
in, buy on purpose at second-hand.
* see letter XXXIX. of this volume.
I be always for form a judgment of the reading part of the sex by
their book. the observation I have make on this occasion have be of
great use to I, as well in England as out of it. the sagacious lady may
possibly be as curious in this point as her Lovelace.
so much for the present. Thou seest that I have a great deal of business
before I; yet I will write again soon.
[Mr. Lovelace send another letter with this; in which he take notice of
young Miss Sorlings's set out with they, and leave they at
Barnet: but as its content be nearly the same with those in the
Lady's next letter, it be omit.]
END of VOL.3
Volume IV.
content of volume IV
LETTER I. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
like her lodging; but not greatly the widow. chide Miss Howe for her
rash, though friendly vow. catalogue of good book she find in her
closet. utterly dissatisfied with he for give out to the woman below
that they be privately marry. have a strong debate with he on this
subject. he offer matrimony to she, but in such a manner that she could
not close with his offer. her caution as to door, window, and seal of
letter.
LETTER II. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
her expedient to correspond with each other every day. be glad she have
thought of marry he have he repeat his offer. wonder he do not.
LETTER III. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
Breakfasts with he and the widow, and her two niece. observation upon
their behaviour and look. he make a merit of leave she, and hope,
on his return, that she will name his happy day. she be willing to make
the good construction in his favour.
in his next letter (extract from which be only give) he triumph on
the point he have carry. stimulate by the woman, he resume his
resolution to try she to the utmost.
LETTER IV. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
Lovelace return the next day. she think herself meanly treat, and be
angry. he again urge marriage; but before she can return his answer
make another proposal; yet she suspect not that he mean a studied
delay. he be in treaty for Mrs. Fretchville's house. description of it.
an invite opportunity offer for he to propose matrimony to she. she
wonder he let it slip. he be very urgent for her company at a collation
he be to give to four of his select friend, and Miss Partington. he
give an account who Miss Partington be.
in Mr. Lovelace's next letter he invite Belford, Mowbray, Belton, and
Tourville, to his collation. his humourous instruction for their
behaviour before the lady. have two view in get she into their
company.
LETTER V. Lovelace to Belford.--
have be at church with Clarissa. the sabbath a charming institution.
the text startle he. Nathan the prophet he call a good ingenious
fellow. she like the woman well than she do at first. she
reluctantly consent to honour his collation with her presence. long
to have their opinion of his fair prize. describe she to great
advantage.
LETTER VI. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
she praise his good behaviour at St. Paul's. be prevail on to dine
with Mrs. Sinclair and her niece. be well pleased with they than she
think she should be. blame herself for her readiness to censure,
where reputation be concern. her charitable allowance on this head.
this day an agreeable day. interpret ever thing she can fairly
interpret in Mr. Lovelace's favour. she could prefer he to all the man
she ever know, if he would always be what he have be that day. be
determine, as much as possible, by true merit, and by deed. date
again, and be offend at Miss Partington's be introduce to she, and
at his make her yield to be present at his intended collation.
LETTER VII. from the same.--
disgusted wit her evening. characterize his four companion. like not
Miss Partington's behaviour.
LETTER viii. from the same.--
an attempt to induce she to admit Miss Partington to a share in her bed
for that night. she refuse. her reason. be highly dissatisfied.
LETTER IX. from the same.--
have receive an angry letter from Mrs. Howe, forbid she to correspond
with her daughter. she advise compliance, though against herself; and,
to induce she to it, make the good of her present prospect.
LETTER x. Miss Howe. in answer.--
flame out upon this step of her mother. insist upon continue the
correspondence. her menace if Clarissa write not. rave against
Lovelace. but blame she for not oblige Miss Partington: and why.
advise she to think of settlement. Likes Lovelace's proposal of Mrs.
Fretchville's house.
LETTER XI. Clarissa. in reply.--
terrify at her menace, she promise to continue write. beseeche
she to learn to subdue her passion. have just receive her clothe.
LETTER XII. Mr. Hickman to clarissa.--
Miss Howe, he tell she, be uneasy for the vexation she have give she.
if she will write on as before, Miss Howe will not think of do what
she be so apprehensive of. he offer she his most faithful service.
LETTER XIII. XIV. Lovelace to Belford.--
tell he how much the lady dislike the confraternity; Belford as well
as the rest. have a warm debate with she in her behalf. look upon she
refuse a share in her bed to Miss Partington as suspect and defy
he. threatens her.--savagely glory in her grief, on receive Miss
Howe's prohibitory letter: which appear to be instigate by himself.
LETTER XV. Belford to Lovelace.--
his and his compeer's high admiration of Clarissa. they all join to
entreat he to do her justice.
LETTER XVI. XVII. Lovelace. in answer.--
he endeavour to palliate his purpose by familiar instance of cruelty
to bird, &c.--farther characteristic reasoning in support of his wicked
design. the passive condition to which he want to bring the lady.
LETTER XVIII. Belford. in reply.--
still warmly argue in behalf of the lady. be oblige to attend a die
uncle: and entreat he to write from time to time an account of all his
proceeding.
LETTER XIX. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
Lovelace, she say, complain of the reserve he give occasion for. his
pride a dirty low pride, which have eat up his prudence. he be sink in
her opinion. an afflict letter send she from her cousin Morden.
enclose the letter. in which her cousin (sway by the representation
of her brother) plead in behalf of Solmes, and the family-view; and
set before she, in strong and just light, the character of a libertine.
her heavy reflection upon the content. her generous prayer.
LETTER XX. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
he press she to go abroad with he; yet mention not the ceremony that
should give propriety to his urgency. cannot bear the life she live.
wish her uncle Harlowe to be sound by Mr. Hickman, as to a
reconciliation. Mennell introduce to she. will not take another step
with Lovelace till she know the success of the propose application to
her uncle.
substance of two letter from Lovelace to Belford; in which he tell he
who Mennell be, and give an account of many new contrivance and
precaution. woman's pocket ballast-bag. Mrs. Sinclair's wardrobe.
good order observe in her house. the lady's caution, he say, warrant
his contrivance.
LETTER XXI. Lovelace to belford.--
will write a play. the title of it, the Quarrelsome Lovers.
perseverance his glory; patience his hand-maid. attempt to get a letter
the lady have dropt as she sit. her high indignation upon it. far
plot. Paul Wheatly, who; and for what employ. Sally Martin's
reproach. have overplotte himself. human nature a well-know rogue.
LETTER XXII. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
Acquaints she with their present quarrel. find it imprudent to stay
with he. Re-urge the application to her uncle. caution her sex with
regard to the danger of be mislead by the eye.
LETTER XXIII. Miss Howe. in answer.--
approve of her leave Lovelace. new story of his wickedness. will
have her uncle sound. comfort she. how much her case differ from
that of any other female fugitive. she will be an example, as well as a
warning. a picture of Clarissa's happiness before she know Lovelace.
brief sketch of her exalt character. adversity her shin time.
LETTER XXIV. Clarissa. in reply.--
have a contest with Lovelace about go to church. he oblige she again
to accept of his company to St. Paul's.
LETTER XXV. Miss Howe to Mrs. Norton.--
Desiring she to try to dispose Mrs. Harlowe to forward a reconciliation.
LETTER XXVI. Mrs. Norton. in answer.
LETTER XXVII. Miss Howe. in reply.
LETTER XXVIII. Mrs. Harlowe's pathetic letter to Mrs. Norton.
LETTER XXIX. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
fruitless issue of Mr. Hickman's application to her uncle. advise she
how to proceed with, and what to say to, Lovelace. endeavour to account
for his teasing way. who know, she say, but her dear friend be
permit to swerve, in order to bring about his reformation? inform
she of her uncle Antony's intended address to her mother.
LETTER XXX. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
Hard fate to be throw upon an ungenerous and cruel man. reason why she
cannot proceed with Mr. Lovelace as she advise. affect apostrophe to
Lovelace.
LETTER XXXI. from the same.--
interesting conversation with Lovelace. he frighten she. he mention
settlement. her modest encouragement of he. he evade. true
generosity what. she require his proposal of settlement in writing.
examine herself on her whole conduct to Lovelace. maidenly niceness not
her motive for the distance she have keep he at. what be. invite her
correction if she deceive herself.
LETTER XXXII. from the same.--
with Mr. Lovelace's write proposal. her observation on the cold
conclusion of they. he know not what every wise man know, of the
prudence and delicacy require in a wife.
LETTER XXXIII. from the same.--
Mr. Lovelace press for the day; yet make a proposal which must
necessarily occasion a delay. her unreserved and pathetic answer to it.
he be affect by it. she rejoice that he be penetrable. he press
for her instant resolution; but at the same time insinuate delay.
see she displeased, he urge for the morrow: but, before she can
answer, give she the alternative of other day. yet, want to reward
himself, as if he have oblige she, she repulse he on a liberty he would
have take. he be enrage. her melancholy reflection on her future
prospect with such a man. the moral she deduce from her story. [a
note, defend her conduct from the censure which pass upon she as
over nice.]
extract from four of his letter: in which he glory in his cruelty.
Hardheartedness he own to be an essential of the libertine character.
enjoy the confusion of a fine woman. his apostrophe to virtue. Ashamed
of be visibly affect. enrage against she for repulse he. will
steel his own heart, that he may cut through a rock of ice to she's. the
woman afresh instigate he to attempt her virtue.
LETTER XXXIV. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
be enrage at his delay. will think of some scheme to get she out of
his hand. have no notion that he can or dare to mean she dishonour.
woman do not naturally hate such man as Lovelace.
LETTER XXXV. Belford to Lovelace.--
warmly espouse the lady's cause. nothing but vanity and nonsense in the
wild pursuit of libertine. for his own sake, for his family's sake,
and for the sake of their common humanity, he beseech he to do this
lady justice.
letter xxxvi. Lord M. to Mr. Belford.--
a proverbial letter in the lady's favour.
LETTER XXXVII. Lovelace to belford.--
he ludicrously turn Belford's argument against he. resistance
inflame he. why the gallant be prefer to the husband. give a piece
of advice to married woman. substance of his letter to Lord M. desiring
he to give the lady to he in person. his view in this letter.
Ridicules Lord M. for his proverb. ludicrous advice to Belford in
relation to his die uncle. what physician should do when a patient be
give over.
LETTER XXXVIII. Belford to Lovelace.--
set forth the folly, the inconvenience, the impolicy of keeping, and the
preference of marriage, upon the foot of their own principle, as
libertine.
LETTER XXXIX. Lovelace to Belford.--
affect to mistake the intention of Belford's letter, and thank he for
approve his present scheme. the seduction progress be more delightful
to he, he say, than the crown act.
LETTER XL. from the same.--
all extremely happy at present. contrive a conversation for the lady to
overhear. platonic love, how it generally end. will get she to a play;
like not tragedy. have too much feeling. why man of his cast prefer
comedy to tragedy. the nymph, and Mrs. Sinclair, and all their
acquaintance, of the same mind. other artifice of his. could he have
be admit in her hour of dishabille and heedlessness, he have be
long ago master of his wish. his view in get she to a play: a
play, and a collation afterwards, greatly befriend a lover's design; and
why. she consent to go with he to see the tragedy of Venice preserve.
LETTER XLI. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
give the particular of the overheard conversation. think she
prospect a little mend. be willing to compound for tolerable
appearance, and to hope, when reason for hope offer.
LETTER XLII. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
her scheme of Mrs. Townsend. be not for encourage dealer in
prohibit good; and why. her humourous treatment of Hickman on
consult he upon Lovelace's proposal of settlement.
LETTER XLIII. from the same.--
her account of Antony Harlowe's address to her mother, and of what pass
on her mother's communicate it to she. Copy of Mrs. Howe's answer to
his letter.
LETTER XLIV. XLV. Lovelace to Belford.--
come at several letter of Miss Howe. he be now more assured of
Clarissa than ever; and why. sparkle eye, what they indicate. she
keep he at distance. repeat instigation from the woman. account of
the letter he have come at. all rage and revenge upon the content of
they. Menaces Hickman. wish Miss Howe have come up to town, as she
threaten.
LETTER XLVI. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--Is terrify by he. disclaim
prudery. beg of Miss Howe to perfect her scheme, that she may leave
he. she think her temper change for the bad. tremble to look back
upon his encroachment. be afraid, on the close self-examination which
her calamity have cause she to make, that even in the good action of
her past life she have not be quite free from secret pride, &c. Tears
almost in two the answer she have write to his proposal. intend to go
out next day, and not to return. her farther intention.
LETTER XLVII. Lovelace to Belford.--
meet the lady at breakfast. fling the tea-cup and saucer over his
head. the occasion. alarm and terrify she by his free address.
Romping, the use of it by a lover. will try if she will not yield to
nightly surprise. a lion-hearte lady where her honour be concern.
must have recourse to his master-stroke. fable of the sun and north
wind. Mrs. Fretchville's house an embarrass. he give that pretend
lady the small-pox. other contrivance in his head to bring Clarissa
back, if she should get away. Miss Howe's scheme of Mrs. Townsend be, he
say, a sword hang over his head. he must change his measure to
render it abortive. he be of the true lady-make. what that be. another
conversation between they. her apostrophe to her father. he be
temporarily move. Dorcas give he notice of a paper she have come at,
and be transcribe. in order to detain the lady, he press for the
day. Miss Howe he fancy in love with he; and why. he see Clarissa
do not hate he.
LETTER XLVIII. from the same.--
Copy of the transcribed paper. it prove to be her torn answer to his
proposal. Meekness the glory of a woman. ludicrous image of a
termagant wife. he have well never to have see this paper. have very
strong remorse. paint they in lively colour. set forth the lady's
transcendent virtue, and greatness of mind. surprise into these
argument in her favour by his conscience. put it to flight.
letter XLIX. from the same.--
Mennell scruple to aid he far in his design. vapourish people
the physical tribe's milch-cow. advice to the faculty. have do with
the project about Mrs. Fretchville's house. the lady suspect he. a
seasonable letter for he from his cousin Charlotte. send up the letter
to the lady. she write to Miss Howe, upon peruse it, to suspend for
the present her application to Mrs. Townsend.
LETTER L. from the same.--
an interview all placid and agreeable. now be he in a train. all he now
wait for be a letter from Lord M. Inquires after their marriage by a
stranger of good appearance. the lady alarm at they.
LETTER LI. Lovelace to Belford.--
curse his uncle for another proverbial letter he have send he. permit
the lady to see it. nine woman in ten that fall, fall, he say, through
their own fault.
LETTER LII. Lord M.'s characteristic letter.
LETTER LIII. Lovelace to belford.--
the lady now come to he at the first word. triumph in her sweetness
of temper, and on her patience with he. put his writing into
counsellor Williams's hand, to prepare settlement. shall now be doubly
arm. boast of his contrivance in petto. bring pattern to she.
Proposes jewel. admire she for her prudence with regard to what he
put she upon do for her Norton. what his wife must do and be. she
decline a public wedding. her dutiful reason. she be willing to
dispense with Lord M.'s presence. he write to Lord M. accordingly.
extract from a letter from clarissa.--
after give Miss Howe an account of the present favourable appearance,
she desire she to keep herself all such of the particular which she have
communicate to she as may discredit Mr. Lovelace.
LETTER LIV. Lovelace to Belford.--
his project plot to revenge himself upon Miss Howe.
LETTER LV. from the same.--
fresh contrivance crowd in upon he. he shall be very sick on the
morrow; and why. woman below impertinently reproachful. he will be no
man's successor. will not take up with harlots.--history of the french
marquis.
the history
of
CLARISSA HARLOWE
letter I
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
WEDNESDAY AFTERNOON, APRIL 26.
at length, my dearest Miss Howe, I be in London, and in my new lodging.
they be neatly furnish, and the situation, for the town, be pleasant.
but I think you must not ask I how I like the old gentlewoman. yet she
seem courteous and obliging.--her kinswoman just appear to welcome I
at my alighting. they seem to be genteel young woman. but more of
their aunt and they, as I shall see more.
Miss Sorlings have an uncle at Barnet, whom she find so very ill, that
her uneasiness, on that account, (have large expectation from he,)
make I comply with her desire to stay with he. yet I wish, as she
uncle do not expect she, that she would see I settle in London; and
Mr. Lovelace be still more earnest that she would, offer to send she
back again in a day or two, and urge that her uncle's malady threaten
not a sudden change. but leave the matter to her choice, after she
know what would have be mine, she make I not the expect compliment.
Mr. Lovelace, however, make she a handsome present at part.
his genteel spirit, on all occasion, make he often wish he more
consistent.
as soon as he arrive, I take possession of my apartment. I shall make
good use of the light closet in it, if I stay here any time.
one of his attendant return in the morning to the Lawn; and I make
write to you by he an excuse for my retiring.
and now give I leave to chide you, my dear friend, for your rash,
and I hope revocable resolution not to make Mr. Hickman the happy man
in the world, while my happiness be in suspense. suppose I be to be
unhappy, what, my dear, would this resolution of yours avail I?
marriage be the high state of friendship: if happy, it lessen our
care, by divide they, at the same time that it double our pleasure
by a mutual participation. why, my dear, if you love I, will you not
rather give another friend to one who have not two she be sure of? have
you married on your mother's last birth-day, as she would have have you,
I should not, I dare say, have want a refuge; that would have save I
many mortification, and much disgrace.
***
here I be break in upon by Mr. Lovelace; introduce the widow lead
in a kinswoman of shebe to attend I, if I approve of she, till my
Hannah should come, or till I have provide myself with some other
servant. the widow give she many good quality; but say, that she have
one great defect; which be, that she could not write, nor read writing;
that part of her education have be neglect when she be young; but
for discretion, fidelity, obligingness, she be not to be out-do by any
body. so comment she likewise for her skill at the needle.
as for her defect, I can easily forgive that. she be very likely and
genteel--too genteel indeed, I think, for a servant. but what I like
least of all in she, she have a strange sly eye. I never see such an eye;
half-confident, I think. but indeed Mrs. Sinclair herself, (for that be
the widow's name,) have an odd wink eye; and her respectfulness seem
too much study, methink, for the London ease and freedom. but people
cannot help their look, you know; and after all she be extremely civil
and obliging,--and as for the young woman, (Dorcas be her name,) she will
not be long with I.
I accept she: how could I do otherwise, (if I have have a mind to make
objection, which, in my present situation, I have not,) her aunt present,
and the young woman also present; and Mr. Lovelace officious in his
introduce they, to oblige I? but, upon their leave I, I tell he,
(who seem inclinable to begin a conversation with I,) that I desire
that this apartment might be consider as my retirement: that when I see
he it might be in the dining-room, (which be up a few stair; for this
back-house, be once two, the room do not all of they very
conveniently communicate with each other,) and that I might be as little
break in upon as possible, when I be here. he withdraw very
respectfully to the door, but there stopt; and ask for my company then
in the dining-room. if he be about set out for other lodging, I
would go with he now, I tell he; but, if he do not just then go, I
would first finish my letter to Miss Howe.
I see he have no mind to leave I if he can help it. my brother's scheme
may give he a pretence to try to engage I to dispense with his promise.
but if I now do I must acquit he of it entirely.
my approbation of his tender behaviour in the midst of my grief, have
give he a right, as he seem to think, of address I with all the
freedom of an approve lover. I see by this man, that when once a woman
embark with this sex, there be no receding. one concession be but the
prelude to another with they. he have be ever since Sunday last
continually complain of the distance I keep he at; and think himself
entitle now to call in question my value for he; strengthen his
doubt by my former declare readiness to give he up to a reconciliation
with my friend; and yet have himself fall off from that obsequious
tenderness, if I may couple the word, which draw from I the concession
he build upon.
while we be talk at the door, my new servant come up with an
invitation to we both to tea. I say he might accept of it, if he
please: but I must pursue my writing; and not choose either tea or
supper, I desire he to make my excuse below, as to both; and inform
they of my choice to be retire as much as possible; yet to promise for
I my attendance on the widow and her niece at breakfast in the morning.
he object particularly in the eye of stranger as to avoid supper.
you know, say I, and you can tell they, that I seldom eat supper. my
spirit be low. you must never urge I against a declare choice.
Pray, Mr. Lovelace, inform they of all my particularity. if they be
oblige, they will allow for they--I come not hither to make new
acquaintance.
I have turn over the book I find in my closet; and be not a little
pleased with they; and think the well of the people of the house for
their sake.
Stanhope's gospel; Sharp's, Tillotson's, and South's sermon; Nelson's
feast and Fasts; a Sacramental Piece of the Bishop of Man, and another
of Dr. Gauden, Bishop of Exeter; and Inett's Devotions, be among the
devout books:--and among those of a light turn, the follow not ill-
choose one: a Telemachus, in French; another in English; Steel's,
Rowe's, and Shakespeare's play; that genteel Comedy of Mr. Cibber, the
Careless Husband, and other of the same author; Dryden's Miscellanies;
the Tatlers, Spectators, and Guardians; Pope's, and Swift's, and
Addison's Works.
in the blank leaf of the Nelson and Bishop Gauden, be Mrs. Sinclair's
name; and in those of most of the other, either Sarah Martin, or Mary
Horton, the name of the two niece.
***
I be exceedingly out of humour with Mr. Lovelace: and have great reason
to be so, as you will allow, when you have read the conversation I be
go to give you an account of; for he would not let I rest till I give
he my company in the dining-room.
he begin with let I know, that he have be out to inquire after the
character of the widow, which be the more necessary, he say, as he
suppose that I would expect his frequent absence.
I do, I say; and that he would not think of take up his lodging in
the same house with I. but what, say I, be the result of your inquiry?
why, indeed, the widow's character be, in the main, what he like well
enough. but as it be Miss Howe's opinion, as I have tell he, that my
brother have not give over his scheme; as the widow live by let
lodging, and have other to let in the same part of the house, which
might be take by an enemy; he know no well way than for he to take
they all, as it could not be for a long time, unless I would think of
remove to other.
so far be well enough. but as it be easy for I to see, that he speak
the slighter of the widow, in order to have a pretence to lodge here
himself, I ask he his intention in that respect. and he frankly
own, that if I choose to stay here, he could not, as matter stand,
think of leave I for six hour together; and he have prepare the widow
to expect, that we should be here but for a few day; only till we could
fix ourselves in a house suitable to our condition; and this, that I
might be under the less embarrassment, if I please to remove.
fix our-self in a house, and we, and our, Mr. Lovelace--Pray, in what
light--
he interrupt I--why, my dear life, if you will hear I with
patience--yet, I be half afraid that I have be too forward, as I have
not consult you upon it--but as my friend in town, accord to what
Mr. Doleman have write, in the letter you have see, conclude we to be
married--
Surely, Sir, you have not presumed--
hear I out, my dear creature--you have receive with favour, my
address: you have make I hope for the honour of your consent hand:
yet, by decline my most fervent tender of myself to you at Mrs.
sorling's, have give I apprehension of delay: I would not for the
world be think so ungenerous a wretch, now you have honour I with
your confidence, as to wish to precipitate you. yet your brother's
scheme be not give up. Singleton, I be afraid, be actually in town;
his vessel lie at Rotherhithe--your brother be absent from Harlowe-
place; indeed not with Singleton yet, as I can hear. if you be know
to be mine, or if you be but think to be so, there will probably be an
end of your brother's contrivance. the widow's character may be as
worthy as it be say to be. but the worthy she be, the more danger,
if your brother's agent should find we out; since she may be persuade,
that she ought in conscience to take a parent's part against a child who
stand in opposition to they. but if she believe we marry, her good
character will stand we instead, and give she a reason why two apartment
be requisite for we at the hour of retirement.
I perfectly rave at he. I would have fling from he in resentment; but
he would not let I: and what could I do? whither go, the evening
advance?
I be astonish at you! say i.--if you be a man of honour, what need of
all this strange obliquity? you delight in crooked way--let I know,
since I must stay in your company (for he hold my hand), let I know all
you have say to the people below.--indee, indeed, Mr. Lovelace, you be
a very unaccountable man.
my dearest creature, need I to have mention any thing of this? and
could I not have take up my lodging in this house unknown to you, if I
have not intend to make you the judge of all my proceedings?--but this
be what I have tell the widow before her kinswoman, and before your new
servant--'that indeed we be privately marry at Hertford; but that you
have preliminarily bind I under a solemn vow, which I be most
religiously resolve to keep, to be content with separate apartment,
and even not to lodge under the same roof, till a certain reconciliation
shall take place, which be of high consequence to both.' and far
that I might convince you of the purity of my intention, and that my
whole view in this be to prevent mischief, I have acquaint they, 'that
I have solemnly promise to behave to you before every body, as if we
be only betroth, and not marry; not even offer to take any of
those innocent freedom which be not refuse in the most punctilious
love.'
and then he solemnly vow to I the strict observance of the same
respectful behaviour to I.
I say, that I be not by any mean satisfied with the tale he have tell,
nor with the necessity he want to lay I under of appear what I be
not: that every step he take be a wry one, a needless wry one: and since
he think it necessary to tell the people below any thing about I, I
insist that he should unsay all he have say, and tell they the truth.
what he have tell they, he say, be with so many circumstance, that he
could soon die than contradict it. and still he insist upon the
propriety of appear to be marry, for the reason he have give
before--and, dear creature, say he, why this high displeasure with
I upon so well-intend an expedient? you know, that I cannot wish to
shun your brother, or his Singleton, but upon your account. the first
step I would take, if leave to myself, would be to find they out. I have
always act in this manner, when any body have presume to give out
threatening against it.
'tis true I would have consult you first, and have your leave. but
since you dislike what I have say, let I implore you, dearest Madam,
to give the only proper sanction to it, by name an early day. would to
Heaven that be to be to-morrow!--for God's sake, let it be to-morrow!
but, if not, [be it his business, my dear, before I speak (yet he seem
to be afraid of I) to say, if not?] let I beseech you, Madam, if my
behaviour shall not be to your dislike, that you will not to-morrow, at
breakfast-time, discredit what I have tell they. the moment I give you
cause to think that I take any advantage of your concession, that moment
revoke it, and expose I, as I shall deserve.--and once more, let I
remind you, that I have no view either to serve or save myself by this
expedient. it be only to prevent a probable mischief, for your own
mind's sake; and for the sake of those who deserve not the least
consideration from I.
what could I say? what could I do?--i verily think, that have he urge I
again, in a proper manner, I should have consent (little satisfied as I
be with he) to give he a meeting to-morrow morning at a more solemn
place than in the parlour below.
but this I resolve, that he shall not have my consent to stay a night
under this roof. he have now give I a strong reason for this
determination than I have before.
***
Alas! my dear, how vain a thing to say, what we will, or what we will not
do, when we have put ourselves into the power of this sex!--he go down
to the people below, on my desiring to be leave to myself; and staid till
their supper be just ready; and then, desire a moment's audience, as
he call it, he besought my leave to stay that one night, promise to
set out either for Lord M.'s, or for Edgeware, to his friend Belford's,
in the morning, after breakfast. but if I be against it, he say, he
would not stay supper; and would attend I about eight next day--yet he
add, that my denial would have a very particular appearance to the
people below, from what he have tell they; and the more, as he have
actually agree for all the vacant apartment, (indeed only for a month,)
for the reason he before hint at: but I need not stay here two day,
if, upon converse with the widow and her niece in the morning, I
should have any dislike to they.
I think, notwithstanding my resolution above-mention, that it would
seem too punctilious to deny he, under the circumstance he have
mention: have, besides, no reason to think he would obey I; for he
look as if he be determined to debate the matter with I. and now,
as I see no likelihood of a reconciliation with my friend, and as I have
actually receive his address, I think I would not quarrel with he,
if I could help it, especially as he ask to stay but for one night, and
could have do so without my know it; and you be of opinion, that
the proud wretch, distrust his own merit with I, or at least my
regard for he, will probably bring I to some concession in his favour
--for all these reason, I think proper to yield this point: yet I be
so vex with he on the other, that it be impossible for I to comply
with that grace which a concession should be make with, or not make at
all.
this be what I say--what you will do, you must do, I think. you be
very ready to promise; very ready to depart from your promise. you say,
however, that you will set out to-morrow for the country. you know how
ill I have be. I be not well enough now to debate with you upon your
encroach way. I be utterly dissatisfied with the tale you have tell
below. nor will I promise to appear to the people of the house to-morrow
what I be not.
he withdraw in the most respectful manner, beseech I only to favour
he with such a meeting in the morning as might not make the widow and
her niece think he have give I reason to be offend with he.
I retire to my own apartment, and Dorcas come to I soon after to take
my command. I tell she, that I require very little attendance, and
always dress and undressed myself.
she seem concerned, as if she think I have repulse she; and say, it
should be her whole study to oblige I.
I tell she, that I be not difficult to be please: and should let she
know from time to time what assistance I should expect from she. but for
that night I have no occasion for her further attendance.
she be not only genteel, but be well breed, and well speak--she must have
have what be generally think to be the polite part of education: but it
be strange, that father and mother should make so light, as they
generally do, of that preferable part, in girl, which would improve
their mind, and give a grace to all the rest.
as soon as she be go, I inspect the door, the window, the
wainscot, the dark closet as well as the light one; and find very good
fastening to the door, and to all the window, I again have recourse to
my pen.
***
Mrs. Sinclair be just now go from I. Dorcas, she tell I, have
acquaint she, that I have dismiss she for the night. she come to ask
I how I like my apartment, and to wish I good rest. she express her
concern, that they could not have my company at supper. Mr. Lovelace,
she say, have inform they of my love of retirement. she assure I,
that I should not be break in upon. she highly extoll he, and give
I a share in the praise as to person. but be sorry, she say, that she
be likely to lose we so soon as Mr. Lovelace talk of.
I answer she with suitable civility; and she withdraw with great token
of respect. with great, I think, than should be from distance of
year, as she be the wife of a gentleman; and as the appearance of every
thing about she, as well house as dress, carry the mark of such good
circumstance, as require not abasement.
if, my dear, you will write, against prohibition, be pleased to direct,
to Miss Laetitia Beaumont; to be leave till call for, at Mr. Wilson's,
in Pall Mall.
Mr. Lovelace propose this direction to I, not know of your desire
that your letter should pass by a third hand. as his motive for it be,
that my brother might not trace out where we be, I be glad, as well from
this instance as from other, that he seem to think he have do mischief
enough already.
do you know how my poor Hannah do?
Mr. Lovelace be so full of his contrivance and expedient, that I think
it may not be amiss to desire you to look carefully to the seal of my
letter, as I shall to those of your. if I find he base in this
particular, I shall think he capable of any evil; and will fly he as my
bad enemy.
LETTER II
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[with she two last letter, NO. LVIII. LIX. of VOL. III., ENCLOSED.]
THURSDAY NIGHT, APRIL 27.
I have your's; just bring I. Mr. Hickman have help I to a lucky
expedient, which, with the assistance of the post, will enable I to
correspond with you every day. an honest higler, [Simon Collins his
name,] by whom I shall send this, and the two enclose, (now I have your
direction whither,) go to town constantly on Mondays, wednesday, and
Fridays; and can bring back to I from Mr. Wilson's what you shall have
cause to be leave for I.
I congratulate you on your arrival in town, so much amend in spirit.
I must be brief. I hope youwill have no cause to repent return my
Norris. it be forthcoming on demand.
I be sorry your Hannah cannot be with you. she be very ill still; but not
dangerously.
I long for your account of the woman you be with. if they be not right
people, you will find they out in one breakfasting.
I know not what to write upon his reporting to they that you be actually
married. his reason for it be plausible. but he delight in odd
expedient and invention.
whether you like the people or not, do not, by your noble sincerity and
plain dealing, make yourself enemy. you be in the real world now you
know.
I be glad you have thought of take he at his offer, if he have re-urge
it. I wonder he do not. but if he do not soon, and in such a way as
you can accept of it, donot think of stay with he.
depend upon it, my dear, he will not leave you, either night or day, if
he can help it, now he have get footing.
I should have abhor he for his report of your marriage, have he not
make it with such circumstance as leave it still in your power to keep
he at distance. if once he offer at the least familiarity--but this be
needless to say to you. he can have, I think, no other design but what
he profess; because he must need think, that his report of be
married to you must increase your vigilance.
you may depend upon my look narrowly into the sealing of your
letter. if, as you say, he be base in that point, he will be so in
every thing. but to a person of your merit, of your fortune, of your
virtue, he cannot be base. the man be no fool. it be his interest, as
well with regard to his expectation from his own friend, as from you,
to be honest. would to Heaven, however, you be really married! this
be now the predominant wish of
your
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER III
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY MORNING, eight O'CLOCK.
I be more and more displeased with Mr. Lovelace, on reflection, for his
boldness in hop to make I, though but passively, as I may say,
testify to his great untruth. and I shall like he still less for it, if
his view in it do not come out to be the hope of accelerate my
resolution in his favour, by the difficulty it will lay I under as to my
behaviour to he. he have send I his compliment by Dorcas, with a
request that I will permit he to attend I in the dining-room,--meet he
in good humour, or not: but I have answer, that as I shall see he at
breakfast-time I desire to be excuse.
TEN O'CLOCK.
I try to adjust my countenance, before I go down, to an easy air
than I have a heart, and be receive with the high token of respect
by the widow and her two niece: agreeable young woman enough in their
person; but they seem to put on an air of reserve; while Mr. Lovelace
be easy and free to all, as if he be of long acquaintance with they:
gracefully enough, I cannot but say; an advantage which travel
gentleman have over other people.
the widow, in the conversation we have after breakfast, give we an account
of the military merit of the Colonel her husband, and, upon this
occasion, put she handkerchief to her eye twice or thrice. I hope for
the sake of her sincerity, she wet it, because she would be think to
have do so; but I see not that she do. she wish that I might never
know the loss of a husband so dear to I, as her beloved Colonel be to
she: and she again put the handkerchief to her eye.
it must, no doubt, be a most affect thing to be separate from a good
husband, and to be leave in difficult circumstance besides, and that not
by his fault, and expose to the insult of the base and ungrateful, as
she represent her case to be at his death. this move I a good deal
in her favour.
you know, my dear, that I have an open and free heart; and naturally have
as open and free a countenance; at least my complimenter have tell I
so. at once, where I like, I mingle mind without reserve, encourage
reciprocal freedom, and be forward to dissipate diffidence. but with
these two niece of the widow I never can be intimate--I donot know why.
only that circumstance, and what pass in conversation, encourage not
the notion, or I should have be apt to think, that the young lady and
Mr. Lovelace be of long acquaintance than of yesterday. for he, by
stealth as it be, cast glance sometimes at they, when they return;
and, on my ocular notice, their eye fall, as I may say, under my eye, as
if they could not stand its examination.
the widow direct all her talk to I, as to Mrs. Lovelace; and I, with a
very ill grace bear it. and once she express more forwardly than I
thank she for, her wonder that any vow, any consideration, however
weighty, could have force enough with so charming a couple, as she call
he and I, to make we keep separate bed.
their eye, upon this hint, have the advantage of mine. yet be I not
conscious of guilt. how know I then, upon recollection, that my censure
upon there be not too rash? there be, no doubt, many truly modest
person (put myself out of the question) who, by blush at an
injurious charge, have be suspect, by those who cannot distinguish
between the confusion which guilt will be attend with, and the noble
consciousness that overspread the face of a fine spirit, to be think
but capable of an imputed evil.
the great Roman, as we read, who take his surname from one part in three
(the fourth not then discover) of the world he have triumph over,
be charge with a great crime to his soldiery, choose rather to suffer
exile (the punishment due to it, have he be find guilty) than to have
it say, that Scipio be question in public, on so scandalous a charge.
and think you, my dear, that Scipio do not blush with indignation, when
the charge be first communicate to he?
Mr. Lovelace, when the widow express her forward wonder, look sly and
leering, as if to observe how I take it: and say, they might take notice
that his regard for my will and pleasure (call I his dear creature)
have great force upon he than the oath by which he have bind himself.
rebuke both he and the widow, I say, it be strange to I to hear an
oath or vow so lightly treat, as to have it think but of second
consideration, whatever be the first.
the observation be just, Miss Martin say; for that nothing could excuse
the breaking of a solemn vow, be the occasion of make it what it would.
I ask she after the near church; for I have be too long a stranger
to the sacred worship. they name St. James's, St. Anne's, and another
in Bloomsbury; and the two niece say they oftenest go to St. James's
church, because of the good company, as well as for the excellent
preaching.
Mr. Lovelace say, the Royal Chapel be the place he oftenest go to,
when he be in town. poor man! little do I expect to hear he go to
any place of devotion. I ask, if the presence of the visible king of,
comparatively, but a small territory, do not take off, too generally,
the requisite attention to the service of the invisible King and Maker
of a thousand world?
he believe this might be so with such as come for curiosity, when the
royal family be present. but otherwise, he have see as many contrite
face at the Royal Chapel, as any where else: and why not? since the
people about court have as deep score to wipe off, as any people
whatsoever.
he speak this with so much levity, that I could not help say, that
nobody question but he know how to choose his company.
your servant, my dear, bowing, be his word; and turn to they, you
will observe upon numberless occasion, lady, as we be far
acquaint, that my belove never spar I upon these topic. but I
admire she as much in her reproof, as I be fond of her approbation.
Miss Horton say, there be a time for every thing. she could not but
say, that she think innocent mirth be mighty become in young people.
very true, join in Miss Martin. and Shakespeare say well, that youth
be the spring of life, the bloom of gaudy year [with a theatrical air,
she speak it:] and for her part, she could not but admire in my spouse
that charming vivacity which so well suit his time of life.
Mr. Lovelace bow. the man be fond of praise. more fond of it, I
doubt, than of deserve it. yet this sort of praise he do deserve.
he have, you know, an easy free manner, and no bad voice: and this praise
so expand his gay heart, that he sing the follow line from
Congreve, as he tell we they be:
Youth do a thousand pleasure bring,
which from decrepid age will fly;
sweet that wanton in the bosom of the spring,
in winter's cold embrace die.
and this for a compliment, as he say, to the two niece. nor be it
throw away upon they. they encore it; and his compliance fix they
in my memory.
we have some talk about meal, and the widow very civilly offer to
conform to any rule I would set she. I tell she how easily I be
pleased, and how much I choose to dine by myself, and that from a plate
send I from any single dish. but I will not trouble you, my dear, with
such particular.
they think I very singular; and with reason: but as I like they not
so very well as to forego my own choice in compliment to they, I be the
less concerned for what they thought.--and still the less, as Mr. Lovelace
have put I very much out of humour with he.
they, however, caution I against melancholy. I say, I should be a
very unhappy creature if I could not bear my own company.
Mr. Lovelace say, that he must let the lady into my story, and then
they would know how to allow for my way. but, my dear, as you love I,
say the confident wretch, give as little way to melancholy as possible.
nothing but the sweetness of your temper, and your high notion of a duty
that never can be deserve where you place it, can make you so uneasy as
you are.--Be not angry, my dear love, for say so, [see I frown, I
suppose:] and snatch my hand and kiss it.--I leave he with they; and
retire to my closet and my pen.
just as I have write thus far, I be interrupt by a message from he,
that he be set out on a journey, and desire to take my commands.--so
here I will leave off, to give he a meeting in the dining-room.
I be not displeased to see he in his riding-dress.
he seem desirous to know how I like the gentlewoman below. I tell
he, that although I do not think they very exceptionable; yet as I
want not, in my present situation, new acquaintance, I should not be
fond of cultivate theirs.
he urge I still far on this head.
I could not say, I tell he, that I greatly like either of the young
gentlewoman, any more than their aunt: and that, be my situation ever
so happy, they have much too gay a turn for I.
he do not wonder, he say, to hear I say so. he know not any of the
sex, who have be accustom to show themselves at the town diversion
and amusement, that would appear tolerable to I. silence and blush,
Madam, be now no grace with our fine lady in town. harden by
frequent public appearance, they would be as much ashamed to be find
guilty of these weakness, as man.
do you defend these two gentlewoman, Sir, by reflection upon half the
sex? but you must second I, Mr. Lovelace, (and yet I be not fond of
be think particular,) in my desire of breakfast and sup (when
I do sup) by myself.
if I would have it so, to be sure it should be so. the people of the
house be not of consequence enough to be apologize to, in any point
where my pleasure be concern. and if I should dislike they still more
on further knowledge of they, he hop I would think of some other
lodging.
he express a good deal of regret at leave I, declare, that it be
absolutely in obedience to my command: but that he could not have
consent to go, while my brother's scheme be on foot, if I have not
do he the credit of my countenance in the report he have make that we
be marry; which, he say, have bind all the family to his interest,
so that he could leave I with the great security and satisfaction.
he hop, he say, that on his return I would name his happy day; and the
rather, as I might be convince, by my brother's project, that no
reconciliation be to be expect.
I tell he, that perhaps I might write one letter to my uncle Harlowe.
he once love I. I should be easy when I have make one direct
application. I might possibly propose such term, in relation to my
grandfather's estate, as might procure I their attention; and I hop he
would be long enough absent to give I time to write to he, and receive
an answer from he.
that, he must beg my pardon, he could not promise. he would inform
himself of Singleton's and my brother's motion; and if on his return he
find no reason for apprehension, he would go directly for Berks, and
endeavour to bring up with he his cousin Charlotte, who, he hop, would
induce I to give he an early day than at present I seem to think
of.--I seem to think of, my dear, very acquiescent, as I should
imagine!
I tell he, that I should take that young lady's company for a great
favour.
I be the more pleased with this motion, as it come from himself, and
with no ill grace.
he earnestly press I to accept of a bank note: but I decline it. and
then he offer I his servant William for my attendant in his absence;
who, he say, might be dispatch to he, if any thing extraordinary fall
out. I consent to that.
he take his leave of I in the most respectful manner, only kiss my
hand. he leave the bank note, unobserve by I, upon the table. you may
be sure, I shall give it he back at his return.
I be in a much well humour with he than I be.
where doubt of any person be remove, a mind not ungenerous be willing,
by way of amend for have conceive those doubt, to construe every
thing that happen, capable of a good instruction, in that person's
favour. particularly, I cannot but be pleased to observe, that although
he speak of the lady of his family with the freedom of relationship,
yet it be always of tenderness. and from a man's kindness to his
relation of the sex, a woman have some reason to expect his good
behaviour to herself, when marry, if she be willing to deserve it from
he.
and thus, my dear, be I bring to sit down satisfied with this man,
where I find room to infer that he be not by nature a savage. but how
could a creature who (treat herself unpolitely) give a man an
opportunity to run away with she, expect to be treat by that man with a
very high degree of politeness?
but why, now, when fairer prospect seem to open, why these melancholy
reflection? will my beloved friend ask of her Clarissa?
why? can you ask why, my dearest Miss Howe, of a creature, who, in the
world's eye, have enrol her name among the giddy and inconsiderate; who
labour under a parent's curse, and the cruel uncertainty, which must
arise from reflect, that, equally against duty and principle, she have
throw herself into the power of a man, and that man an immoral one?--
must not the sense she have of her inconsideration darken her most hopeful
prospect? must it not even rise strong upon a thoughtful mind, when
her hope be the fair? even her pleasure, be the man to prove
well than she expect, come to she with an abatement, like that which
person who be in possession of ill-get wealth must then most
poignantly experience (if they have reflect and unseared mind) when,
all their wish answer, (if answer,) they sit down in hope to enjoy
what they have unjustly obtain, and find their own reflection their
great torment.
may you, my dear friend, be always happy in your reflection, pray
your ever affectionate
CL. HARLOWE.
***
[Mr. Lovelace, in his next letter, triumph on his have carry his two
great point of make the Lady yield to pass for his wife to the
people of the house, and to his take up his lodging in it, though
but for one night. he be now, he say, in a fair way, and doubt not
but that he shall soon prevail, if not by persuasion, by surprise.
yet he pretend to have some little remorse, and censure himself as
to act the part of the grand tempter. but have succeed thus
far, he cannot, he say, forbear try, accord to the resolution
he have before make, whether he cannot go far.
he give the particular of their debate on the above-mention
subject, to the same effect as in the Lady's last letter.
it will by this time be see that his whole merit, with regard to the
Lady, lie in do justice to her excellency both of mind and
person, though to his own condemnation. thus he begin his succeed
letter:]
and now, Belford, will I give thee an account of our first breakfast-
conversation.
all sweetly serene and easy be the lovely brow and charming aspect of my
goddess, on her descend among we; command reverence from every eye,
a courtesy from every knee, and silence, awful silence, from every
quivering lip: while she, arm with conscious worthiness and
superiority, look and behave as an empress would look and behave among
her vassal; yet with a freedom from pride and haughtiness, as if bear to
dignity, and to a behaviour habitually gracious.
[he take notice of the jealousy, pride, and vanity of Sally Martin and
Polly Horton, on his respectful behaviour to the Lady: creature who,
bring up too high for their fortune, and to a taste of pleasure,
and the public diversion, have fall an easy prey to his seducing
art (as will be see in the conclusion of this work:) and who, as he
observe, 'have not yet get over that distinction in their love, which
make a woman prefer one man to another.']
how difficult be it, say he, to make a woman subscribe to a preference
against herself, though ever so visible; especially where love be
concern! this violent, this partial little devil, Sally, have the
insolence to compare herself with my angel--yet own she to be an angel.
I charge you, Mr. Lovelace, say she, show none of your extravagant act
of kindness before I to this sullen, this gloomy beauty--I cannot bear
it. then be I remind of her first sacrifice.
what a rout do these woman make about nothing at all! be it not for
what the learn Bishop, in his Letter from Italy, call the
entanglement of amour, and I the delicacy of intrigue, what be there,
Belford, in all they can do for we?
how do these creature endeavour to stimulate I! a fallen woman be a
bad devil than ever a profligate man. the former be incapable of
remorse: that be not I--nor ever shall they prevail upon I, though aid
by all the power of darkness, to treat this admirable creature with
indignity--so far, I mean, as indignity can be separate from the trial
which will prove she to be either woman or angel.
yet with they I be a craven. I might have have she before now, if I
would. if I would treat she as flesh and blood, I should find she such.
they think I know, if any man live do, that if a man make a goddess
of a woman, she would assume the goddess; that if power be give to
she, she would exert that power to the giver, if to nobody else. and
D----r's wife be throw into my dish, who, thou know, keep she
ceremonious husband at haughty distance, and whine in private to she
insult footman. o how I curse the blasphemous wretch! they will
make I, as I tell they, hate their house, and remove from it. and by my
soul, Jack, I be ready at time to think that I should not have bring
her hither, be it but on Sally's account. and yet, without know
either Sally's heart, or Polly's, the dear creature resolve against
have any conversation with they but such as she can avoid. I be not
sorry for this, thou mayest think; since jealousy in a woman be not to be
conceal from woman. and Sally have no command of herself.
what dost think!--here this little devil Sally, not be able, as she
tell I, to support life under my displeasure, be go into a fit: but
when I see she prepare for it, I go out of the room; and so she
think it would not be worth she while to show away.
[in this manner he mention what his meaning be in make the Lady the
compliment of his absence:]
as to leave she: if I go but for one night, I have fulfil my
promise: and if she think not, I can mutter and grumble, and yield again,
and make a merit of it; and then, unable to live out of her presence,
soon return. nor be woman ever angry at bottom for be disobey
through excess of love. they like an uncontroulable passion. they like
to have every favour ravish from they, and to be eat and drink quite
up by a voracious lover. donot I know the sex?--not so, indeed, as yet,
my Clarissa: but, however, with she my frequent egress will make I
look new to she, and create little busy scene between we. at the least,
I may surely, without exception, salute she at parting, and at return;
and will not those occasional freedom (which civility will warrant) by
degree familiarize my charmer to they?
but here, Jack, what shall I do with my uncle and aunt, and all my
loving cousin? for I understand that they be more in haste to have I
married than I be myself.
LETTER IV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
FRIDAY, APRIL 28.
Mr. Lovelace be return already. my brother's project be his
pretence. I could not but look upon this short absence as an evasion of
his promise; especially as he have take such precaution with the people
below; and as he know that I propose to keep close within-door. I
cannot bear to be deal meanly with; and angrily insist that he should
directly set out for Berkshire, in order to engage his cousin, as he have
promise.
o my dear life, say he, why will you banish I from your presence? I
cannot leave you for so long a time as you seem to expect I should. I
have be hover about town ever since I leave you. Edgware be the
farth place I go to, and there I be not able to stay two hour, for
fear, at this crisis, any thing should happen. who can account for the
working of an apprehensive mind, when all that be dear and valuable to
it be at stake? you may spare yourself the trouble of write to any of
your friend, till the solemnity have pass that shall entitle I to give
weight to your application. when they know we be married, your
brother's plot will be at an end; and your father and mother, and
uncle, must be reconcile to you. why then should you hesitate a moment
to confirm my happiness? why, once more, would you banish I from you?
why will you not give the man who have bring you into difficulty, and
who so honourably wish to extricate you from they, the happiness of
do so?
he be silent. my voice fail to second the inclination I have to say
something not wholly discourage to a point so warmly press.
Iwill tell you, my angel, resume he, what I propose to do, if you approve
of it. I will instantly go out to view some of the handsome new square
or fine street round they, and make a report to you of any suitable
house I find to be let. I will take such a one as you shall choose, and
set up an equipage befit our condition. you shall direct the whole.
and on some early day, either before, or after we fix, [it must be at
your own choice], be pleased to make I the happy of man. and then
will every thing be in a desirable train. you shall receive in your own
house (if it can be so soon furnish as I wish) the compliment of all
my relation. Charlotte shall visit you in the interim: and if it take
up time, you shall choose whom you will honour with your company, first,
second, or third, in the summer month; and on your return you shall find
all that be want in your new habitation supply, and pleasure in a
constant round shall attend we. o my angel, take I to you, instead of
banish I from you, and make I yourbe for ever.
you see, my dear, that here be no day press for. I be not uneasy
about that, and the soon recover myself, as there be not. but,
however, I give he no reason to upbraid I for refuse his offer of
go in search of a house.
he be accordingly go out for this purpose. but I find that he intend
to take up his lodging here tonight; and if to-night, no doubt on other
night, while he be in town. as the door and window of my apartment
have good fastening; as he have not, in all this time, give I cause for
apprehension; as he have the pretence of my brother's scheme to plead; as
the people below be very courteous and obliging, Miss Horton especially,
who seem to have take a great liking to I, and to be of a gentler
temper and manner than Miss Martin; and as we be now in a tolerable
way; I imagine it would look particular to they all, and bring I into a
debate with a man, who (let he be set upon what he will) have always a
great deal to say for himself, if I be to insist upon his promise: on
all these account, I think, I will take no notice of his lodge here,
if he don't.--let I know, my dear, your thought of every thing.
you may believe I give he back his bank note the moment I see he.
FRIDAY evening.
Mr. Lovelace have see two or three house, but none to his mind. but he
have hear of one which look promise, he say, and which he be to
inquire about in the morning.
SATURDAY MORNING.
he have make his inquiry, and actually see the house he be tell of
last night. the owner of it be a young widow lady, who be inconsolable
for the death of her husband; Fretchville her name. it be furnish
quite in taste, every thing be new within these six month. he
believe, if I like not the furniture, the use of it may be agree for,
with the house, for a time certain: but, if I like it, he will endeavour
to take the one, and purchase the other, directly.
the lady see nobody; nor be the good apartment above-stair to be
view, till she be either absent, or go into the country; which she
talk of do in a fortnight, or three week, at farth, and to live
there retire.
what Mr. Lovelace see of the house (which be the saloon and two
parlour) be perfectly elegant; and he be assure all be of a piece.
the office be also very convenient; coach-house and stable at hand.
he shall be very impatient, he say, till I see the whole; nor will he,
if he find he can have it, look far till I have see it, except any
thing else offer to my liking. the price he value not.
he now do nothing but talk of the ceremony, but not indeed of the day.
I donot want he to urge that--but I wonder he do not.
he have just now receive a letter from Lady Betty Lawrance, by a
particular hand; the content principally relate to an affair she have
in chancery. but in the postscript she be pleased to say very respectful
thing of I.
they be all impatient, she say, for the happy day be over; which
they flatter themselves will ensure his reformation.
he hop, he tell I, that I would soon enable he to answer their wish
and his own.
but, my dear, although the opportunity be so inviting, he urge not for
the day. which be the more extraordinary, as he be so press for
marriage before we come to town.
he be very earnest with I to give he, and four of his friend, my
company on Monday evening, at a little collation. Miss Martin and Miss
Horton cannot, he say, be there, be engage in a party of their own,
with two daughter of Colonel Solcombe, and two niece of Sir Anthony
Holmes, upon an annual occasion. but Mrs. Sinclair will be present, and
she give he hope of the company of a young lady of very great fortune
and merit (Miss Partington), an heiress to whom Colonel Sinclair, it
seem, in his lifetime be guardian, and who therefore call Mrs.
Sinclair Mamma.
I desire to be excuse. he have lay I, I say, under a most
disagreeable necessity of appear as a married person, and I would see
as few people as possible who be to think I so.
he would not urge it, he say, if I be much averse: but they be his
select friend; man of birth and fortune, who long to see I. it be
true, he add, that they, as well as his friend Doleman, believe we
be marry: but they think he under the restriction that he have
mention to the people below. I might be assure, he tell I, that his
politeness before they should be carry into the high degree of
reverence.
when he be set upon any thing, there be no knowing, as I have say
heretofore, what one can do.* but I will not, if I can help it, be make
a show of; especially to man of whose character and principle I have no
good opinion. I be, my dear friend,
your ever affectionate
CL. HARLOWE.
* see Letter I. of this volume. see also Vol. II. Letter XX.
***
[Mr. Lovelace, in his next letter, give an account of his quick return:
of his reason to the Lady for it: of her displeasure upon it: and of
she urge his absence from the safety she be in from the situation
of the house, except she be to be trace out by his visit.]
I be confoundedly puzzle, say he, on this occasion, and on she
insist upon the execution of a too-ready offer which I make she go
down to Berks, to bring up my cousin Charlotte to visit and attend she.
I make miserable excuse; and fear that they would be mortally
resent, as her passion begin to rise upon my saying Charlotte be
delicate, which she take strangely wrong, I be oblige to screen myself
behind the most solemn and explicit declaration.
[he then repeat those declaration, to the same effect with the account
she give of they.]
I begin, say he, with an intention to keep my life of honour in view, in
the declaration I make she; but, as it have be say of a certain orator
in the House of Commons, who more than once, in a long speech, convince
himself as he go along, and conclude against the side he set out
intend to favour, so I in earnest press without reserve for
matrimony in the progress of my harangue, which state I little think of
urge upon she with so much strength and explicitness.
[he then value himself upon the delay that his proposal of take and
furnish a house must occasion.
he waver in his resolution whether to act honourable or not by a merit
so exalted.
he value himself upon his own delicacy, in express his indignation
against her friend, for suppose what he pretend his heart rise
against they for presume to suppose.]
but have I not reason, say he, to be angry with she for not praise I
for this my delicacy, when she be so ready to call I to account for the
least failure in punctilio?--however, I believe I can excuse she too,
upon this generous consideration, [for generous I be sure it be, because
it be against myself,] that her mind be the essence of delicacy, the
least want of it shock she; while the meeting with what be so very
extraordinary to I, be too familiar to she to obtain her notice, as an
extraordinary.
[he glory in the story of the house, and of the young widow possessor
of it, Mrs. Fretchville he call she; and leave it doubtful to Mr.
Belford, whether it be a real or a fictitious story.
he mention his different proposal in relation to the ceremony, which he
so earnestly press for; and own his artful intention in avoid to
name the day.]
and now, say he, I hope soon to have an opportunity to begin my
operation; since all be halcyon and security.
it be impossible to describe the dear creature's sweet and silent
confusion, when I touch upon the matrimonial topic.
she may doubt. she may fear. the wise in all important case will
doubt, and will fear, till they be sure. but her apparent willingness
to think well of a spirit so inventive, and so machinating, be a happy
prognostic for I. o these reasoning ladies!--how I love these reasoning
ladies!--'ti all over with they, when once love have creep into their
heart: for then will they employ all their reasoning power to excuse
rather than to blame the conduct of the doubted lover, let appearance
against he be ever so strong.
Mowbray, Belton, and Tourville, long to see my angel, and will be there.
she have refuse I; but must be present notwithstanding. so generous a
spirit as mine be cannot enjoy its happiness without communication. if I
raise not your envy and admiration both at once, but half-joy will be the
joy of have such a charming fly entangle in my web. she therefore
must comply. and thou must come. and then will show thee the pride and
glory of the Harlowe family, my implacable enemy; and thou shalt join
with I in my triumph over they all.
I know not what may still be the perverse beauty's fate: I want thee,
therefore, to see and admire she, while she be serene and full of hope:
before her apprehension be realize, if realize they be to be; and if
evil apprehension of I she really have; before her beamy eye have lose
their lustre; while yet her charming face be surround with all its
virgin glory; and before the plough of disappointment have throw up
furrow of distress upon every lovely feature.
if I can procure you this honour you will be ready to laugh out, as I
have often much ado to forbear, at the puritanical behaviour of the
mother before this lady. not an oath, not a curse, nor the least free
word, escape her lip. she mince in her gait. she prim up her
horse-mouth. her voice, which, when she please, be the voice of
thunder, be sink into an humble whine. her stiff ham, that have not
be bent to a civility for ten year past, be now limber into
courtesy three deep at ever word. her fat arm be cross before
she; and she can hardly be prevail upon to sit in the presence of my
goddess.
I be draw up instruction for ye all to observe on Monday night.
SATURDAY NIGHT.
most confoundedly alarmed!--Lord, Sir, what do you think? cry Dorcas
--My lady be resolve to go to church to-morrow! I be at quadrille with
the woman below.--To church! say I, and down I lay my card. to
church! repeat they, each look upon the other. we have do playing
for that night.
who could have dream of such a whim as this?--without notice, without
question! her clothe not come! no leave asked!--impossible she should
think of be my wife!--besides, she donot consider, if she go to
church, I must go too!--yet not to ask for my company! her brother and
Singleton ready to snap she up, as far as she knows!--Known by her
clothe--her person, her feature, so distinguished!--not such another
woman in england!--to church of all place! be the devil in the girl?
say I, as soon as I could speak.
well, but to leave this subject till to-morrow morning, I will now give
you the instruction I have draw up for your' and your companion'
behaviour on Monday night.
***
instruction to be observe by John Belford, Richard Mowbray, Thomas
Belton, and James Tourville, Esquires of the Body to General Robert
Lovelace, on their admission to the presence of his Goddess.
Ye must be sure to let it sink deep into your heavy head, that there be
no such lady in the world as Miss Clarissa Harlowe; and that she be
neither more nor less than Mrs. Lovelace, though at present, to my shame
be it speak, a virgin.
be mindful also, that your old mother's name, after that of her mother
when a maid, be sinclair: that her husband be a lieutenant-colonel, and
all that you, Belford, know from honest Doleman's letter of she,* that
let your brother know.
* see Letter XXXVIII. Vol. III.
Mowbray and Tourville, the two great blunderer of the four, I allow
to be acquaint with the widow and niece, from the knowledge they have
of the colonel. they will not forbear familiarity of speech to the
mother, as of long acquaintance than a day. so I have suit their
part to their capacity.
they may praise the widow and the colonel for people of great honour--but
not too grossly; nor to labour the point so as to render themselves
suspect.
the mother will lead ye into her own and the colonel's praise! and
Tourville and Mowbray may be both her voucher--I, and you, and Belton,
must be only hearsay confirmer.
as poverty be generally suspectible, the widow must be get handsomely
aforehand; and no doubt but she be. the elegance of her house and
furniture, and her readiness to discharge all demand upon she, which
she do with ostentation enough, and which make her neighbour, I
suppose, like she the well, demonstrate this. she will propose to do
handsome thing by her two niece. Sally be near marriage--with an
eminent woollen-draper in the Strand, if ye have a mind to it; for there
be five or six of they there.
the niece may be inquire after, since they will be absent, as person
respect by Mowbray and Tourville, for their late worthy uncle's sake.
watch ye diligently every turn of my countenance, every motion of my eye;
for in my eye, and in my countenance will ye find a sovereign regulator.
I need not bid you respect I mightily: your allegiance oblige you to
that: and who that see I, respect I not?
Priscilla Partington (for her look so innocent, and discretion so deep,
yet seem so softly) may be greatly rely upon. she will accompany
the mother, gorgeously dress, with all her Jew's extravagance flame
out upon she; and first induce, then countenance, the lady. she have she
cue, and I hope will make her acquaintance covet by my charmer.
Miss Partington's history be this: the daughter of Colonel Sinclair's
brother-in-law: that brother-in-law may have be a Turkey-merchant, or
any merchant, who die confoundedly rich: the colonel one of her
guardian [collateral credit in that to the old one:] whence she always
call Mrs. Sinclair Mamma, though not succeed to the trust.
she be just come to pass a day or two, and then to return to she
survive guardian's at Barnet.
Miss Partington have suitor a little hundred (her grandmother, an
alderman's dowager, have leave she a great additional fortune,) and be
not trust out of her guardian's house without an old governante, note
for discretion, except to her Mamma Sinclair, with whom now-and-then she
be permit to be for a week together.
Pris. will Mamma-up Mrs. Sinclair, and will undertake to court her
guardian to let she pass a delightful week with she--Sir Edward Holden he
may as well be, if your shallow pate will not be clog with too many
circumstantial. Lady Holden, perhaps, will come with she; for she
always delighted in her Mamma Sinclair's company, and talk of she, and
her good management, twenty time a day.
be it principally thy part, Jack, who art a parade fellow, and aim
at wisdom, to keep thy brother-varlet from blunder; for, as thou must
have observe from what I have write, we have the most watchful and
most penetrate lady in the world to deal with; a lady worth deceive!
but whose eye will piece to the bottom of your shallow soul the moment
she hear you open. do you therefore place thyself between Mowbray and
Tourville: their toe to be play upon and command by thine, if they
go wrong: thy elbow to be the minister of approbation.
as to your general behaviour; no hypocrisy!--I hate it: so do my
charmer. if I have study for it, I believe I could have be an
hypocrite: but my general character be so well know, that I should have
be suspect at once, have I aim at make myself too white. but what
necessity can there be for hypocrisy, unless the generality of the sex
be to refuse we for our immorality? the good of they love to have
the credit for reform we. let the sweet soul try for it: if they
fail, their intent be good. that will be a consolation to they. and as
to we, our work will be the easy; our sin the few: since they will
draw themselves in with a very little of our help; and we shall save a
parcel of cursed falsehood, and appear to be what we be both to angel
and men.--mean time their very grandmother will acquit we, and reproach
they with their self-do, self-have, and as have err against
knowledge, and venture against manifest appearance. what folly,
therefore, for man of our character to be hypocrite!
be sure to instruct the rest, and do thou thyself remember, not to talk
obscenely. you know I never permit any of you to talk obscenely.
Time enough for that, when ye grow old, and can only talk. besides, ye
must consider Prisc.'s affected character, my goddess's real one. far
from obscenity, therefore, do not so much as touch upon the double
entendre. what! as I have often say, cannot you touch a lady's heart
without wound her ear?
it be necessary that ye should appear bad man than myself. you cannot
help appear so, youwill say. well, then, there will be the less
restraint upon you--the less restraint, the less affectation.--and if
Belton begin his favourite subject in behalf of keep, it may make I
take upon myself to oppose he: but fear not; I shall not give the
argument all my force.
she must have some curiosity, I think, to see what sort of man my
companion be: she will not expect any of you to be saint. be you
not man bear to considerable fortune, although ye be not all of you
man of part? who be it in this mortal life that wealth do not
mislead? and as it give people the power of be mischievous, do it
not require great virtue to forbear the use of that power? be not the
devil say to be the god of this world? be we not child of this
world? well, then! let I tell thee my opinion--it be this, that be it
not for the poor and the middling, the world would probably, long ago,
have be destroy by fire from Heaven. ungrateful wretche the rest,
thou wilt be apt to say, to make such sorry return, as they generally do
make, to the poor and the middling!
this dear lady be prodigiously learn in theory. but as to practice,
as to experimental, must be, as you know from her tender year, a mere
novice. till she know I, I dare say, she do not believe, whatever she
have read, that there be such fellow in the world, as she will see in
you four. I shall have much pleasure in observe how shewill stare at
her company, when she find I the polite man of the five.
and so much for instruction general and particular for your behaviour on
Monday night.
and let I add, that you must attend to every minute circumstance, whether
you think there be reason for it, or not. deep, like golden ore,
frequently lie my meaning, and richly worth dig for. the hint of
least moment, as you may imagine it, be often pregnant with event of the
great. be implicit. be I not your general? do I ever lead you on
that I bring you not off with safety and success?--sometime to your own
stupid astonishment.
and now, methink, thou art curious to know, what can be my view in
risque the displeasure of my fair-one, and alarm her fear, after
four or five halcyon day have go over our head? Iwill satisfy thee.
the visiter of the two niece will crowd the house.--Beds will be
scarce:--miss Partington, a sweet, modest, genteel girl, will be
prodigiously take with my charmer;--will want to begin a friendship with
she--a share in her bed, for one night only, will be request. who
know, but on that very Monday night I may be so unhappy as to give
mortal offence to my beloved? the shy bird may be catch nap.
should she attempt to fly I upon it, cannot I detain she? should she
actually fly, cannot I bring she back, by authority civil or uncivil, if
I have evidence upon evidence that she acknowledge, though but tacitly,
her marriage? and should I, or should I not succeed, and she forgive I,
or if she but descend to expostulate, or if she bear I in her sight,
then will she be all my own. all delicacy be my charmer. I long to see
how such a delicacy, on any of these occasion, will behave, and in my
situation it behove I to provide against every accident.
I must take care, know what an eel I have to do with, that the little
riggle rogue do not slip through my finger. how silly should I
look, star after she, when she have shoot from I into the muddy river,
her family, from which with so much difficulty I have take she!
well then, here be--let I see--how many person be there who, after
Monday night, will be able to swear that she have go by my name,
answer to my name, have no other view in leave her friend but to go
by my name? her own relation neither able nor willing to deny it.--
first, here be my servant, her servant, Dorcas, Mrs. Sinclair, Mrs.
Sinclair's two niece, and Miss Partington.
but for fear these evidence should be suspect, here come the jet of
the business--'no less than four worthy gentleman of fortune and family,
who be all in company such a night particularly, at a collation to
which they be invite by Robert Lovelace, of Sandoun-hall, in the
county of Lancaster, esquire, in company with Magdalen Sinclair, widow,
and Priscilla Partington, spinster, and the lady complainant, when the
say Robert Lovelace address himself to the say lady, on a multitude
of occasion, as his wife; as they and other do, as Mrs. Lovelace;
every one compliment and congratulate she upon her nuptial; and
that she receive such their compliment and congratulation with no
other visible displeasure or repugnance, than such as a young bride, full
of blush and pretty confusion, might be suppose to express upon such
contemplative revolving as those compliment would naturally inspire.'
nor do thou rave at I, Jack, nor rebel. dost think I bring the dear
creature hither for nothing?
and herebe a faint sketch of my plot.--stand by, varlet--tanta-ra-ra-ra!
--Veil your bonnet, and confess your master!
LETTER V
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY.
have be at church, Jack--behave admirably well too! my charmer be
pleased with I now: for I be exceedingly attentive to the discourse,
and very ready in the auditor's part of the service.--eyes do not much
wander. how could they, when the lovely object, infinitely the
lovely in the whole church, be in my view!
dear creature! how fervent, how amiable, in her devotion! I have get
she to own that she pray for I. I hope a prayer from so excellent a
mind will not be make in vain.
there be, after all, something beautifully solemn in devotion. the
Sabbath be a charming institution to keep the heart right, when it be
right. one day in seven, how reasonable!--i think Iwill go to church once
a day often. I fancy it will go a great way towards make I a reform
man. to see multitude of well-appear people all join in one
reverend act. an exercise how worthy of a rational being! yet it add a
sting or two to my former sting, when I think of my project with regard
to this charming creature. in my conscience, I believe, if I be to go
constantly to church, I could not pursue they.
I have a scheme come into my head while there; but I will renounce it,
because it obtrude itself upon I in so good a place. excellent
creature! how many ruin have she prevent by attach I to herself
--by engross my whole attention.
but let I tell thee what pass between we in my first visit of this
morning; and then I will acquaint thee more largely with my good
behaviour at church.
I could not be admit till after eight. I find she ready prepare to
go out. I pretend to be ignorant of her intention, have charge
Dorcas not to own that she have tell I of it.
go abroad, Madam?--with an air of indifference.
yes, Sir: I intend to go to church.
I hope, Madam, I shall have the honour to attend you.
no: she design to take a chair, and go to the next church.
this startle me:--a chair to carry she to the next church from Mrs.
Sinclair's, her right name not Sinclair, and to bring she back hither
in the face of people who might not think well of the house!--There be
no permitting that. yet I be to appear indifferent. but say, I should
take it for a favour, if she would permit I to attend she in a coach, as
there be time for it, to St. Paul's.
she make objection to the gaiety of my dress; and tell I, that if she
go to St. Paul's, she could go in a coach without I.
I object Singleton and her brother, and offer to dress in the
plainest suit I have.
I beg the favour of attend you, dear Madam, say I. I have not be
at church a great while; we shall sit in different stall, and the next
time I go, I hope it will be to give myself a title to the great
blessing I can receive.
she make some further objection: but at last permit I the honour of
attend she.
I get myself place in her eye, that the time might not seem tedious to
I, for we be there early. and I gain her good opinion, as I
mention above, by my behaviour.
the subject of the discourse be particular enough: it be about a
prophet's story or parable of an ewe-lamb take by a rich man from a poor
one, who dearly love it, and whose only comfort it be: design to
strike remorse into David, on his adultery with Uriah's wife Bathsheba,
and his murder of the husband. these woman, Jack, have be the occasion
of all manner of mischief from the beginning! now, when David, full of
indignation, swear [King David would swear, Jack: but how shouldst thou
know who King David was?--the story be in the Bible,] that the rich man
should surely die; Nathan, which be the prophet's name, and a good
ingenious fellow, cry out, (which be the word of the text,) thou art
the man! by my soul I think the parson look directly at I; and at
that moment I cast my eye full on my ewe-lamb.--But I must tell thee too,
that, that I think a good deal of my rosebud.--a well man than King
David, in that point, however, think I!
when we come home we talk upon the subject; and I show my charmer my
attention to the discourse, by let she know where the Doctor make the
most of his subject, and where it might have be touch to great
advantage: for it be really a very affect story, and have as pretty a
contrivance in it as ever I read. and this I do in such a grave way,
that she seem more and more pleased with I; and I have no doubt, that
I shall get she to favour I to-morrow night with her company at my
collation.
SUNDAY EVENING.
we all din together in Mrs. Sinclair's parlour:--all excessively right!
the two niece have top their part--Mrs. Sinclair she's. never be
so easy as now!--'she really think a little oddly of these people at
first, she say! Mrs. Sinclair seem very forbidding! her niece be
person with whom she could not wish to be acquaint. but really we
should not be too hasty in our censure. some people improve upon we.
the widow seem tolerable.' she go no far than tolerable.--'miss
Martin and Miss Horton be young people of good sense, and have read a
great deal. what Miss Martin particularly say of marriage, and of her
humble servant, be very solid. she believe with such notion she
cannot make a bad wife.' I have say Sally's humble servant be a woolen-
draper of great reputation; and she be soon to be marry.
I have be let she into thy character, and into the character of my
other three esquire, in hope to excite her curiosity to see you
to-morrow night. I have tell she some of the bad, as well as good
part of your character, in order to exalt myself, and to obviate any
sudden surprize, as well as to teach she what sort of man she may expect
to see, if she will oblige I with her company.
by her after-observation upon each of you, I shall judge what I may or
may not do to obtain or keep her good opinion; what she will like, or
what not; and so pursue the one or avoid the other, as I see proper. so,
while she be penetrate into your shallow head, I shall enter she
heart, and know what to bid my own to hope for.
the house be to be take in three weeks.--all will be over in three
week, or bad will be my luck!--who know but in three days?--have I not
carry that great point of make her pass for my wife to the people
below? and that other great one, of fix myself here night and day?
--what woman ever escape I, who lodge under one roof with me?--The
house too, the house; the people--people after my own heart; her
servant, Will. and Dorcas, both my servants.--three day, do I say!
Pho! Pho! Pho!--three hour!
***
I have carry my third point: but so extremely to the dislike of my
charmer, that I have be threaten, for suffer Miss Partington to be
introduce to she without her leave. which lay she under a necessity to
deny or comply with the urgent request of so fine a young lady; who have
engage to honour I at my collation, on condition that my beloved would
be present at it.
to be oblige to appear before my friend as what she be not! she be
for insist, that I should acquaint the woman here with the truth of
the matter; and not go on propagate story for she to countenance,
make she a sharer in my guilt.
but what point will not perseverance carry? especially when it be
cover over with the face of yield now, and, Parthian-like, return
to the charge anon. do not the sex carry all their point with their man
by the same method? have I converse with they so freely as I have
do, and learn nothing of they? didst thou ever know that a woman's
denial of any favour, whether the least or the great, that my heart
be set upon, stand she in any stead? the more perverse she, the more
steady I--that be my rule.
but the point thus so much against she will carry, I doubt thou will
see in her more of a sullen than of an oblige charmer: for, when Miss
Partington be withdraw, 'what be Miss Partington to she? in her
situation she want no new acquaintance. and what be my four friend
to she in her present circumstance? she would assure I, if ever again'
--and there she stop, with a twirl of her hand.
when we meet, I will, in her presence, tip thee a wink, show thee the
motion, for it be a very pretty one. quite new. yet have I see an
hundred pretty passionate twirl too, in my time, from other fair-one.
how universally engaging be it to put a woman of sense, to whom a man be
not marry, in a passion, let the reception give to every rant
scene in our play testify. take care, my charmer, now thou art come to
delight I with thy angry twirl, that thou tempt I not to provoke a
variety of they from one, whose every motion, whose every air, carry in
it so much sense and soul.
but, angry or please, this charming creature must be all loveliness.
her feature be all harmony, and make for one another. no other feature
could be substitute in the place of any one of she's but most abate of
her perfection: and think you that I do not long to have your opinion of
my fair prize?
if you love to see feature that glow, though the heart be frozen, and
never yet be thaw; if you love fine sense, and adage flow through
tooth of ivory and lip of coral; an eye that penetrate all thing; a
voice that be harmony itself; an air of grandeur, mingle with a
sweetness that cannot be describe; a politeness that, if ever equal,
be never excel--you'll see all these excellency, and ten time
more, in this my GLORIANA.
mark her majestic fabric!--She's a temple,
sacred by birth, and build by hand divine;
her soul the deity that lodge there:
nor be the pile unworthy of the god.
or, to describe she in a soft style with Rowe,
the bloom of op'ning flow'rs, unsully'd beauty,
Softness, and sweetest innocence she wear,
and look like nature in the world's first spring.
Adieu, varlet four!--At six, on Monday evening, I expect ye all.
LETTER VI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SUNDAY, APRIL 30.
[Mr. Lovelace, in his last letter, have take notice of the most
material passage contain in this letter, the following extract
from it be only insert.
she give pretty near the same account that he do of what pass
between they on her resolution to go to church; and of his proposal
of St. Paul's, and desire of attend her.--She praise his good
behaviour there; as also the discourse, and the preacher.--Is please
with its seasonableness.--gives particular of the conversation
between they afterwards, and commend the good observation he make
upon the sermon.]
I be willing, say she, to have hope of he: but be so unable to know
how to depend upon his seriousness for an hour together, that all my
favourable account of he in this respect must be take with allowance.
be very much pressed, I could not tell how to refuse din with the
widow and her niece this day. I be well pleased with they than I ever
think I should be. I cannot help blame myself for my readiness to
give severe censure where reputation be concern. People's way,
humour, constitution, education, and opportunity allow for, my
dear, many person, as far as I know, may appear blameless, whom other,
of different humour and education, be too apt to blame; and who, from
the same fault, may be as ready to blame they. I will therefore make it
a rule to myself for the future--never to judge peremptorily on first
appearance: but yet I must observe that these be not people I should
choose to be intimate with, or whose way I can like: although, for the
station they be in, they may go through the world with tolerable
credit.
Mr. Lovelace's behaviour have be such as make I call this, so far as
it be pass, an agreeable day. yet, when easy as to he, my
situation with my friend take place in my thought, and cause I many
a tear.
I be the more pleased with the people of the house, because of the
person of rank they be acquaint with, and who visit they.
SUNDAY EVENING.
I be still well pleased with Mr. Lovelace's behaviour. we have have a
good deal of serious discourse together. the man have really just and
good notion. he confess how much he be pleased with this day, and
hope for many such. nevertheless, he ingenuously warn I, that his
unlucky vivacity might return: but, he doubt not, that he should be
fix at last by my example and conversation.
he have give I an entertaining account of the four gentleman he be to
meet to-morrow night.--entertaining, I mean for his humourous description
of their person, manner, &c. but such a description as be far from
be to their praise. yet he seem rather to design to divert my
melancholy by it than to degrade they. I think at bottom, my dear, that
he must be a good-natured man; but that he be spoil young, for want
of check or controul.
I cannot but call this, my circumstance consider, an happy day to the
end of it. indeed, my dear, I think I could prefer he to all the man I
ever know, be he but to be always what he have be this day. you see
how ready I be to own all you have charge I with, when I find myself
out. it be a difficult thing, I believe, sometimes, for a young creature
that be able to deliberate with herself, to know when she love, or when
she hat: but I be resolve, as much as possible, to be determine both
in my hatred and love by action, as they make the man worthy or unworthy.
[she date again Monday, and declare herself highly displeased at Miss
Partington's be introduce to she: and still more for be oblige
to promise to be present at Mr. Lovelace's collation. she foresee,
she say, a murder'd evening.]
LETTER VII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
MONDAY NIGHT, MAY 1.
I have just escape from a very disagreeable company I be oblige, so
much against my will, to be in. as a very particular relation of this
evening's conversation would be painful to I, you must content yourself
with what you shall be able to collect from the outline, as I may call
they, of the character of the person; assist by the little history
Mr. Lovelace give I of each yesterday.
the name of the gentleman be Belton, Mowbray, Tourville, and Belford.
these four, with Mrs. Sinclair, Miss Partington, the great heiress
mention in my last, Mr. Lovelace, and myself, make up the company.
I give you before the favourable side of Miss Partington's character,
such as it be give to I by Mrs. Sinclair, and her niece. I will now
add a few word from my own observation upon her behaviour in this
company.
in well company perhaps she would have appear to less disadvantage:
but, notwithstanding her innocent look, which Mr. Lovelace also highly
praise, he be the last person whose judgment I would take upon real
modesty. for I observe, that, upon some talk from the gentleman, not
free enough to be easily censure, yet too indecent in its implication to
come from well-breed person, in the company of virtuous prople [sic],
this young lady be very ready to apprehend; and yet, by smile and
simpering, to encourage, rather than discourage, the culpable freedom
of person, who, in what they go out of their way to say, must either
be guilty of absurdity, mean nothing, or mean something of
rudeness.*
* Mr. Belford, in Letter XIII. of Vol. V. remind Mr. Lovelace of some
particular topic which pass in their conversation, extremely to the
Lady's honour.
but, indeed, I have see no woman, of whom I have a well opinion than I
can say of Mrs. Sinclair, who have allow gentleman, and themselves too,
in great liberty of this sort than I have think consistent with that
purity of manner which ought to be the distinguish characteristic of
our sex: for what be word, but the body and dress of thought? and be
not the mind of a person strongly indicate by outward dress?
but to the gentleman--as they must be call in right of their ancestor,
it seem; for no other do they appear to have:--
Mr. BELTON have have university education, and be design for the gown;
but that not suit with the gaiety of his temper, and an uncle die,
who devise to he a good estate, he quit the college, come up to
town, and commence fine gentleman. he be say to be a man of sense.--
Mr. Belton dress gaily, but not quite foppishly; drink hard; keep all
hour, and glory in do so; game, and have be hurt by that
pernicious diversion: he be about thirty year of age: his face be a
fiery red, somewhat bloated and pimply; and his irregularity threaten a
brief duration to the sensual dream he be in: for he have a short
consumption cough, which seem to denote bad lung; yet make himself and
his friend merry by his stupid and inconsiderate jest upon very
threaten symptom which ought to make he more serious.
Mr. MOWBRAY have be a great traveller; speak as many language as Mr.
Lovelace himself, but not so fluently: be of a good family: seem to be
about thirty-three or thirty-four: tall and comely in his person: bold
and dare in his look: be a large-boned, strong man: have a great scar in
his forehead, with a dent, as if his skull have be beat in there, and
a seam scar in his right cheek: he likewise dress very gaily: have his
servant always about he, whom he be continually call upon, and
send on the most trifling message--half a dozen instance of which we
have in the little time I be among they; while they seem to watch the
turn of his fierce eye, to be ready to run, before they have half his
message, and serve he with fear and trembling. yet to his equal the
man seem tolerable: he talk not amiss upon public entertainment and
diversion, especially upon those abroad: yet have a romancing air, and
aver thing strongly which seem quite improbable. indeed he doubt
nothing but what he ought to believe; for he jest upon sacred thing;
and professe to hate the clergy of all religion. he have high notion
of honour, a world hardly ever out of his mouth; but seem to have no
great regard to moral.
Mr. TOURVILLE occasionally tell his age; just turn of thirty-one. he
be also of an ancient family; but, in his person and manner, more of what
I call the coxcomb than any of his companion. he dress richly;
would be think elegant in the choice and fashion of what he wear; yet,
after all, appear rather tawdry than fine.--one see by the care he
take of his outside, and the notice he bespeak from every one by his
own notice of himself, that the inside take up the least of his
attention. he dance finely, Mr. Lovelace say; be a master of music,
and singing be one of his principal excellency. they prevail upon
he to sing, and he oblige they both in italian and French; and, to do
him justice, his song in both be decent. they be all highly
delighted with his performance; but his great admirer be, Mrs.
Sinclair, Miss Partington, and himself. to I he appear to have a
great deal of affectation.
Mr. Tourville's conversation and address be insufferably full of those
really gross affront upon the understanding of our sex, which the
modern call compliment, and be intend to pass for so many instance
of good breeding, though the most hyperbolical, unnatural stuff that can
be conceive, and which can only serve to show the insincerity of the
complimenter, and the ridiculous light in which the complimented appear
in his eye, if he suppose a woman capable of relish the romantic
absurdity of his speech.
he affect to introduce into his common talk italian and french word;
and often answer an english question in French, which language he greatly
prefer to the barbarously hiss English. but then he never fail to
translate into this his odious native tongue the word and the sentence
he speak in the other two--lest, perhaps, it should be question
whether he understand what he say.
he love to tell story: always call they merry, facetious, good, or
excellent, before he begin, in order to bespeak the attention of the
hearer, but never give himself concern in the progress or conclusion of
they, to make good what he promise in his preface. indeed he seldom
bring any of they to a conclusion; for if his company have patience to
hear he out, he break in upon himself by so many parenthetical
intrusion, as one may call they, and have so many incident spring in
upon he, that he frequently drop his own thread, and sometimes sit
down satisfied half way; or, if at other time he would resume it, he
apply to his company to help he in again, with a Devil fetch he if he
remember what he be drive at--but enough, and too much of Mr.
Tourville.
Mr. BELFORD be the fourth gentleman, and one of whom Mr. Lovelace seem
more fond than any of the rest; for he be a man of try bravery, it
seem; and this pair of friend come acquaint upon occasion of a
quarrel, (possibly about a woman,) which bring on a challenge, and a
meeting at Kensington Gravel-pit; which end without unhappy
consequence, by the mediation of three gentleman stranger, just as each
have make a pass at the other.
Mr. Belford, it seem, be about seven or eight and twenty. he be the
young of the five, except Mr. Lovelace, and they be perhaps the
wicked; for they seem to lead the other three as they please. Mr.
Belford, as the other, dress gaily; but have not those advantage of
person, nor from his dress, which Mr. Lovelace be too proud of. he have,
however, the appearance and air of a gentleman. he be well read in
classical author, and in the good english poet and writer; and, by his
mean, the conversation take now and then a more agreeable turn. and I,
who endeavour to put the good face I could upon my situation, as I
pass for Mrs. Lovelace with they, make shift to join in it, at such
time, and receive abundance of compliment from all the company, on the
observation I make.*
* see Letter XIII. of Vol. V. above refer to.
Mr. Belford seem good-natured and obliging; and although very
complaisant, not so fulsomely so as Mr. Tourville; and have a polite and
easy manner of express his sentiment on all occasion. he seem to
delight in a logical way of argumentation, as also do Mr. Belton.
these two attack each other in this way; and both look at we woman,
as if to observe whether we do not admire this learning, or when they
have say a smart thing, their wit. but Mr. Belford have visibly the
advantage of the other, have quick part, and by take the bad
side of the argument, seem to think he have. upon the whole of his
behaviour and conversation, he put I in mind of that character of
milton:--
--------His tongue
Dropt manna, and could make the bad appear
the well reason, to perplex and dash
Maturest counsel; for his thought be low;
to vice industrious: but to nobler deed
tim'rous and slothful: yet he please the ear.
how little soever matter in general may be to our liking, we be apt,
when hope be strong enough to permit it, to endeavour to make the good we
can of the lot we have draw; and I could not but observe often, how much
Mr. Lovelace excel all his four friend in every thing they seem
desirous to excel in. but as to wit and vivacity, he have no equal there.
all the other give up to he, when his lip begin to open. the haughty
Mowbray would call upon the prating Tourville for silence, when Lovelace
be go to speak. and when he have speak, the word, Charming fellow!
with a free word of admiration or envy, fall from every mouth.
he have indeed so many advantage in his person and manner, that what
would be inexcusable in another, would, if one watch not over one's
self, and do not endeavour to distinguish what be the essence of right
and wrong, look become in he.
Mr. Belford, to my no small vexation and confusion, with the forwardness
of a favoured and intrusted friend, single I out, on Mr. Lovelace's
be send for down, to make I congratulatory compliment on my suppose
nuptial; which he do with a caution, not to insist too long on the
rigorous vow I have impose upon a man so universally admired--
'see he among twenty man,' say he, 'all of distinction, and nobody be
regard but Mr. Lovelace.'
it must, indeed, be confess, that there be, in his whole deportment, a
natural dignity, which render all insolent or imperative demeanour as
unnecessary as inexcusable. then that deceive sweetness which appear
in his smile, in his accent, in his whole aspect, and address, when he
think it worth his while to oblige, or endeavour to attract, how do
this show that he be bear innocent, as I may say; that he be not
naturally the cruel, the boisterous, the impetuous creature, which the
wicked company he may have fall into have make he! for he have,
besides, as open, and, I think, an honest countenance. donot you think
so, my dear? on all these specious appearance, have I found my hope
of see he a reform man.
but it be amazing to I, I own, that with so much of the gentleman, such
a general knowledge of book and man, such a skill in the learn as well
as modern language, he can take so much delight as he do in the
company of such person as I have describe, and in subject of frothy
impertinence, unworthy of his talent, and his natural and acquire
advantage. I can think but of one reason for it, and that must argue a
very low mind,--his vanity; which make he desirous of be consider
as the head of the people he consort with.--A man to love praise, yet to
be content to draw it from such contaminate spring!
one compliment pass from Mr. Belford to Mr. Lovelace, which hasten my
quit the shocking company--'you be a happy man, Mr. Lovelace,' say
he, upon some fine speech make he by Mrs. Sinclair, and assent to by
Miss partington:--'you have so much courage, and so much wit, that
neither man nor woman can stand before you.'
Mr. Belford look at I when he speak: yes, my dear, he smilingly look
at I; and he look upon his complimented friend; and all their
assenting, and therefore affront eye, both man's and woman's, be
turn upon your Clarissa; at least, my self-reproach heart make I
think so; for that would hardly permit my eye to look up.
oh! my dear, be but a woman, who give reason to the world to think she
to be in love with a man, [and this must be believe to be my case; or to
what can my suppose voluntary go off with Mr. Lovelace be impute?]
to reflect one moment on the exaltation she give he, and the disgrace
she bring upon herself,--the low pity, the silent contempt, the insolent
sneer and whisper, to which she make herself obnoxious from a
censuring world of both sexes,--how would she despise herself! and how
much more eligible would she think death itself than such a discover
debasement!
what I have thus in general touch upon, will account to you why I could
not more particularly relate what pass in this evening's conversation:
which, as may be gather from what I have write, abound with
approbatory accusation, and suppose witty retort.
LETTER viii
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
MONDAY MIDNIGHT.
I be very much vex and disturb at an odd incident. Mrs. Sinclair have
just now leave I; I believe in displeasure, on my decline to comply
with a request she make I: which be, to admit Miss Partington to a
share in my bed, her house be crowd by her niece's guest and by
their attendant, as well as by those of Miss Partington.
there might be nothing in it; and my denial carry a stiff and ill-
natured appearance. but instantly, upon she make the request, it come
into my thought, 'that I be in a manner a stranger to every body in the
house: not so much as a servant I could call my own, or of whom I have any
great opinion: that there be four man of free manner in the house,
avow supporter of Mr. Lovelace in matter of offence; himself a man of
enterprise; all, as far as I know, (and as I have reason to think by their
noisy mirth after I leave they,) drink deeply: that Miss Partington
herself be not so bashful a person as she be represent to I to be:
that officious pain be take to give I a good opinion of she: and
that Mrs. Sinclair make a great parade in preface the request, than
such a request need. to deny, think I, can carry only an appearance
of singularity to people who already think I singular. to consent may
possibly, if not probably, be attend with inconveniencie. the
consequence of the alternative so very disproportionate, I think it
more prudent to incur the censure, than to risque the inconvenience.'
I tell she that I be write a long letter: that I should choose to
write till I be sleepy, and that a companion would be a restraint upon
I, and I upon she.
she be loth, she say, that so delicate a young creature, and so great
a fortune as Miss Partington, should be put to lie with Dorcas in a
press-bed. she should be very sorry, if she have ask an improper thing.
she have never be so put to it before. and Miss would stay up with she
till I have do writing.
alarm at this urgency, and it be easy to persist in a denial
give, than to give it at first, I say, Miss Partington should be
welcome to my whole bed, and I would retire into the dining-room, and
there, lock myself in, write all the night.
the poor thing, she say, be afraid to lie alone. to be sure Miss
Partington would not put I to such an inconvenience.
she then withdrew,--but return--beg my pardon for return, but the
poor child, she say, be in tears.--Miss Partington have never see a
young lady she so much admire, and so much wish to imitate as I. the
dear girl hop that nothing have pass in her behaviour to give I
dislike to her.--should she bring she to I?
I be very busy, I say: the letter I be write be upon a very
important subject. I hop to see the young lady in the morning, when I
would apologize to she for my particularity. and then Mrs. Sinclair
hesitating, and move towards the door, (though she turn round to I
again,) I desire she, (light she,) to take care how she go down.
Pray, Madam, say she, on the stair-head, donot give yourself all this
trouble. God know my heart, I mean no affront: but, since you seem to
take my freedom amiss, I beg you will not acquaint Mr. Lovelace with it;
for he perhaps will think I bold and impertinent.
now, my dear, be not this a particular incident, either as I have make
it, or as it be design? I donot love to do an uncivil thing. and if
nothing be mean by the request, my refusal deserve to be call
uncivil. then I have show a suspicion of foul usage by it, which surely
dare not be mean. if just, I ought to apprehend every thing, and fly
the house and the man as I would an infection. if not just, and if I
cannot contrive to clear myself of have entertain suspicion, by
assign some other plausible reason for my denial, the very staying
here will have an appearance not at all reputable to myself.
I be now out of humour with him,--with myself,--with all the world, but
you. his companion be shocking creature. why, again I repeat, should
he have be desirous to bring I into such company? once more I like
he not.--Indeed I do not like he!
LETTER ix
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
TUESDAY, MAY 2.
with infinite regret I be oblige to tell you, that I can no long write
to you, or receive letter from you.--your mother have send I a letter
enclose in a cover to Mr. Lovelace, direct for he at Lord M.'s, (and
which be bring he just now,) reproach I on this subject in very
angry term, and forbid I, 'as I would not be think to intend to
make she and you unhappy, to write to you without her leave.'
this, therefore, be the last you must receive from I, till happy day.
and as my prospect be not very bad, I presume we shall soon have leave
to write again; and even to see each other: since an alliance with a
family so honourable as Mr. Lovelace's be will not be a disgrace.
she be pleased to write, 'that if I would wish to inflame you, I should
let you know her write prohibition: but if otherwise, find some way of
my own accord (without bring she into the question) to decline a
correspondence, which I must know she have for some time past forbid.'
but all I can say be, to beg of you not to be inflame: to beg of you not
to let she know, or even by your behaviour to she, on this occasion,
guess, that I have acquaint you with my reason for decline to write
to you. for how else, after the scruple I have heretofore make on this
very subject, yet proceed to correspond, can I honestly satisfy you
about my motif for this sudden stop? so, my dear, I choose, you see,
rather to rely upon your discretion, than to feign reason with which you
would not be satisfied, but with your usual active penetration, sift to
the bottom, and at last find I to be a mean and low qualifi; and that
with an implication injurious to you, that I suppose you have not
prudence enough to be trust with the naked truth.
I repeat, that my prospect be not bad. 'the house, I presume, will
soon be take. the people here be very respectful, notwithstanding my
nicety about Miss Partington. Miss Martin, who be near marriage with an
eminent tradesman in the Strand, just now, in a very respectful manner,
ask my opinion of some pattern of rich silk for the occasion. the
widow have a less forbidding appearance than at first. Mr. Lovelace, on
my declare dislike of his four friend, have assure I that neither they
nor any body else shall be introduce to I without my leave.'
these circumstance I mention (as you will suppose) that your kind heart
may be at ease about I; that you may be induce by they to acquiesce
with your mother's command, (cheerfully acquiesce,) and that for my
sake, lest I should be think an inflamer; who be, with very contrary
intention, my dearest and good beloved friend,
your ever oblige and affectionate,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER x
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
WEDN. may 3.
I be astonish that my mother should take such a step--purely to
exercise an unreasonable act of authority; and to oblige the most
remorseless heart in the world. if I find that I can be of use to you,
either by advice or information, do you think I will not give it!--were
it to any other person, much less dear to I than you be, do you think,
in such a case, I would forbear give it?
Mr. Hickman, who pretend to a little casuistry in such nice matter, be
of opinion that I ought not to decline such a correspondence thus
circumstance. and it be well he be; for my mother have set I up, I
must have somebody to quarrel with.
this I will come into if it will make you easy--I will forbear to write
to you for a few day, if nothing extraordinary happen, and till the
rigour of her prohibition be abate. but be assure that I will not
dispense with your writing to I. my heart, my conscience, my honour,
will not permit it.
but how will I help myself?--how!--easily enough. for I do assure you
that I want but very little farth provocation to fly privately to
London. and if I do, I will not leave you till I see you either
honourably marry, or absolutely quit of the wretch: and, in this last
case, I will take you down with I, in defiance of the whole world: or,
if you refuse to go with I, stay with you, and accompany you as your
shadow whithersoever you go.
donot be frighten at this declaration. there be but one consideration,
and but one hope, that withhold I, watch as I be in all my
retirement; oblige to read to she without a voice; to work in her
presence without finger; and to lie with she every night against my
will. the consideration be, lest you should apprehend that a step of
this nature would look like a doubling of your fault, in the eye of such
as think your go away a fault. the hope be, that thing will still
end happily, and that some people will have reason to take shame to
themselves for the sorry part they have act. nevertheless I be often
balance--but your resolve to give up the correspondence at this
crisis will turn the scale. Write, therefore, or take the consequence.
a few word upon the subject of your last letter. I know not whether
your brother's wise project be give up or not. a dead silence reign in
your family. your brother be absent three day; then at home one; and
be now absent: but whether with Singleton, or not, I cannot find out.
by your account of your wretch's companion, I see not but they be a set
of infernal, and he the Beelzebub. what could he mean, as you say, by
his earnestness to bring you into such company, and to give you such an
opportunity to make he and they reflect-glass to one another? the
manbe a fool, to be sure, my dear--a silly fellow, at least--the wretch
must put on their good before you, no doubt--lord of the creation!--
noble fellow these!--yet who know how many poor despicable soul of our
sex the bad of they have have to whine after he!
you have bring an inconvenience upon yourself, as you observe, by your
refusal of Miss Partington for your bedfellow. pity you have not admit
she! watchful as you be, what could have happen? if violence be
intend, he would not stay for the night. you might have sit up after
she, or not go to bed. Mrs. Sinclair press it too far. you be
over-scrupulous.
if any thing happen to delay your nuptial, I would advise you to remove:
but, if you marry, perhaps you may think it no great matter to stay where
you be till you take possession of your own estate. the knot once tie,
and with so resolute a man, it be my opinion your relation will soon
resign what they cannot legally hold: and, be even a litigation to
follow, you will not be able, nor ought you to be willing, to help it:
for your estate will then be his right; and it will be unjust to wish it
to be withhold from he.
one thing I would advise you to think of; and that be, of proper
settlement: it will be to the credit of your prudence and of his justice
(and the more as matter stand) that something of this should be do
before you marry. bad as he be, nobody account he a sordid man. and I
wonder he have be hitherto silent on that subject.
I be not displeased with his proposal about the widow lady's house. I
think it will do very well. but if it must be three week before you can
be certain about it, surely you need not put off his day for that space:
and he may bespeak his equipage. surprising to I, as well as to you,
that he could be so acquiescent!
I repeat--continue to write to I. I insist upon it; and that as
minutely as possible: or, take the consequence. I send this by a
particular hand. I be, and ever will be,
your most affectionate,
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY, MAY 4.
I forego every other engagement, I suspend ever wish, I banish every
other fear, to take up my pen, to beg of you that you will not think of
be guilty of such an act of love as I can never thank you for; but
must for ever regret. if I must continue to write to you, I must. I
know full well your impatience of control, when you have the least
imagination that your generosity or friendship be likely to be wonder
at.
my dearest, dearest creature, would you incur a maternal, as I have a
paternal, malediction? would not the world think there be an infection
in my fault, if it be to be follow by Miss Howe? there be some
point so flagrantly wrong that they will not bear to be argue upon.
this be one of they. I need not give reason against such a rashness.
Heaven forbid that it should be know that you have it but once in your
thought, be your motif ever so noble and generous, to follow so bad an
example, the rather, as that you would, in such a case, want the
extenuation that might be plead in my favour; and particularly that
one of be surprised into the unhappy step!
the restraint your mother lay you under would not have appear heavy to
you but on my account. would you have once think it a hardship to be
admit to a part of her bed?--How do I use to be delighted with such
a favour from my mother! how do I love to work in she presence!--so do
you in the presence of your' once. and to read to she in winter
evening I know be one of your joys.--Do not give I cause to reproach
myself on the reason that may be assign for the change in you.
Learn, my dear, I beseech you, learn to subdue your own passion. be the
motif what they will, excess be excess. those passion in our sex,
which we take pain to subdue, may have one and the same source with
those infinitely-blacker passion, which we use so often to condemn in
the violent and headstrong of the other sex; and which may only be
heighten in they by custom, and their free education. let we both,
my dear, ponder well this thought: look into ourselves, and fear.
if I write, as I find I must, I insist upon your forbearing to write.
your silence to this shall be the sign to I that you will not think of
the rashness you threaten I with: and that you will obey your mother as
to your own part of the correspondence, however; especially as you can
inform or advise I in every weighty case by Mr. Hickman's pen.
my trembling writing will show you, my dear impetuous creature, what a
trembling heart you have give to
your ever oblige,
or, if you take so rash a step,
your for ever disoblige,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
my clothe be bring to I just now. but you have so much discompose
I, that I have no heart to look into the trunk. why, why, my dear, will
you fright I with your flaming love? discomposure give distress to a
weak heart, whether it arise from friendship or enmity.
a servant of Mr. Lovelace carry this to Mr. Hickman for dispatch-sake.
let that worthy man's pen relieve my heart from this new uneasiness.
LETTER XII
MR. HICKMAN, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[send to WILSON's BY a PARTICULAR HAND.]
FRIDAY, MAY 5.
MADAM,
I have the honour of dear Miss Howe's command to acquaint you, without
know the occasion, 'that she be excessively concerned for the concern
she have give you in her last letter: and that, if you will but write to
she, under cover as before, she will have no thought of what you be so
very apprehensive about.'--yet she bid I write, 'that if she have bite the
least imagination that she can serve you, and save you,' those be her
word, 'all the censure of the world will be but of second consideration
with she.' I have great temptation, on this occasion, to express my own
resentment upon your present state; but not be fully apprize of what
that be--only conjecture from the disturbance upon the mind of the
dear lady in the world to I, and the most sincere of friend to you,
that that be not altogether so happy as be to be wish; and be,
moreover, forbid to enter into the cruel subject; I can only offer, as I
do, my good and faithfullest service! and wish you a happy deliverance
from all your trouble. for I be,
most excellent young lady,
your faithful and most obedient servant,
CH. HICKMAN.
LETTER XIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, MAY 2.
Mercury, as the fabulist tell we, have the curiosity to know the
estimation he stand in among mortal, descend in disguise, and in a
statuary's shop cheapen a Jupiter, then a Juno, then one, then another,
of the dii majore; and, at last, ask, what price that same statue of
Mercury bore? o Sir, say the artist, buy one of the other, and Iwill
throw you in that for nothing.
how sheepish must the god of thief look upon this rebuff to his vanity!
so thou! a thousand pound wouldst thou give for the good opinion of this
single lady--to be only think tolerably of, and not quite unworthy of
her conversation, would make thee happy. and at parting last night, or
rather this morning, thou madest I promise a few line to Edgware, to
let thee know what she think of thee, and of thy brother.
Thy thousand pound, Jack, be all thy own: for most heartily do she
dislike ye all--thee as much as any of the rest.
I be sorry for it too, as to thy part; for two reason--one, that I think
thy motive for thy curiosity be fear of consciousness: whereas that of
the arch-thief be vanity, intolerable vanity: and he be therefore
justly send away with a blush upon his cheek to heaven, and could not
brag--the other, that I be afraid, if she dislike thee, she dislike I:
for be we not bird of a feather?
I must never talk of reformation, she tell I, have such companion,
and take such delight, as I seem to take, in their frothy
conversation.
I, no more than you, Jack, imagine she could possibly like ye: but then,
as my friend, I think a person of her education would have be more
sparing of her censure.
I donot know how it be, Belford; but woman think themselves entitle to
take any freedom with we; while we be unpolite, forsooth, and I cannot
tell what, if we donot tell a pack of cursed lie, and make black white,
in their favour--teach we to be hypocrite, yet stigmatize we, at
other time, for deceiver.
I defend ye all as well as I could: but you know there be no
attempt aught but a palliative defence, to one of her principle.
I will summarily give thee a few of my plea.
'to the pure, every little deviation seem offensive: yet I see not,
that there be any thing amiss the whole evening, either in the word or
behaviour of any of my friend. some people could talk but upon one or
two subject: she upon every one: no wonder, therefore, they talk to
what they understand well; and to mere object of sense. have she
honour we with more of her conversation, she would have be less
disgusted with our; for she see how every one be prepared to admire
she, whenever she open her lip. you, in particular, have say, when
she retire, that virtue itself speak when she speak, but that you have
such an awe upon you, after she have favour we with an observation or
two on a subject start, that you should ever be afraid in her company
to be find most exceptionable, when you intend to be least so.'
plainly, she say, she neither like my companion nor the house she be
in.
I like not the house any more than she: though the people be very
obliging, and she have own they be less exceptionable to herself than
at first: and be we not about another of our own?
she do not like Miss Partington--let her fortune be what it would, and
she have hear a great deal say of her fortune, she should not choose an
intimacy with she. she think it be a hardship to be put upon such a
difficulty as she be put upon the precede night, when there be
lodger in the front-house, whom they have reason to be free with, than,
upon so short an acquaintance, with she.
I pretend to be an utter stranger as to this particular; and, when she
explain herself upon it, condemn Mrs. Sinclair's request, and call
it a confident one.
she, artfully, make light of her denial of the girl for a bedfellow,
than she think of it, I could see that; for it be plain, she suppose
there be room for I to think she have be either over-nice, or over-
cautious.
I offer to resent Mrs. Sinclair's freedom.
no; there be no great matter in it. it be good to let it pass. it
might be think more particular in she to deny such a request, than in
Mrs. Sinclair to make it, or in Miss Partington to expect it to be
comply with. but as the people below have a large acquaintance, she do
not know how often she might indeed have her retirement invade, if she
give way. and indeed there be levity in the behaviour of that young
lady, which she could not so far pass over as to wish an intimacy with
she.
I say, I like Miss Partington as little as she could. Miss Partington
be a silly young creature; who seem to justify the watchfulness of her
guardian over her.--but nevertheless, as to her own, that I think the
girl (for girl she be, as to discretion) not exceptionable; only
carry herself like a free good-natured creature who believe herself
secure in the honour of her company.
it be very well say of I, she reply: but if that young lady be so
well satisfied with her company, she must need say, that I be very kind
to suppose she such an innocent--for her own part, she have see nothing
of the London world: but think, she must tell I plainly, that she
never be in such company in her life; nor ever again wish to be in
such.
there, belford!--worse off than mercury!--art thou not?
I be nettle. hard would be the lot of more discreet woman, as far as I
know, that Miss Partington, be they to be judge by so rigid a virtue
as her.
not so, she say: but if I really see nothing exceptionable to a virtuous
mind, in that young person's behaviour, my ignorance of well behaviour
be, she must need tell I, as pitiable as her: and it be to be
wish, that mind so pair, for their own sake should never be
separate.
see, Jack, what I get by my charity!
I thank she heartily. but say, that I must take the liberty to
observe, that good folk be generally so uncharitable, that, devil take
I, if I would choose to be good, be the consequence to be that I must
think hardly of the whole world besides.
she congratulate I upon my charity; but tell I, that to enlarge her
own, she hop it would not be expect of she to approve of the low
company I have bring she into last night.
no exception for thee, Belford!--Safe be thy thousand pound.
I see not, I say, beg her pardon, that she like any body.--[plain
deal for plain dealing, jack!--why then do she abuse my friend?]
however, let I but know whom and what she do or do not like; and, if
possible, I would like and dislike the very same person and thing.
she bid I then, in a pet, dislike myself.
cursed severe!--doe she think she must not pay for it one day, or one
night?--and if one, many; thatbe my comfort.
I be in such a train of be happy, I say, before my earnestness to
procure she to favour my friend with her company, that I wish the
devil have have as well my friend as Miss Partington--and yet, I must say,
that I see not how good people could answer half their end, which be to
reform the wicked by precept as well as example, be they to accompany
only with the good.
I have the like to have be blast by two or three flash of lightning
from her indignant eye; and she turn scornfully from I, and retire
to her own apartment.
once more, Jack, safe, as thou seest, be thy thousand pound.
she say, I be not a polite man. but be she, in the instance before we,
more polite for a woman?
and now, dost thou not think that I owe my charmer some revenge for her
cruelty in oblige such a fine young creature, and so vast a fortune, as
Miss Partington, to crowd into a press-bed with Dorcas the maid-servant
of the proud refuser?--miss Partington too (with tear) declare, by Mrs.
Sinclair, that would Mrs. Lovelace do she the honour of a visit at
Barnet, the good bed and good room in her guardian's house should be at
her service. think thou that I could not guess at her dishonourable
fear of me?--that she apprehend, that the suppose husband would
endeavour to take possession of his own?--and that Miss Partington would
be willing to contribute to such a piece of justice?
thus, then, thou both remind, and defiest I, charmer!--and since thou
reliest more on thy own precaution than upon my honour; be it unto thee,
fair one, as thou apprehendest.
and now, Jack, let I know, what thy opinion, and the opinion of thy
brother varlet, be of my Gloriana.
I have just now hear, that Hannah hop to be soon well enough to attend
her young lady, when in London. it seem the girl have have no physician.
I must send her one, out of pure love and respect to her mistress. who
know but medicine may weaken nature, and strengthen the disease?--as her
malady be not a fever, very likely it may do so.--but perhaps the wench's
hope be too forward. bluster weather in this month yet.--And that
be bad for rheumatic complaint.
LETTER XIV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, MAY 2.
just as I have seal up the enclosed, come a letter to my beloved, in a
cover to I, direct to Lord M.'s. from whom, think thou?--From Mrs.
Howe!
and what the content?
how should I know, unless the dear creature have communicate they to I?
but a very cruel letter I believe it be, by the effect it have upon she.
the tear run down her cheek as she read it; and her colour change
several time. no end of her persecution, I think!
'what a cruelty in my fate!' say the sweet lamenter.--'Now the only
comfort of my life must be give up!'
Miss Howe's correspondence, no doubt.
but should she be so much grieve at this? this correspondence be
prohibit before, and that, to the daughter, in the strong term:
but yet carry on by both; although a brace of impeccable, an't please
ye. could they expect, that a mother would not vindicate her authority?
--and find her prohibition ineffectual with her perverse daughter, be
it not reasonable to suppose she would try what effect it would have upon
her daughter's friend?--and now I believe the end will be effectually
answer: for my beloved, I dare say, will make a point of conscience of
it.
I hate cruelty, especially in woman; and should have be more concerned
for this instance of it Mrs. Howe, have I not have a strong instance of
the same in my beloved to Miss Partington: for how do she know, since
she be so much afraid for herself, whom Dorcas might let in to that
innocent and less watchful young lady? but nevertheless I must need
own, that I be not very sorry for this prohibition, let it originally
come from the Harlowes, or from whom it will; because I make no doubt,
that it be owe to Miss Howe, in a great measure, that my beloved be so
much upon her guard, and think so hardly of I. and who can tell, as
character here be so tender, and some disguise so flimsy, what
consequence might follow this undutiful correspondence?--i say,
therefore, I be not sorry for it: now will she not have any body to
compare note with: any body to alarm she: and I may be save the guilt
and disobligation of inspect into a correspondence that have long make
I uneasy.
how every ting work for me!--why will this charming creature make such
contrivance necessary, as will increase my trouble, and my guilt too, as
some will account it? but why, rather I should ask, will she fight
against her star?
LETTER XV
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
EDGWARE, TUESDAY NIGHT, MAY 2.
without stay for the promise letter from you to inform we what the
lady say of we, I write to tell you, that we be all of one opinion with
regard to she; which be, that there be not of her age a fine woman in
the world, as to her understanding. as for her person, she be at the age
of bloom, and an admirable creature; a perfect beauty: but this poorer
praise, a man, who have be honour with her conversation, can hardly
descend to give; and yet she be bring amongst we contrary to her will.
permit I, dear Lovelace, to be a mean of save this excellent creature
from the danger she hourly run from the most plot heart in the
world. in a former, I plead your own family, Lord M.'s wish
particularly; and then I have not see she: but now, I join her sake,
honour's sake, motif of justice, generosity, gratitude, and humanity,
which be all concerned in the preservation of so fine a woman. Thou
know not the anguish I should have have, (whence arise, I cannot
devise,) have I not know before I set out this morning, that the
incomparable creature have disappoint thee in thy cursed view of get
she to admit the specious Partington for a bed-fellow.
I have do nothing but talk of this lady ever since I see she. there be
something so awful, and yet so sweet, in her aspect, that be I to have
the virtue and the grace all draw in one piece, they should be take,
every one of they, from different air and attribute in she. she be
bear to adorn the age she be give to, and would be an ornament to the
first dignity. what a pierce, yet gentle eye; every glance I think
mingle with love and fear of you! what a sweet smile dart through
the cloud that overspread her fair face, demonstrate that she have more
apprehension and grief at her heart than she care to express!
you may think what I be go to write too flighty: but, by my faith, I
have conceive such a profound reverence for her sense and judgment,
that, far from think the man excusable who should treat she basely,
I be ready to regret that such an angel of a woman should even marry.
she be in my eye all mind: and be she to meet with a man all mind
likewise, why should the charming quality she be mistress of be
endanger? why should such an angel be plunge so low as into the
vulgar office of a domestic life? be she mine, I should hardly wish
to see she a mother, unless there be a kind of moral certainty, that
mind like hers could be propagate. for why, in short, should not the
work of body be leave to mere body? I know, that you yourself have
an opinion of her little less exalted. Belton, Mowbray, Tourville, be
all of my mind; be full of her praise; and swear, it would be a million
of pity to ruin a woman in whose fall none but devil can rejoice.
what must that merit and excellence be which can extort this from we,
freeliver, like yourself, and all of your just resentment against the
rest of her family, and offer our assistance to execute your vengeance
on they? but we cannot think it reasonable that you should punish an
innocent creature, who love you so well, and who be your protection, and
have suffer so much for you, for the fault of her relation.
and here let I put a serious question or two. think thou, truly
admirable as this lady be, that the end thou propos to thyself, if
obtain, be answerable to the mean, to the trouble thou giv thyself,
and to the perfidy, trick, stratagem, and contrivance thou have
already be guilty of, and still meditatest? in every real excellence
she surpass all her sex. but in the article thou seekest to subdue she
for, a mere sensualist, a Partington, a Horton, a Martin, would make a
sensualist a thousand time happy than she either will or can.
Sweet be the joy that come with willingness.
and wouldst thou make she unhappy for her whole life, and thyself not
happy for a single moment?
Hitherto, it be not too late; and that perhaps be as much as can be say,
if thou meanest to preserve her esteem and good opinion, as well as
person; for I think it be impossible she can get out of thy hand now she
be in this accursed house. o that damn hypocritical Sinclair, as thou
call she! how be it possible she should behave so speciously as she
do all the time the lady staid with us!--Be honest, and marry; and be
thankful that she will condescend to have thee. if thou dost not, thou
wilt be the bad of man; and wilt be condemn in this world and the
next: as I be sure thou ought, and shouldest too, wert thou to be
judge by one, who never before be so much touch in a woman's favour;
and whom thou know to be
thy partial friend,
J. BELFORD.
our companion consent that I should withdraw to write to the above
effect. they can make nothing of the character we write in; and so I
read this to they. they approve of it; and of their own motion each man
would set his name to it. I would not delay send it, for fear of some
detestable scheme take place.
THOMAS BELTON,
RICHARD MOWBRAY,
JAMES TOURVILLE.
just now be bring I both your. I vary not my opinion, nor forbear
my earnest prayer to you in her behalf, notwithstanding her dislike of
I.
LETTER XVI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY, MAY 3.
when I have already take pain to acquaint thee in full with regard to
my view, design, and resolution, with regard to this admirable woman,
it be very extraordinary that thou shouldst vapour as thou dost in her
behalf, when I have make no trial, no attempt: and yet, givest it as thy
opinion in a former letter, that advantage may be take of the situation
she be in; and that she may be overcome.
Most of thy reflection, particularly that which respect the difference
as to the joy to be give by the virtuous and libertine of her sex, be
fitter to come in as after-reflection than as antecedency.
I own with thee, and with the poet, that sweet be the joy that come
with willingness--but be it to be expect, that a woman of education,
and a lover of form, will yield before she be attack? and have I so
much as summon this to surrender? I doubt not but I shall meet with
difficulty. I must therefore make my first effort by surprise. there
may possibly be some cruelty necessary: but there may be consent in
struggle; there may be yield in resistance. but the first conflict
over, whether the following may not be weak and weak, till
willingness ensue, be the point to be try. I will illustrate what I
have say by the simile of a bird new catch. we begin, when boy, with
bird; and when grow up, go on to woman; and both perhaps, in turn,
experience our sportive cruelty.
Hast thou not observe, the charming gradation by which the ensnare
volatile have be bring to bear with its new condition? how, at first,
refuse all sustenance, it beat and bruise itself against its wire,
till it make its gay plumage fly about, and over-spread its well-secure
cage. now it get out its head; stick only at its beautiful
shoulder: then, with difficulty, draw back its head, it gasp for
breath, and erectly perch, with meditate eye, first survey, and
then attempt, its wire canopy. as it get its pretty head and side,
bite the wire, and peck at the finger of its delighted tamer. till
at last, find its effort ineffectual, quite tired and breathless, it
lay itself down, and pant at the bottom of the cage, seem to bemoan
its cruel fate and forfeited liberty. and after a few day, its
struggle to escape still diminish as it find it to no purpose to
attempt it, its new habitation become familiar; and it hop about from
perch to perch, resume its wonted cheerfulness, and every day sing a
song to amuse itself and reward its keeper.
now le I tell thee, that I have know a bird actually starve itself, and
die with grief, at its being catch and cage. but never do I meet with
a woman who be so silly.--Yet have I hear the dear soul most
vehemently threaten their own life on such an occasion. but it be
say nothing in a woman's favour, if we do not allow she to have more
sense than a bird. and yet we must all own, that it be more difficult to
catch a bird than a lady.
to pursue the comparison--if the disappointment of the captivate lady be
very great, she will threaten, indeed, as I say: she will even refuse
her sustenance for some time, especially if you entreat her much, and she
think she give you concern by her refusal. but then the stomach of the
dear sullen one will soon return. 'tis pretty to see how she come to by
degree: press by appetite, she will first steal, perhaps, a weeping
morsel by herself; then be bring to piddle and sigh, and sigh and
piddle before you; now-and-then, if her viand be unsavoury, swallow
with they a relish tear or two: then she come to eat and drink, to
oblige you: then resolve to live for your sake: her exclamation will,
in the next place, be turn into blandishment; her vehement upbraiding
into gentle murmuring--how dare you, traitor!--into how could you,
dearest! she will draw you to she, instead of push you from she: no
long, with unsheathed claw, will she resist you; but, like a pretty,
playful, wanton kitten, with gentle paw, and conceal talon, tap your
cheek, and with intermingle smile, and tear, and caress, implore
your consideration for she, and your constancy: all the favour she then
have to ask of you!--And this be the time, be it give to man to confine
himself to one object, to be happy every day than another.
now, Belford, be I to go no far than I have go with my beloved
Miss Harlowe, how shall I know the difference between she and another
bird? to let she fly now, what a pretty jest would that be!--how do I
know, except I try, whether she may not be bring to sing I a fine
song, and to be as well content as I have bring other bird to be,
and very shy one too?
but now let we reflect a little upon the confound partiality of we
human creature. I can give two or three familiar, and if they be not
familiar, they would be shocking, instance of the cruelty both of man
and woman, with respect to other creature, perhaps as worthy as (at
least more innocent than) themselves. by my soul, Jack, there be more of
the savage on human nature than we be commonly aware of. nor be it,
after all, so much amiss, that we sometimes avenge the more innocent
animal upon our own specie.
to particular:
how usual a thing be it for woman as well as man, without the least
remorse, to ensnare, to cage, and torment, and even with burning
knitting-needle to put out the eye of the poor feather'd songster [thou
seest I have not yet do with bird]; which however, in proportion to
its bulk, have more life than themselves (for a bird be all soul;) and of
consequence have as much feeling as the human creature! when at the same
time, if an honest fellow, by the gentle persuasion, and the soft
art, have the good luck to prevail upon a mew'd-up lady, to countenance
her own escape, and she consent to break cage, and be set a flying into
the all-cheer air of liberty, mercy on we! what an outcry be generally
raise against he!
just like what you and I once see raise in a paltry village near
Chelmsford, after a poor hungry fox, who, watch his opportunity, have
seize by the neck, and shoulder a sleek-feather goose: at what time
we behold the whole vicinage of boy and girl, old man, and old woman,
all the furrow and wrinkle of the latter fill up with malice for the
time; the old man arm with prong, pitch-fork, club, and catstick;
the old woman with mop, broom, fire-shovel, tong, and poker; and the
young fry with dirt, stone, and brickbat, gather as they run like
a snowball, in pursuit of the wind-outstrip prowler; all the mongrel
cur of the circumjacencie yelp, yelp, yelp, at their heel, complete
the horrid chorus.
Rememebrest thou not this scene? surely thou must. my imagination,
inflame by a tender sympathy for the danger of the adventurous marauder,
represent it to my eye as if it be but yesterday. and dost thou not
recollect how generously glad we be, as if our own case, that honest
reynard, by the help of a lucky stile, over which both old and young
tumble upon one another, and a winding course, escape their brutal
fury, and fly catstick; and how, in fancy, we follow he to his
undiscovered retreat; and imagine we behold the intrepid thief enjoy
his dear-earn purchase with a delight proportion to his past danger?
I once make a charming little savage severely repent the delight she take
in see her tabby favourite make cruel sport with a pretty sleek bead-
eyed mouse, before she devour it. egad, my love, say I to myself, as
I sit meditate the scene, I be determined to lie in wait for a fit
opportunity to try how thou wilt like to be tost over my head, and be
catch again: how thou wilt like to be part from I, and pull to I.
yet will I rather give life than take it away, as this barbarous
quadrupe have at last do by her prey. and after all be over between
my girl and I, I remind she of the incident to which my resolution be
owe.
nor have I at another time any mercy upon the daughter of an old epicure,
who have teach the girl, without the least remorse, to roast lobster
alive; to cause a poor pig to be whipt to death; to scrape carp the
contrary way of the scale, make they leap in the stew-pan, and
dress they in their own blood for sauce. and this for luxury-sake,
and to provoke an appetite; which I have without stimulation, in my way,
and that I can tell thee a very ravenous one.
many more instance of the like nature could I give, be I to leave
nothing to thyself, to shew that the good take the same liberty, and
perhaps bad, with some sort of creature, that we take with other; all
creature still! and creature too, as I have observe above, replete
with strong life, and sensible feeling!--if therefore people pretend to
mercy, let mercy go through all their action. I have hear somewhere,
that a merciful man be merciful to his beast.
so much at present for those part of thy letter in which thou urgest to
I motif of compassion for the lady.
but I guess at thy principal motive in this thy earnestness in behalf of
this charming creature. I know that thou correspond with Lord M. who
be impatient, and have long be desirous to see I shackle. and thou
want to make a merit with the uncle, with a view to one of his niece.
but know thou not, that my consent will be want to complete thy
wishes?--And what a commendation will it be of thee to such a girl as
Charlotte, when I shall acquaint she with the affront thou putt upon
the whole sex, by ask, whether I think my reward, when I have subdue
the most charming woman in the world, will be equal to my trouble?--
which, think thou, will a woman of spirit soon forgive; the
undervaluing varlet who can put such a question; or he, who prefer the
pursuit and conquest of a fine woman to all the joy of life? have I not
know even a virtuous woman, as she would be think, vow everlaste
antipathy to a man who give out that she be too old for he to attempt?
and do not Essex's personal reflection on Queen Elizabeth, that she be
old and crooked, contribute more to his ruin than his treason?
but another word or two, as to thy objection relate to my trouble and
reward.
do not the keen fox-hunter endanger his neck and his bone in pursuit
of a vermin, which, when kill, be neither fit food for man nor dog?
do not the hunter of the noble game value the venison less than the
sport?
why then should I be reflect upon, and the sex affront, for my
patience and perseverance in the most noble of all chase; and for not
be a poacher in love, as thy question be make to imply?
learn of thy master, for the future, to treat more respectfully a sex
that yield we our principal diversion and delight.
proceed anon.
LETTER XVII
MR. LOVELACE
[in CONTINUATION.]
well sayest thou, that mine be the most plot heart in the world.
Thou dost I honour; and I thank thee heartily. thou art no bad judge.
how like Boileau's parson I strut behind my double chin! be I not
oblige to deserve thy compliment? and wouldst thou have I repent of a
murder before I have commit it?
'the Virtues and Graces be this Lady's handmaid. she be certainly
bear to adorn the age she be give to.'--Well say, Jack--'And would be
an ornament to the first dignity.' but what praise be that, unless the
first dignity be adorn with the first merit?--dignity! gew-gaw!--
first dignity! thou idiot!--art thou, who knowest I, so take with
ermine and tinsel?--i, who have win the gold, be only fit to wear it.
for the future therefore correct thy style, and proclaim she the ornament
of the happy man, and (respect herself and sex) the great
conqueror in the world.
then, that she love I, as thou imagin, by no means appear clear to
I. her conditional offer to renounce I; the little confidence she
place in I; entitle I to ask, what merit can she have with a man, who
win she in spite of herself; and who fairly, in set and obstinate battle,
take her prisoner?
as to what thou inferrest from her eye when with we, thou know nothing
of her heart from that, if thou imagin there be one glance of love
shoot from it. well do I note her eye, and plainly do I see, that it
be all but just civil disgust to I and to the company I have bring she
into. her early retire that night, against all entreaty, might have
convince thee, that there be very little of the gentle in her heart for
I. and her eye never know what it be to contradict her heart.
she be, thou sayest, all mind. so say i. but why shouldst thou imagine
that such a mind as hers, meet with such a one as mine, and, to dwell
upon the word, meet with an inclination in her, should not propagate
mind like her own?
be I to take thy stupid advice, and marry; what a figure should I make
in rakish annal! the lady in my power: yet not have intend to put
herself in my power: declare against love, and a rebel to it: so much
open-eyed caution: no confidence in my honour: her family expect the
bad hath pass: herself seem to expect that the bad will be
attempt: [Priscilla Partington for that!] what! wouldst thou not have
I act in character?
but why call thou the lady innocent? and why sayest thou she love
I?
by innocent, with regard to I, and not take as a general character, I
must insist upon it she be not innocent. can she be innocent, who, by
wish to shackle I in the prime and glory of my youth, with such a
capacity as I have for noble mischief,* would make my perdition more
certain, be I to break, as I doubt I should, the most solemn vow I
could make? I say no man ought to take even a common oath, who think he
cannot keep it. this be conscience! this be honour!--and when I think I
can keep the marriage-vow, then will it be time to marry.
* see Vol. III. Letter XXIII. Paragr. 4.
no doubt of it, as thou sayest, the devil would rejoice in the fall of
such a woman. but this be my confidence, that I shall have it in my
power to marry when I will. and if I do she this justice, shall I not
have a claim of her gratitude? and will she not think herself the
oblige, rather than the obliger? then let I tell thee, Belford, it be
impossible so far to hurt the moral of this lady, as thou and thy
brother varlet have hurt other of the sex, who now be cast about
the town firebrand and double death. take ye that thistle to mumble
upon.
***
a short interruption. I now resume.
that the moral of this lady cannot fail, be a consideration that will
lessen the guilt on both side. and if, when subdue, she know but how
to middle the matter between virtue and love, then will she be a wife for
I: for already I be convinced that there be not a woman in the world
that be love-proof and plot-proof, if she be not the person.
and now imagine (the charmer overcome) thou se I sit supinely
cross-kneed, recline on my sofa, the god of love dance in my eye,
and rejoice in every mantling feature; the sweet rogue, late such a
proud rogue, wholly in my power, move up slowly to I, at my beck, with
heaving sigh, half-pronounce upbraiding from murmur lip, her
finger in her eye, and quicken her pace at my Come hither, dearest!
one hand stick in my side, the other extend to encourage her bashful
approach--kiss I, love!--sweet, as Jack Belford say, be the joy that
come with willingness.
she tender her purple mouth [her coral lip will be purple then, Jack!]:
sigh not so deeply, my beloved!--happi hour await thy humble love,
than do thy proud resistance.
once more bent to my ardent lip the swanny glossiness of a neck late so
stately.--
therebe my precious!
again!
oblige loveliness!
o my ever-bloom glory! I have try thee enough. to-morrow's sun--
then I rise, and fold to my almost-talk heart the throb-bosom'd
charmer.
and now shall thy humble pride confess its obligation to I!
to-morrow's sun--and then I disengage myself from the bashful passive,
and stalk about the room--to-morrow's sun shall gild the altar at which
my vow shall be pay thee!
then, Jack, the rapture! then the darted sun-beam from her gladden
eye, drink up, at one sip, the precious distillation from the pearl-
dropt cheek! then hand ardently fold, eye seem to pronounce, God
bless my Lovelace! to supply the joy-lock tongue: her transport too
strong, and expression too weak, to give utterance to her grateful
meanings!--All--all the study--all the study of her future life vow
and devoted (when she can speak) to acknowledge and return the perpetual
obligation!
if I could bring my charmer to this, would it not be the eligible of
eligibles?--is it not worth try for?--as I say, I can marry she when
I will. she can be nobody's but mine, neither for shame, nor by choice,
nor yet by address: for who, that know my character, believe that the
bad she dread be now to be dread?
I have the high opinion that man can have (thou know I have) of the
merit and perfection of this admirable woman; of her virtue and honour
too, although thou, in a former, art of opinion that she may be
overcome.* be I not therefore oblige to go far, in order to
contradict thee, and, as I have often urge, to be sure that she be what
I really think she to be, and, if I be ever to marry she, hope to find
she?
* see Vol. III. Letter LI. Paragr. 9.
then this lady be a mistress of our passion: no one ever have to so much
perfection the art of move. this all her family know, and have equally
fear and revere she for it. this I know too; and doubt not more and
more to experience. how charmingly must this divine creature warble
forth (if a proper occasion be give) her melodious elegiacs!--Infinite
beauty be there in a weeping eye. I first teach the two nymph below
to distinguish the several accent of the lamentable in a new subject,
and how admirably some, more than other, become their distress.
but to return to thy objection--thou wilt perhaps tell I, in the name
of thy brother, as well as in thy own name, that, among all the object
of your respective attempt, there be not one of the rank and merit of
my charming Miss Harlowe.
but let I ask, have it not be a constant maxim with we, that the
great the merit on the woman's side, the nobler the victory on the
man's? and as to rank, sense of honour, sense of shame, pride of family,
may make rifle rank get up, and shake itself to right: and if any thing
come of it, such a one may suffer only in her pride, by be oblige to
take up with a second-rate match instead of a first; and, as it may fall
out, be the happy, as well as the more useful, for the misadventure;
since (take off of her public gadding, and domesticate by she
disgrace) she will have reason to think herself oblige to the man who
have save she from further reproach; while her fortune and alliance will
lay an obligation upon he; and her past fall, if she have prudence and
consciousness, will be his present and future security.
but a poor girl [such a one as my Rosebud for instance] have no recall
from education; be drive out of every family that pretend to
reputation; persecute most perhaps by such as have only keep their
secret well; and have no refuge to fly to--the common, the stew, the
street, be the fate of such a poor wretch; penury, want, and disease, she
sure attendant; and an untimely end perhaps close the miserable scene.
and will you not now all join to say, that it be more manly to attach a
lion than a sheep?--Thou know, that I always illustrate my eagleship,
by aim at the noble quarry; and by disdain to make a stoop at
wren, phyl-tit,* and wag-tail.
* Phyl-tit, q. d. Phyllis-tit, in opposition to Tom-tit. it need not
now be observe, that Mr. Lovelace, in this wanton gaiety of his heart,
often take liberty of coin word and phrase in his letter to this
his familiar friend. see his ludicrous reason for it in Vol. III. Letter
XXV. Paragr. antepenult.
the bad respect myself, in the case before I, be that my triumph,
when complete, will be so glorious a one, that I shall never be able to
keep up to it. all my future attempt must be poor to this. I shall be
as unhappy, after a while, from my reflection upon this conquest, as Don
Juan of Austria be in his, on the renowned victory of Lepanto, when he
find that none of future achievement could keep pace with his early
glory.
I be sensible that my plea and my reasoning may be easily answer, and
perhaps justly censure; but by whom censure? not by any of the
confraternity, whose constant course of life, even long before I become
your general, to this hour, have justify what ye now in a fit of
squeamishness, and through envy, condemn. have, therefore, vindicate
myself and my intention to you, that be all I be at present concern
for.
be convince, then, that I (accord to our principle) be right, thou
wrong; or, at least, be silent. but I command thee to be convince. and
in thy next be sure to tell I that thou art.
LETTER XVIII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
EDGEWARE, THURSDAY, MAY 4.
I know that thou art so abandon a man, that to give thee the good
reason in the world against what thou hast once resolve upon will be
but act the madman whom once we see try to buffet down a hurricane
with his hat. I hope, however, that the lady's merit will still avail she
with thee. but, if thou persist; if thou wilt avenge thyself on this
sweet lamb which thou hast single out from a flock thou hatest, for the
fault of the dog who keep it: if thou art not to be move by beauty, by
learning, by prudence, by innocence, all shin out in one charming
object; but she must fall, fall by the man whom she have choose for her
protector; I would not for a thousand world have thy crime to answer
for.
upon my faith, Lovelace, the subject stick with I, notwithstanding I
find I have no the honour of the lady's good opinion. and the more, when
I reflect upon her father's brutal curse, and the villainous hard-
heartedness of all her family. but, nevertheless, I should be desirous
to know (if thou wilt proceed) by what gradation, art, and contrivance
thou effectest thy ingrateful purpose. and, O Lovelace, I conjure thee,
if thou art a man, let not the specious devil thou have bring she among
be suffer to triumph over she; yield to fair seduction, if I may so
express myself! if thou canst raise a weakness in she by love, or by art
not inhuman; I shall the less pity she: and shall then conclude, that
there be not a woman in the world who can resist a bold and resolute
lover.
a messenger be just now arrive from my uncle. the mortification, it
seem, be get to his knee; and the surgeon declare that he cannot live
many day. he therefore send for I directly, with these shocking
word, that I will come and close his eye. my servant or his must of
necessity be in town every day on his case, or other affair; and one of
they shall regularly attend you for any letter or command. it will be
charity to write to I as often as you can. for although I be likely to
be a considerable gainer by the poor man's death, yet I cannot say that I
at all love these scene of death and the doctor so near I. the doctor
and death I should have say; for that be the natural order, and
generally speak, the one be but the harbinger to the other.
if, therefore, you decline to oblige I, I shall think you be displeased
with my freedom. but let I tell you, at the same, that no man have a
right to be displeased at freedom take with he for fault he be not
ashamed to be guilty of.
J. BELFORD.
LETTER XIX
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
I thank you and Mr. Hickman for his letter, send I with such kind
expedition; and proceed to obey my dear menacing tyranness.
[she then give the particular of what pass between herself and Mr.
Lovelace on Tuesday morning, in relation to his four friend, and to
Miss Partington, pretty much to the same effect as in Mr. Lovelace's
Letter, no. xiii. and then proceed:]
he be constantly accuse I of over-scrupulousness. he say, 'I be
always out of humour with he: that I could not have behave more
reservedly to Mr. Solmes: and that it be contrary to all his hope and
notion, that he should not, in so long a time, find himself able to
inspire the person, whom he hop so soon to have the honour to call his,
with the least distinguish tenderness for he before-hand.'
silly and partial encroacher! not to know to what to attribute the
reserve I be force to treat he with! but his pride have eat up his
prudence. it be indeed a dirty low pride, that have swallow up the true
pride which should have set he above the vanity that have overrun he.
yet he pretend that he have no pride but in oblige I: and be always
talk of his reverence and humility, and such sort of stuff: but of
this I be sure that he have, as I observe the first time I see he,* too
much regard to his own person, greatly to value that of his wife, marry
he whom he will: and I must be blind, if I do not see that he be
exceedingly vain of his external advantage, and of that address, which,
if it have any merit in it to an outward eye, be perhaps owe more to his
confidence that [sic] to any thing else.
* see Vol. I. Letter III.
have you not beheld the man, when I be your happy guest, as he walk to
his chariot, look about he, as if to observe what eye his specious
person and air have attract?
but indeed we have some homely coxcomb as proud as if they have person to
be proud of; at the same time that it be apparent, that the pain they
take about themselves but the more expose their defect.
the man who be fond of be think more or well than he be, as I have
often observe, but provoke a scrutiny into his pretension; and that
generally produce contempt. for pride, as I believe I have heretofore
say, be an infallible sign of weakness; of something wrong in the head
or in both. he that exalt himself insult his neighbour; who be
provoke to question in he even that merit, which, be he modest, would
perhaps be allow to be his due.
you will say that I be very grave: and so I be. Mr. Lovelace be
extremely sunk in my opinion since Monday night: nor see I before I any
thing that can afford I a pleasing hope. for what, with a mind so
unequal as his, can be my good hope?
I think I mention to you, in my former, that my clothe be bring
I. you flutter I so, that I be not sure I do. but I know I
design to mention that they be. they be bring I on Thursday;
but neither my few guineas with they, nor any of my book, except a
Drexelius on Eternity, the good old Practice of Piety, and a Francis
Spira. my brother's wit, I suppose. he think he do well to point out
death and despair to I. I wish for the one, and every now-and-then be
on the brink of the other.
you will the less wonder at my be so very solemn, when, add to the
above, and to my uncertain situation, I tell you, that they have send I
with these book a letter form my cousin Morden. it have set my heart
against Mr. Lovelace. against myself too. I send it enclose. if you
please, my dear, you may read it here:
COL. MORDEN, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
Florence, April 13.
I be extremely concerned to hear of a difference betwixt the rest of a
family so near and dear to I, and you still dearer to than any of the
rest.
my cousin James have acquaint I with the offer you have have, and with
your refusal. I wonder not at either. such charming promise at so
early an age as when I leave England; and those promise, as I have often
hear, so greatly exceed, as well in your person as mind; how much must
you be admire! how few must there be worthy of you!
your parent, the most indulgent in the world, to a child the most
deserve, have give way it seem to your refusal of several gentleman.
they have content themselves at last to name one with earnestness to
you, because of the address of another whom they cannot approve.
they have not reason, it seem, from your behaviour, to think you greatly
averse: so they proceed: perhaps too hastily for a delicacy like
your's. but when all be fix on their part, and most extraordinary
term conclude in your favour; term, which abundantly show the
gentleman's just value for you; you fly off with a warmth and vehemence
little suited to that sweetness which give grace to all your action.
I know very little of either of the gentleman: but of Mr. Lovelace I know
more than of Mr. Solmes. I wish I could say more to his advantage than I
can. as to every qualification but one, your brother own there be no
comparison. but that one outweigh all the rest together. it cannot be
think that Miss Clarissa Harlowe will dispense with moral in a
husband.
what, my dear cousin, shall I plead first to you on this occasion?
your duty, your interest, your temporal and your eternal welfare, do, and
may all, depend upon this single point, the morality of a husband. a
woman who hath a wicked husband may find it difficult to be good, and out
of her power to do good; and be therefore in a bad situation than the
man can be in, who hath a bad wife. you preserve all your religious
regard, I understand. I wonder not that you do. I should have wonder
have you not. but what can you promise youself, as to perseverance in
they, with an immoral husband?
if your parent and you differ in sentiment on this important occasion,
let I ask you, my dear cousin, who ought to give way? I own to you,
that I should have think there could not any where have be a more
suitable match for you than Mr. Lovelace, have he be a moral man. I
should have very little to say against a man, of whose action I be not
to set up myself as a judge, do he not address my cousin. but, on this
occasion, let I tell you, my dear Clarissa, that Mr. Lovelace cannot
possibly deserve you. he may reform, youwill say: but he may not. Habit
be not soon or easily shake off. libertine, who be libertine in
defiance of talent, of superior light, of conviction, hardly ever
reform but by miracle, or by incapacity. well do I know mine own sex.
well be I able to judge of the probability of the reformation of a
licentious young man, who have not be fasten upon by sickness, by
affliction, by calamity: who have a prosperous run of fortune before he:
his spirit high: his will uncontroulable: the company he keep, perhaps
such as himself, confirm he in all his course, assist he in
all his enterprise.
as to the other gentleman, suppose, my dear cousin, you do not like he
at present, it be far from be unlikely that you will hereafter:
perhaps the more for not like he now. he can hardly sink lower in
your opinion: he may rise. very seldom be it that high expectation be
so much as tolerably answer. how indeed can they, when a fine and
extensive imagination carry its expectation infinitely beyond reality,
in the high of our sublunary enjoyment? a woman adorn with such an
imagination see no defect in a favour object, (the less, if she be not
conscious of any wilful fault in herself,) till it be too late to rectify
the mistake occasion by her generous credulity.
but suppose a person of your talent be to marry a man of inferior
talent; who, in this case, can be so happy in herself as Miss Clarissa
Harlowe? what delight do you take in do good! how happily do you
devote the several portion of the day to your own improvement, and to
the advantage of all that move within your sphere!--and then, such be
your taste, such be your acquirement in the politer study, and in the
politer amusement; such your excellence in all the different part of
economy fit for a young lady's inspection and practice, that your friend
would wish you to be take off as little as possible by regard that may
be call merely personal.
but as to what may be the consequence respect yourself, respect a
young lady of your talent, from the preference you be suspect to give
to a libertine, I would have you, my dear cousin, consider what that may
be. a mind so pure, to mingle with a mind impure! and will not such a
man as this engross all your solitude? will he not perpetually fill you
with anxiety for he and for yourself?--the divine and civil power
defy, and their sanction break through by he, on every not merely
accidental but meditated occasion. to be agreeable to he, and to hope
to preserve an interest in his affection, you must probably be oblige
to abandon all your own laudable pursuit. you must enter into his
pleasure and distaste. you must give up your virtuous companion for
his profligate one--perhaps be forsake by your's, because of the
scandal he daily give. can you hope, cousin, with such a man as this to
be long so good as you now be? if not, consider which of your present
laudable delight you would choose to give up! which of his culpable one
to follow he in! how could you brook to go backward, instead of
forward, in those duty which you now so exemplarily perform? and how do
you know, if you once give way, where you shall be suffer, where you
shall be able, to stop?
your brother acknowledge that Mr. Solmes be not near so agreeable in
person as Mr. Lovelace. but what be person with such a lady as I have
the honour to be now write to? he own likewise that he have not the
address of Mr. Lovelace: but what a mere personal advantage be a
plausible address, without moral? a woman have well take a husband
whose manner she be to fashion, than to find they ready-fashioned to
her hand, at the price of her morality; a price that be often pay for
travel accomplishment. o my dear cousin, be you but with we here
at Florence, or at Rome, or at Paris, (where also I reside for many
month,) to see the gentleman whose suppose rough english manner at
set out be to be polish, and what their improvement be in their
return through the same place, you would infinitely prefer the man in
his first stage to the same man in his last. you find the difference on
their return--a fondness for foreign fashion, an attachment to foreign
vice, a supercilious contempt of his own country and countryman;
(himself more despicable than the most despicable of those he despise;)
these, with an unblushing effrontery, be too generally the attainment
that concur to finish the travelled gentleman!
Mr. Lovelace, I know, deserve to have an exception make in his favour;
for he really be a man of part and learning: he be esteem so both
here and at Rome; and a fine person, and a generous turn of mind, give
he great advantage. but you need not be tell, that a libertine of weak
part be able to do. and this I will tell you far, that it be Mr.
Lovelace's own fault that he be not still more respected than he be
among the literati here. there be, in short, some liberty in which
he indulge himself, that endanger his person and his liberty; and make
the good and most worthy of those who honour he with their notice give
he up, and his stay both at Florence and at Rome shorter than he
design.
this be all I choose to say of Mr. Lovelace. I have much rather have have
reason to give he a quite contrary character. but as to rakes or
libertine in general, I, who know they well, must be allow, because of
the mischief they have always in their heart, and too often in their
power, to do your sex, to add still a few more word upon this topic.
a libertine, my dear cousin, a plotting, an intriguing libertine, must be
generally remorseless--unjust he must always be. the noble rule of do
to other what he would have do to himself be the first rule he break;
and every day he break it; the oftener, the great his triumph. he have
great contempt for your sex. he believe no woman chaste, because he be
a profligate. every woman who favour he confirm he in his wicked
incredulity. he be always plot to extend the mischief he delight
in. if a woman love such a man, how can she bear the thought of
divide her interest in his affection with half the town, and that
perhaps the dreg of it? then so sensual!--how will a young lady of your
delicacy bear with so sensual a man? a man who make a jest of his vow?
and who perhaps will break your spirit by the most unmanly insult. to
be a libertine, be to continue to be every thing vile and inhuman.
Prayers, tear, and the most abject submission, be but fuel to his
pride: wager perhaps with lewd companion, and, not improbably, with
lewder woman, upon instance which he boast of to they of your patient
suffering, and broken spirit, and bring they home to witness both.
I write what I know have be.
I mention not fortune squander, estate mortgage or sell, and
posterity rob--nor yet a multitude of other evil, too gross, too
shocking, to be mention to a person of your delicacy.
all these, my dear cousin, to be shun, all the evil I have name to
be avoid; the power of do all the good you have be accustom to,
preserve, nay, increase, by the separate provision that will be make
for you: your charming diversion, and exemplary employment, all
maintain; and every good habit perpetuate: and all by one sacrifice,
the fade pleasure of the eye! who would not, (since every thing be not
to be meet with in one man, who would not,) to preserve so many
essential, give up to light, so unpermanent a pleasure!
weigh all these thing, which I might insist upon to more advantage, do
I think it needful to one of your prudence--weigh they well, my beloved
cousin; and if it be not the will of your parent that you should
continue single, resolve to oblige they; and let it not be say that the
power of fancy shall (as in many other of your sex) be too hard for
your duty and your prudence. the less agreeable the man, the more
oblige the compliance. remember, that he be a sober man--a man who have
reputation to lose, and whose reputation therefore be a security for his
good behaviour to you.
you have an opportunity offer you to give the high instance that can
be give of filial duty. embrace it. it be worthy of you. it be
expect from you; however, for your inclination-sake, we may be sorry
that you be call upon to give it. let it be say that you have be
able to lay an obligation upon your parent, (a proud word, my cousin!)
which you could not do, be it not lay against your inclination!--upon
parent who have lay a thousand upon you: who be set upon this point:
who will not give it up: who have give up many point to you, even of
this very nature: and in their turn, for the sake of their own authority,
as well as judgment, expect to be oblige.
I hope I shall soon, in person, congratulate you upon this your
meritorious compliance. to settle and give up my trusteeship be one of
the principal motif of my leave these part. I shall be glad to
settle it to every one's satisfaction; to yours particularly.
if on my arrival I find a happy union, as formerly, reign in a family so
dear to I, it will be an unspeakable pleasure to I; and I shall perhaps
so dispose my affair, as to be near you for ever.
I have write a very long letter, and will add no more, than that I be,
with the great respect, my dear cousin,
your most affectionate and faithful servant,
WM. MORDEN.
***
I will suppose, my dear Miss Howe, that you have read my cousin's letter.
it be now in vain to wish it have come soon. but if it have, I might
perhaps have be so rash as to give Mr. Lovelace the fatal meeting, as I
little thought of go away with he.
but I should hardly have give he the expectation of so do, previous
to the meeting, which make he come prepare; and the revocation of which
he so artfully make ineffectual.
persecute as I be, and little expect so much condescension, as my
aunt, to my great mortification, have tell I (and you confirm) I should
have meet with, it be, however, hard to say what I should or should not
have do as to meet he, have it come in time: but this effect I
verily believe it would have have--to have make I insist with all my
might on go over, out of all their way, to the kind writer of the
instructive letter, and on make a father (a protector, as well as a
friend) of a kinsman, who be one of my trustee. this, circumstance as
I be, would have be a natural, at least an unexceptionable protection!
--But I be to be unhappy! and how it cut I to the heart to think, that
I can already subscribe to my cousin's character of a libertine, so well
draw in the letter which I suppose you now to have read!
that a man of a character which ever be my abhorrence should fall to my
lot!--But, depend on my own strength; have no reason to apprehend
danger from headstrong and disgraceful impulse; I too little perhaps
cast up my eye to the Supreme Director: in whom, mistrust myself, I
ought to have place my whole confidence--and the more, when I see myself
so perserveringly address by a man of this character.
Inexperience and presumption, with the help of a brother and sister who
have low end to answer in my disgrace, have be my ruin!--a hard word,
my dear! but I repeat it upon deliberation: since, let the good happen
which now can happen, my reputation be destroy; a rake be my portion:
and what that portion be my cousin Morden's letter have acquaint you.
pray keep it by you till call for. I see it not myself (have not the
heart to inspect my trunk) till this morning. I would not for the world
this man should see it; because it might occasion mischief between the
most violent spirit, and the most settle brave one in the world, as my
cousin's be say to be.
this letter be enclose (open) in a blank cover. scorn and detest I
as they will, I wonder that one line be not send with it--be it but to
have more particularly point the design of it, in the same generous
spirit that send I the spira.
the sealing of the cover be with black wax. I hope there be no new
occasion in the family to give reason for black wax. but if there be,
it would, to be sure, have be mention, and lay at my door--perhaps
too justly!
I have begin a letter to my cousin; but lay it by, because of the
uncertainty of my situation, and expect every day for several day
past to be at a great certainty. you bid I write to he some time
ago, you know. then it be I begin it: for I have great pleasure in
obey you in all I may. so I ought to have; for you be the only
friend leave I. and, moreover, you generally honour I with your own
observance of the advice I take the liberty to offer you: for I pretend
to say, I give well advice than I have take. and so I have need. for,
I know not how it come about, but I be, in my own opinion, a poor lose
creature: and yet cannot charge myself with one criminal or faulty
inclination. do you know, my dear, how this can be?
yet I can tell you how, I believe--one devious step at set out!--
that must be it:--which pursue, have lead I so far out of my path, that I
be in a wilderness of doubt and error; and never, never, shall find my
way out of it: for, although but one pace awry at first, it have lead I
hundred and hundred of mile out of my path: and the poor estray have
not one kind friend, nor have meet with one direct passenger, to help she
to recover it.
but I, presumptuous creature! must rely so much upon my own knowledge of
the right path!--little apprehend that an ignus fatuus with its false
fire (and ye I have hear enough of such) would arise to mislead I! and
now, in the midst of fen and quagmire, it play around I, and around
I, throw I back again, whenever I think myself in the right track.
but there be one common point, in which all shall meet, err widely as
they may. in that I shall be lay quietly down at last: and then will
all my calamity be at an end.
but how I stray again; stray from my intention! I would only have say,
that I have begin a letter to my cousin Morden some time ago: but that now
I can never end it. you will believe I cannot: for how shall I tell he
that all his compliment be misbestowed? that all his advice be throw
away? all his warning vain? and that even my high expectation be to
be the wife of that free-liver, whom he so pathetically warn I to shun?
let I own, however, have your prayer join with my own, (my fate
depending, as it seem, upon the lip of such a man) 'that, whatever
shall be my destiny, that dreadful part of my father's malediction, that
I may be punish by the man in whom he suppose I put my confidence, may
not take place! that this for Mr. Lovelace's own sake, and for the sake
of human nature, may not be! or, if it be necessary, in support of the
parental authority, that I should be punish by he, that it may not be
by his premeditated or wilful baseness; but that I may be able to acquit
his intention, if not his action!' otherwise, my fault will appear to be
double in the eye of the event-judge world. and yet, methink, I
would be glad that the unkindness of my father and uncle, whose heart
have already be too much wound by my error, may be justify in every
article, except in this heavy curse: and that my father will be
pleased to withdraw that before it be generally know: at least the most
dreadful part of it which regard futurity!
I must lay down my pen. I must brood over these reflection. once more,
before I close my cousin's letter, I will peruse it. and then I shall
have it by heart.
LETTER XX
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SUNDAY NIGHT, MAY 7.
when you reflect upon my unhappy situation, which be attend with so
many indelicate and even shocking circumstance, some of which my pride
will not let I think of with patience; all aggravate by the content of
my cousin's affect letter; you will not wonder that the vapourishness
which have lay hold of my heart should rise to my pen. and yet it would
be more kind, more friendly in I, to conceal from you, who take such a
generous interest in my concern, that bad part of my grief, which
communication and complaint cannot relieve.
but to whom can I unbosom myself but to you: when the man who ought to be
my protector, as he have bring upon I all my distress, add to my
apprehension; when I have not even a servant on whose fidelity I can
rely, or to whom I can break my grief as they arise; and when his
bountiful temper and gay heart attach every one to he; and I be but a
cipher, to give he significance, and myself pain!--these grief,
therefore, do what I can, will sometimes burst into tear; and these
mingling with my ink, will blot my paper. and I know you will not grudge
I the temporary relief.
but I shall go on in the strain I leave off with in my last, when I
intend rather to apologize for my melancholy. but let what I have
above write, once for all, be my apology. my misfortune have give
you a call to discharge the noble office of the friendship we have
vow to each other, in advice and consolation; and it would be an injury
to it, and to you, to suppose it need even that call.
[she then tell Miss Howe, that now her clothe be come, Mr. Lovelace be
continually tease she to go abroad with he in a coach, attend by
whom she please of her own sex, either for the air, or to the public
diversion.
she give the particular of a conversation that have pass between they
on that subject, and his several proposal. but take notice, that he
say not the least word of the solemnity which he so much press for
before they come to town; and which, as she observe, be necessary to
give propriety to his proposal.]
now, my dear, she say, I cannot bear the life I live. I would be glad
at my heart to be out of his reach. if I be, he should soon find the
difference. if I must be humble, it have well be by those to whom I
owe duty, than by he. my aunt write in her letter,* that she dare not
propose any thing in my favour. you tell I, that upon inquiry, you
find,* that, have I not be unhappily seduce away, a change of measure
be actually resolve upon; and that my mother, particularly, be
determined to exert herself for the restoration of the family peace; and,
in order to succeed the well, have thought of try to engage my uncle
Harlowe in her party.
* see Vol. III. Letter LII.
** ibid. Letter VIII.
let I build on these foundation. I can but try, my dear. it be my
duty to try all probably method to restore the poor outcast to favour.
and who know but that once indulgent uncle, who have very great weight in
the family, may be induce to interpose in my behalf? I will give up all
right and title to my grandfather's devise and bequest, with all my
heart and soul, to whom they please, in order to make my proposal
palatable to my brother. and that my surrender may be effectual, I will
engage never to marry.
what think you, my dear, of this expedient? surely, they cannot resolve
to renounce I for ever. if they look with impartial eye upon what have
happen, they will have something to blame themselves for, as well as
I.
I presume, that you will be of opinion that this expedient be worth
try. but here be my difficulty: if I should write, my hard-hearted
brother have so strongly confederate they all against I, that my letter
would be hand about from one to another, till he have harden every one
to refuse my request; whereas could my uncle be engage to espouse my
cause, as from himself, I should have some hope, as I presume to think he
would soon have my mother and my aunt of his party.
what, therefore, I be think of, be this--'suppose Mr. Hickman, whose
good character have gain he every body's respect, should put himself in
my uncle Harlowe's way? and (as if from your knowledge of the state of
thing between Mr. Lovelace and I) assure he not only of the above
particular, but that I be under no obligation that shall hinder I from
take his direction?'
I submit the whole to your consideration, whether to pursue it at all, or
in what manner. but if it be pursue, and if my uncle refuse to
interest himself in my favour upon Mr. Hickman's application as from you,
(for so, for obvious reason, it must be put,) I can then have no hope;
and my next step, in the mind I be in, shall be to throw myself into the
protection of the lady of his family.
it be an impiety to adopt the follow line, because it would be
throw upon the decree of Providence a fault too much my own. but
often do I revolve they, for the sake of the general similitude which
they bear to my unhappy, yet undersigned error.
to you, great god! I make my last appeal:
or clear my virtue, or my crime reveal.
if wand're in the maze of life I run,
and backward tread the step I seek to shun,
impute my error to your own decree:
my foot be guilty: but my heart be free.
[the Lady date again on Monday, to let Miss Howe know, that Mr.
Lovelace, on observe her uneasiness, have introduce to her Mr.
Mennell, Mrs. Fretchville's kinsman, who manage all her affair. she
call he a young officer of sense and politeness, who give she an
account of the house and furniture, to the same effect that Mr.
Lovelace have do before;* as also of the melancholy way Mrs.
Fretchville be in.
* see Letter IV. of this volume.
she tell Miss Howe how extremely urgent Mr. Lovelace be with the
gentleman, to get his spouse (as he now always call she before
company) a sight of the house: and that Mr. Mennell undertake that
very afternoon to show she all of it, except the apartment Mrs.
Fretchville should be in when she go. but that she choose not to
take another step till she know how she approve of her scheme to have
her uncle sound, and with what success, if try, it would be
attend.
Mr. Lovelace, in his humourous way, give his friend an account of the
Lady's peevishness and dejection, on receive a letter with her
clothe. he regret that he have lose her confidence; which he
attribute to his bring she into the company of his four
companion. yet he think he must excuse they, and censure she for
over-niceness; for that he never see man behave well, at least not
they.
mention his introduce Mr. Mennell to she,]
now, Jack, say he, be it not very kind of Mr. Mennell [Captain Mennell
I sometimes call he; for among the military there be no such officer,
thou know, as a lieutenant, or an ensign--be it not very kind in he]
to come along with I so readily as he do, to satisfy my beloved about
the vapourish lady and the house?
but who be Capt. Mennell? methink thou ask: I never hear of such a
man as Captain Mennell.
very likely. but know thou not young Newcomb, honest Doleman's
newphew?
O-ho! be it he?
it be. and I have change his name by virtue of my own single authority.
know thou not, that I be a great name-father? preferment I bestow,
both military and civil. I give estate, and take they away at my
pleasure. quality too I create. and by a still more valuable
prerogative, I degrade by virtue of my own imperial will, without any
other act of forfeiture than my own convenience. what a poor thing be a
monarch to I!
but Mennell, now he have see this angel of a woman, have qualm; thatbe
the devil!--I shall have enough to do to keep he right. but it be the
less wonder, that he should stagger, when a few hour' conversation with
the same lady could make four much more harden varlet find hearts--
only, that I be confident, that I shall at least reward her virtue, if
her virtue overcome I, or I should find it impossible to persevere--for
at time I have confound qualm myself. but say not a word of they to
the confraternity: nor laugh at I for they thyself.
in another letter, date Monday night, he write as follow:
this perverse lady keep I at such a distance, that I be sure something
be go on between she and Miss Howe, notwithstanding the prohibition
from Mrs. Howe to both: and as I have think it some degree of merit in
myself to punish other for their transgression, I be of opinion that
both these girl be punishable for their breach of parental injunction.
and as to their letter-carrier, I have be inquire into his way of
living; and find he to be a common poacher, a deer-stealer, and
warren-robber, who, under pretence of haggle, deal with a set of
customer who constantly take all he bring, whether fish, fowl, or
venison, I hold myself justify (since Wilson's conveyance must at
present be sacred) to have he strip and rob, and what money he have
about he give to the poor; since, if I take not money as well as
letter, I shall be suspect.
to serve one's self, and punish a villain at the same time, be serve
public and private. the law be not make for such a man as I. and I
must come at correspondence so disobediently carry on.
but, on second thought, if I could find out that the dear creature
carry any of her letter in her pocket, I can get she to a play or to
a concert, and she may have the misfortune to lose her pocket.
but how shall I find this out; since her Dorcas know no more of she
dressing and undressing than her Lovelace? for she be dress for the
day before she appear even to her servant. vilely suspicious! upon my
soul, Jack, a suspicious temper be a punishable temper. if a woman
suspect a rogue in an honest man, be it not enough to make the honest
man who know it a rogue?
but, as to her pocket, I think my mind hanker after they, as the less
mischievous attempt. but they cannot hold all the letter I should wish
to see. and yet a woman's pocket be half as deep as she be high. tie
round the sweet levity, I presume, as ballast-bag, lest the wind, as
they move with full sail, from whale-rib canvass, should blow away the
gypsy.
[he then, in apprehension that something be meditate between the two
lady, or that something may be set on foot to get Miss Harlowe out
of his hand, relate several of his contrivance, and boast of his
instruction give in writing to Dorcas, and to his servant will.
summer; and say, that he have provide against every possible
accident, even to bring she back if she should escape, or in case she
should go abroad, and then refuse to return; and hop so to manage,
as that, should he make an attempt, whether he succeed in it or not,
he may have a pretence to detain she.]
he then proceed as follow:
I have order Dorcas to cultivate by all mean her lady's favour; to
lament her incapacity as to write and reading; to shew letter to her
lady, as from pretended country relation; to beg her advice how to
answer they, and to get they answer; and to be always aim at
scrawl with a pen, lest inky finger should give suspicion. I have
moreover give the wench an ivory-leaf pocket-book, with a silver
pencil, that she may make memoranda on occasion.
and, let I tell thee, that the lady have already (at Mrs. Sinclair's
motion) remove her clothe out of the trunk they come in, into an ample
mahogany repository, where they will lie at full length, and which have
drawer in it for linen. a repository, that use to hold the rich
suit which some of the nymph put on, when they be to be dress out,
to captivate, or to ape quality. for many a countess, thou knowest, have
our mother equip; nay, two or three duchess, who live upon quality-
term with their lord. but this to such as will come up to her price,
and can make an appearance like quality themselves on the occasion: for
the reputation of person of birth must not lie at the mercy of every
under-degreed sinner.
a master-key, which will open every lock in this chest, be put into
Dorcas's hand; and she be to take care, when she search for paper,
before she remove any thing, to observe how it lie, that she may
replace all to a hair. Sally and Polly can occasionally help to
transcribe. slow and sure with such an argus-eyed charmer must be all
my movement.
it be impossible that one so young and so inexperienced as she be can
have all her caution from herself; the behaviour of the woman so
unexceptionable; no revelling, no company ever admit into this inner-
house; all genteel, quiet, and easy in it; the nymph well-breed, and
well-read; her first disgust to the old one get over.--it must be Miss
Howe, therefore, [who once be in danger of be take in by one of our
class, by honest Sir George Colmar, as thou hast hear,] that make my
progress difficult.
thou seest, Belford, by the above precautionarie, that I forget nothing.
as the song say, it be not to be imagine
on what slight string
depend these thing
on which man build their glory!
so far, so good. I shall never rest till I have discover in the first
place, where the dear creature put her letter; and in the next till I
have get she to a play, to a concert, or to take an airing with I out of
town for a day or two.
***
I give thee just now some of my contrivance. Dorcas, who be ever
attentive to all her lady's motion, have give I some instance of her
mistress's precaution. she wafer her letter, it seem, in two place;
prick the wafer; and then seal upon they. no doubt but the same care
be take with regard to those bring to she, for she always examine the
seal of the latter before she open they.
I must, I must come at they. this difficulty augment my curiosity.
strange, so much as she write, and at all hour, that not one sleepy or
forgetful moment have offer in our favour!
a fair contention, thou seest: nor plead thou in her favour her youth,
her beauty, her family, her fortune, CREDULITY, she have none; and with
regard to her TENDER year, be I not a young fellow myself? as to
BEAUTY; pr'ythee, Jack, do thou, to spare my modesty, make a comparison
between my Clarissa for a woman, and thy Lovelace for a man. for her
FAMILY; that be not know to its country a century ago: and I hate they
all but she. have I not cause?--for her FORTUNE; fortune, thou know,
be ever a stimulus with I; and this for reason not ignoble. do not
girl of fortune adorn themselves on purpose to engage our attention?
seek they not to draw we into their snare? depend they not, generally,
upon their fortune, in the view they have upon we, more than on their
merit? shall we deprive they of the benefit of their principal
dependence?--can I, in particular, marry every girl who wish to obtain
my notice? if, therefore, in support of the libertine principle for
which none of the sweet rogue hate we, a woman of fortune be bring to
yield homage to her emperor, and any consequence attend the subjugation,
be not such a one shield by her fortune, as well from insult and
contempt, as from indigence--all, then, that admit of debate between my
beloved and I be only this--which of the two have more wit, more
circumspection--and that remain to be try.
a sad life, however, this life of doubt and suspense, for the poor lady
to live, as well as for I; that be to say, if she be not naturally
jealous--if she be, her uneasiness be constitutional, and she cannot help
it; nor will it, in that case, hurt she. for a suspicious temper will
make occasion for doubt, if none be to offer to its hand. my fair one
therefore, if naturally suspicious, be oblige to I for save she the
trouble of study for these occasion--but, after all, the plainest
path in our journey through life be the safe and good I believe,
although it be not give I to choose they; I be not, however, singular
in the pursuit of the more intricate path; since there be thousand,
and ten thousand, who have rather fish in troubled water than in smooth.
LETTER XXI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, MAY 9.
I be a very unhappy man. this lady be say to be one of the sweetest-
temper creature in the world: and so I think she. but to I she be
one of the most perverse. I never be suppose to be an ill-natured
mortal neither. how can it be? I imagine, for a long while, that we
be bear to make each other happy: but quite the contrary; we really
seem to be send to plague each other.
I will write a comedy, I think: I have a title already; and thatbe half
the work. the Quarrelsome Lovers. 'twill do. therebe something new and
strike in it. yet, more or less, all lover quarrel. Old Terence have
take notice of that; and observe upon it, that lover fall out
occasion lover fall in; and a well understanding of course. 'tis
natural that it should be so. but with we, we fall out so often, without
fall in once; and a second quarrel so generally happen before a first
be make up; that it be hard to guess what event our love will be
attend with. but perseverance be my glory, and patience my handmaid,
when I have in view an object worthy of my attempt. what be there in an
easy conquest? hudibra question well,
------what mad lover ever dy'd
to gain a soft and easy bride?
or, for a lady tender-hearte,
in purl stream, or hemp, depart?
but I will lead to the occasion of this preamble.
I have be out. on my return, meet Dorcas on the stair--your lady in
her chamber, Dorcas? in the dining-room, sir: and if ever you hope for
an opportunity to come at a letter, it must be now. for at her foot I
see one lie, which, as may be see by its open fold, she have be
reading, with a little parcel of other she be now busy with--all
pull out of her pocket, as I believe: so, Sir, youwill know where to
find they another time.
I be ready to leap for joy, and instantly resolve to bring forward an
expedient which I have hold in petto; and enter the dining-room with an
air of transport, I boldly clasp my arm about she, as she sit; she
huddle up her paper in her handkerchief all the time; the drop
paper unseen. o my dear life, a lucky expedient have Mr. Mennell and
I hit upon just now. in order to hasten Mrs. Fretchville to quit the
house, I have agree, if you approve of it, to entertain her cook, she
housemaid, and two man-servant, (about whom she be very solicitous,)
till you be provide to your mind. and, that no accommodation may be
want, I have consent to take the household linen at an appraisement.
I be to pay down five hundred pound, and the remainder as soon as the
bill can be look up, and the amount of they adjust. thus will you
have a charming house entirely ready to receive you. some of the lady
of my family will soon be with you: they will not permit you long to
suspend my happy day. and that nothing may be want to gratify your
utmost punctilio, I will till then consent to stay here at Mrs.
Sinclair's while you reside at your new house; and leave the rest to your
own generosity. o my beloved creature, will not this be agreeable to
you? I be sure it will--it must--and clasp she close to I, I give
she a more fervent kiss than ever I have dare to give she before. I
permit not my ardour to overcome my discretion, however; for I take
care to set my foot upon the letter, and scrap it far from she, as
it be behind her chair.
she be in a passion at the liberty I take. bow low, I beg she
pardon; and stoop still low, in the same motion take up the letter,
and whipt it into my bosom.
pox on I for a puppy, a fool, a blockhead, a clumsy varlet, a mere Jack
Belford!--I think myself a much cleverer fellow than I am!--why could I
not have be follow in by Dorcas, who might have take it up, while I
address her lady?
for here, the letter be unfold, I could not put it in my bosom
without alarm her ear, as my sudden motion do her eye--up she fly
in a moment: Traitor! Judas! her eye flash lightning, and a
perturbation in her eager countenance, so charming!--what have you take
up?--and then, what for both my ear I durst not have do to she, she
make no scruple to seize the steal letter, though in my bosom.
what be to be do on so palpable a detection?--i clasp her hand,
which have hold of the ravished paper, between mine: o my beloved
creature! say I, can you think I have not some curiosity? be it
possible you can be thus for ever employ; and I, love narrative
letter-writing above every other specie of writing, and admire your
talent that way, should not (thus upon the dawn of my happiness, as I
presume to hope) burn with a desire to be admit into so sweet a
correspondence?
let go my hand!--stamping with her pretty foot; how dare you, sir!--at
this rate, I see--too plainly I see--and more she could not say: but,
gasp, be ready to faint with passion and affright; the devil a bit
of her accustomed gentleness to be see in her charming face, or to be
hear in her musical voice.
have go thus far, loth, very loth, be I to lose my prize--once more
I get hold of the rumple-up letter!--impudent man! be her word:
stamp again. for God's sake, then it be. I let go my prize, lest
she should faint away: but have the pleasure first to find my hand within
both her, she try to open my reluctant finger. how near be my
heart at that moment to my hand, throb to my finger' end, to be
thus familiarly, although angrily, treat by the charmer of my soul!
when she have get it in her possession, she fly to the door. I throw
myself in her way, shut it, and, in the humblest manner, besought she to
forgive I. and yet do you think the harlowe-hearted charmer
(notwithstanding the agreeable annunciation I come in with) would forgive
me?--No, truly; but push I rudely from the door, as if I have be
nothing, [yet do I love to try, so innocently to try, her strength too!]
she gain that force through passion, which I have lose through fear, out
she shoot to her own apartment; [thank my star she could fly no far!]
and as soon as she enter it, in a passion still, she double-locked and
double-bolt herself in. this my comfort, on reflection, that, upon a
great offence, it cannot be bad.
I retreat to my own apartment, with my heart full: and, my man will not
be near I, give myself a plaguy knock on the forehead with my double
fist.
and now be my charmer shut up from I: refuse to see I, refuse her
meal. she resolve not to see I; thatbe more:--never again, if she can
help it; and in the mind she be in--I hope she have say.
the dear creature, whenever they quarrel with their humble servant,
should always remember this save clause, that they may not be forswear.
but think thou that I will not make it the subject of one of my first
plot to inform myself of the reason why all this commotion be necessary
on so slight an occasion as this would have be, be not the letter that
pass between these lady of a treasonable nature?
WEDNESDAY MORNING.
no admission to breakfast, any more than to supper. I wish this lady be
not a simpleton, after all.
I have send up in Captain Mennell's name.
a message from Captain Mennell, Madam.
it willnot do. she be of baby age. she cannot be--a Solomon, I be go
to say, in every thing. Solomon, Jack, be the wise man. but didst
ever hear who be the wise woman? I want a comparison for this lady.
cunning woman and witch we read of without number. but I fancy wisdom
never enter into the character of a woman. it be not a requisite of
the sex. woman, indeed, make well sovereign than man: but why be
that?--because the woman-sovereign be govern by man; the men-
sovereign by women.--charme, by my soul! for hence we guess at the
rudder by which both be steer.
but to put wisdom out of the question, and to take cunning in; that
be to say, to consider woman as a woman; what shall we do, if this lady
have something extraordinary in her head? repeat charge have she give
to Wilson, by a particular messenger, to send any letter direct for she
the moment it come.
I must keep a good look-out. she be not now afraid of her brother's
plot. I shallnot be at all surprised, if Singleton call upon Miss Howe,
as the only person who know, or be likely to know, where Miss Harlowe
be; pretend to have affair of importance, and of particular service
to she, if he can but be admit to her speech--of compromise, who
know, from her brother?
then will Miss Howe warn she to keep close. then will my protection be
again necessary. this will do, I believe. any thing from Miss Howe
must.
Joseph Leman be a vile fellow with she, and my implement. Joseph, honest
Joseph, as I call he, may hang himself. I have play he off enough,
and have very little further use for he. no need to wear one plot to
the stump, when I can find new one every hour.
nor blame I for the use I make of my talent. who, that hath such, will
let them be idle?
well, then, I will find a Singleton; thatbe all I have to do.
instantly find one!--will!
sir--
this moment call I hither thy cousin Paul wheatly, just come from sea,
whom thou wert recommend to my service, if I be to marry, and keep
a pleasure-boat.
Presto--Willbe go--Paul will be here presently. presently to Mrs.
Howe's. if Paul be Singleton's mate, come from his captain, it will do
as well as if it be Singleton himself.
Sally, a little devil, often reproach I with the slowness of my
proceeding. but in a play do not the principal entertainment lie in
the first four act? be not all in a manner over when you come to the
fifth? and what a vulture of a man must he be, who souse upon his prey,
and in the same moment truss and devour?
but to own the truth. I have overplotte myself. to my make my work
secure, as I think, I have fright the dear creature with the sight of
my four Hottentots, and I shall be a long time, I doubt, before I can
recover my lose ground. and then this curse family at Harlowe-place
have make she out of humour with I, with herself, and with all the
world, but Miss Howe, who, no doubt, be continually add difficulty
to my other difficulty.
I be very unwilling to have recourse to measure which these demon below
be continually urge I to take; because I be sure, that, at last, I
shall be bring to make she legally mine.
one complete trial over, and I think I will do her noble justice.
***
well, Paul's go--go already--have all his lesson. a notable fellow!
--Lord W.'s necessary-man be Paul before he go to sea. a more
sensible rogue Paul than Joseph! not such a pretender to piety neither
as the other. at what a price have I buy that Joseph! I believe I
must punish the rascal at last: but must let he marry first: then
(though that may be punishment enough) I shall punish two at once in the
man and his wife. and how richly do Betty deserve punishment for her
behaviour to my goddess!
but now I hear the rusty hinge of my beloved's door give I creak
invitation. my heart creak and throb with respondent trepidation:
Whimsical enough though! for what relation have a lover's heart to a rusty
pair of hinge? but they be the hinge that open and shut the door of
my beloved's bed-chamber. relation enough in that.
I hear not the door shut again. I shall receive her command I hope
anon. what signify she keep I thus at a distance? she must be
mine, let I do or offer what I will. courage whenever I assume, all be
over: for, should she think of escape from hence, whither can she fly
to avoid I? her parent will not receive she. her uncle will not
entertain she. her beloved Norton be in their direction, and cannot.
Miss Howe dare not. she have not one friend in town but I--be entirely a
stranger to the town. and what then be the matter with I, that I should
be thus unaccountably over-awed and tyrannize over by a dear creature
who want sonly to know how impossible it be that she should escape I, in
order to be as humble to I as she be to she persecuting relation!
should I ever make the grand attempt, and fail, and should she hate I
for it, her hatred can be but temporary. she have already incur the
censure of the world. she must therefore choose to be mine, for the sake
of solder up her reputation in the eye of that impudent world. for,
who that know I, and know that she have be in my power, though but
for twenty-four hour, will think she spotless as to fact, let she
inclination be what it will? and then human nature be such a well-know
rogue, that every man and woman judge by what each know of he or
herself, that inclination be no more to be trust, where an opportunity
be give, than I be; especially where a woman, young and blooming, love
a man well enough to go off with he; for such will be the world's
construction in the present case.
she call she maid Dorcas. no doubt, that I may hear her harmonious
voice, and to give I an opportunity to pour out my soul at her foot; to
renew all my vow; and to receive her pardon for the past offence: and
then, with what pleasure shall I begin upon a new score, and afterwards
wipe out that; and begin another, and another, till the last offence
pass; and there can be no other! and once, after that, to be forgive,
will be to be forgive for ever.
***
the door be again shut. Dorcas tell I, that her lady deny to admit I
to dine with she; a favour I have order the wench to beseech she to
grant I, the next time she see she--not uncivilly, however, denies--
come-to by degree! nothing but the last offence, the honest wench
tell I, in the language of her principal below, will do with she. the
last offence be meditate. yet this vile recreant heart of mine play
I booty.
but here I conclude; though the tyranness leave I nothing to do but to
read, write, and fret.
Subscription be formal between we. besides, I be so much shebe, that I
cannot say how much I be thine or any other person's.
LETTER XXII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
TUESDAY, MAY 9.
if, my dear, you approve of the application to my uncle Harlowe, I wish
it to be make as soon as possible. we be quite out again. I have shut
myself up from he. the offence indeed not so very great--and yet it be
too. he have like to have get a letter. one of your's. but never will
I write again, or re-peruse my paper, in an apartment where he think
himself entitle to come. he do not read a line of it. indeed he do
not. so donot be uneasy. and depend upon future caution.
thus it be. the sun be upon my closet, and Mr. Lovelace abroad--
she then give Miss Howe an account of his come by surprise upon she:
of his flutter speech: of his bold address: of her struggle with
he for the letter, &c.
and now, my dear, proceed she, I be more and more convinced, that I be
too much in his power to make it prudent to stay with he. and if my
friend will but give I hope, I will resolve to abandon he for ever.
o my dear! he be a fierce, a foolish, an insolent creature!--And, in
truth, I hardly expect that we can accommodate. how much unhappy be I
already with he than my mother ever be with my father after marriage!
since (and that without any reason, any pretence in the world for it) he
be for break my spirit before I be his, and while I be, or ought to be
[o my folly, that I be not!] in my own power.
till I can know whether my friend will give I hope or not, I must do
what I never study to do before in any case; that is, try to keep this
difference open: and yet it will make I look little in my own eye;
because I shall mean by it more than I can own. but this be one of the
consequence of all engagement, where the mind be unpaire--dispaire,
in my case, I must say.
let this evermore be my caution to individual of my sex--guard your eye:
'twill ever be in a combination against your judgment. if there be two
part to be take, it will be for ever, traitor as it be, take the wrong
one.
if you ask I, my dear, how this caution befit I? let I tell you a
secret which I have but very lately find out upon self-examination,
although you seem to have make the discovery long ago: that have not my
foolish eye be too much attach, I have not take the pain to attempt,
so officiously as I do, the prevention of mischief between he and some
of my family, which first induce the correspondence between we, and be
the occasion of bring the apprehended mischief with double weight upon
himself. my vanity and conceit, as far as I know, might have part in the
inconsiderate measure: for do it not look as if I think myself more
capable of obviate difficulty than anybody else of my family?
but you must not, my dear, suppose my heart to be still a confederate
with my eye. that deluded eye now clearly see its fault, and the mislead
heart despise it for it. hence the application I be make to my uncle:
hence it be, that I can say (I think truly) that I would atone for my
fault at any rate, even by the sacrifice of a limb or two, if that would
do.
Adieu, my dearest friend!--may your heart never know the hundredth part
of the pain mine at present feel! pray
your
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER xxiii
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
WEDNESDAY, MAY 10.
I will write! no man shall write for I.* no woman shall hinder I from
writing. surely I be of age to distinguish between reason and caprice.
I be not write to a man, be I?--If I be carry on a correspondence
with a fellow, of whom my mother disapprove, and whom it might be
improper for I to encourage, my own honour and my duty would engage my
obedience. but as the case be so widely different, not a word more on
this subject, I beseech you!
* Clarissa propose Mr. Hickman to write for Miss Howe. see Letter XI.
of this volume, Paragr. 5, & ult.
I much approve of your resolution to leave this wretch, if you can make
it up with your uncle.
I hate the man--most heartily do I hate he, for his teasing way. the
very reading of your account of they tease I almost as much as they can
you. may you have encouragement to fly the foolish wretch!
I have other reason to wish you may: for I have just make an
acquaintance with one who know a vast deal of his private history. the
man be really a villain, my dear! an execrable one! if all be true that I
have hear! and yet I be promise other particular. I do assure you,
my dear friend, that, have he a dozen life, he might have forfeit they
all, and be dead twenty crime ago.
if ever you condescend to talk familiarly with he again, ask he after
Miss Betterton, and what become of she. and if he shuffle and
prevaricate as to she, question he about Miss Lockyer.--O my dear, the
manbe a villain!
I will have your uncle sound, as you desire, and that out of hand. but
yet I be afraid of the success; and this for several reason. 'tis hard
to say what the sacrifice of your estate would do with some people: and
yet I must not, when it come to the test, permit you to make it.
as your Hannah continue ill, I would advise you to try to attach Dorcas
to your interest. have you not be impoliticly shy of she?
I wish you could come at some of his letter. surely a man of his
negligent character cannot be always guard. if he be, and if you
cannot engage your servant, I shall suspect they both. let he be call
upon at a short warning when he be write, or when he have paper lie
about, and so surprise he into negligence.
such inquiry, I know, be of the same nature with those we make at an
inn in traveling, when we look into every corner and closet, for fear of
a villain; yet should be fright out of our wit, be we to find one.
but 'tis well to detect such a one when awake and up, than to be
attack by he when in bed and asleep.
I be glad you have your clothe. but no money! no book but a Spira, a
Drexelius, and a practice of Piety! those who send the latter ought to
have keep it for themselves--but I must hurry myself from this subject.
you have exceedingly alarm I by what you hint of his attempt to get
one of my letter. I be assure by my new informant, that he be the head
of a gang of wretched (those he bring you among, no doubt, be some of
they) who join together to betray innocent creature, and to support one
another afterwards by violence; and be he to come at the knowledge of
the freedom I take with he, I should be afraid to stir out without a
guard.
I be sorry to tell you, that I have reason to think, that your brother
have not lay aside his foolish plot. a sunburnt, sailor-look fellow
be with I just now, pretend great service to you from Captain
Singleton, could he be admit to your speech. I plead ignorance as
to the place of your abode. the fellow be too well instruct for I to
get any thing out of he.
I weep for two hour incessantly on read your', which enclose that
from your cousin Morden.* my dearest creature, do not desert yourself.
let your Anna Howe obey the call of that friendship which have unite we
as one soul, and endeavour to give you consolation.
* see Letter XIX. of this volume.
I wonder not at the melancholy reflection you so often cast upon
yourself in your letter, for the step you have be force upon one
hand, and trick into on the other. a strange fatality! as if it be
design to show the vanity of all human prudence. I wish, my dear, as
you hint, that both you and I have not too much pride ourselves in a
perhaps too conscious superiority over other. but I will stop--how apt
be weak mind to look out for judgment in any extraordinary event!
'tis so far right, that it be well, and safe, and juster, to arraign
ourselves, or our dear friend, than Providence; which must always
have wise end to answer its dispensation.
but do not talk, as if one of your former, of be a warning only*--you
will be as excellent an example as ever you hop to be, as well as a
warning: and that will make your story, to all that shall come to know
it, of double efficacy: for be it that such a merit as yours could not
ensure to herself noble and generous usage from a libertine heart, who
will expect any tolerable behaviour from man of his character?
* see Vol. III. Letter XXVIII.
if you think yourself inexcusable for take a step that put you into the
way of delusion, without any intention to go off with he, what must
those giddy creature think of themselves, who, without half your
provocation and inducement, and without any regard to decorum, leap
wall, drop from window, and steal away from their parent' house, to
the seducer's bed, in the same day?
again, if you be so ready to accuse yourself for dispense with the
prohibition of the most unreasonable parent, which yet be but half-
prohibition at first, what ought those to do, who wilfully shut their
ear to the advice of the most reasonable; and that perhaps, where
apparent ruin, or undoubted inconvenience, be the consequence of the
predetermine rashness?
and lastly, to all who will know your story, you will be an excellent
example of watchfulness, and of that caution and reserve by which a
prudent person, who have be suppose to be a little mislead, endeavour
to mend her error; and, never once lose sight of her duty, do all in
her power to recover the path she have be rather drive out of than
choose to swerve from.
come, come, my dear friend, consider but these thing; and steadily,
without desponding, pursue your earnest purpose to amend what you think
have be amiss; and it may not be a misfortune in the end that you have
err; especially as so little of your will be in your error.
and indeed I must say that I use the word mislead, and error, and such-
like, only in compliment to your own too-ready self-accusation, and to
the opinion of one to whom I owe duty: for I think in my conscience, that
every part of your conduct be defensible: and that those only be
blamable who have no other way to clear themselves but by condemn you.
I expect, however, that such melancholy reflection as drop from your pen
but too often will mingle with all your future pleasure, be you to
marry Lovelace, and be he to make the good of husband.
you be immensely happy, above the happiness of a mortal creature, before
you know he: every body almost worship you: envy itself, which have of
late rear up its venomous head against you, be awe, by your superior
worthiness, into silence and admiration. you be the soul of every
company where you visit. your elder have I see decline to offer
their opinion upon a subject till you have deliver your; often, to
save themselves the mortification of retract theirs, when they hear
your. yet, in all this, your sweetness of manner, your humility and
affability, cause the subscription every one make to your sentiment,
and to your superiority, to be equally unfeigned, and unhesitating; for
they see that their applause, and the preference they give you to
themselves, subject not themselves to insult, nor exalt you into any
visible triumph over they; for you have always something to say on every
point you carry that raise the yield heart, and leave every one
pleased and satisfied with themselves, though they carry not off the
palm.
your work be show or refer to wherever fine work be talk of.
nobody have any but an inferior and second-hand praise for diligence, for
economy, for reading, for writing, for memory, for facility in learn
every thing laudable, and even for the more envy grace of person and
dress, and an all-surpass elegance in both, where you be know, and
those subject talk of.
the poor bless you every step you trod: the rich think you their
honour, and take a pride that they be not oblige to descend from their
own class for an example that do credit to it.
though all man wish for you, and seek you, young as you be; yet,
have not those who be bring to address you be encourage out of
sordid and spiteful view, not one of they would have dare to lift up
his eye to you.
thus happy in all about you, thus make happy all within your circle,
could you think that nothing would happen to you, to convince you that
you be not to be exempt from the common lot?--To convince you, that
you be not absolutely perfect; and that you must not expect to pass
through life without trial, temptation, and misfortune?
indeed, it must be own that no trial, no temptation, worthy of your
virtue, and of your prudence, could well have attack you soon,
because of your tender year, and more effectually, than those heavy one
under which you struggle; since it must be allow, that you equanimity
and foresight make you superior to common accident; for be not most of
the trouble that fall to the lot of common mortal bring upon
themselves either by their too large desire, or too little deserts?--
case, both, from which you stand exempt.--it be therefore to be some
man, or some bad spirit in the shape of one, that, form on purpose,
be to be send to invade you; while as many other such spirit as there
be person in your family be permit to take possession, severally,
in one dark hour, of the heart of every one of it, there to sit perch,
perhaps, and direct every motion to the motion of the seducer
without, in order to irritate, to provoke, to push you forward to meet
he.
upon the whole, there seem, as I have often say, to have be a kind of
fate in your error, if it be an error; and this perhaps admit for
the sake of a well example to be collect from your SUFFERINGS, than
could have be give, have you never err: for my dear, the time of
ADVERSITY be your SHINING-TIME. I see it evidently, that adversity must
call forth grace and beauty which could not have be bring to light
in a run of that prosperous fortune which attend you from your cradle
till now; admirably as you became, and, as we all think, greatly as you
deserve that prosperity.
all the matter be, the trial must be grievous to you. it be to I: it be
to all who love you, and look upon you as one set aloft to be admire
and imitate, and not as a mark, as you have lately find, for envy to
shoot its shaft at.
let what I have write above have its due weight with you, my dear; and
then, as warm imagination be not without a mixture of enthusiasm, your
Anna Howe, who, on reperusal of it, imagine it to be in a style superior
to her usual style, will be ready to flatter herself that she have be in
a manner inspire with the hint that have comfort and raise the
dejected heart of her suffering friend; who, from such hard trial, in a
bloom so tender, may find at time her spirit sink too low to enable she
to pervade the surround darkness, which conceal from her the hopeful
dawning of the well day which await she.
I will add no more at present, than that I be
your ever faithful and affectionate
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XXIV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
FRIDAY, MAY 12.
I must be silent, my exalt friend, under praise that oppress my heart
with a consciousness of not deserve they; at the same time that the
generous design of those praise raise and comfort it: for it be a
charming thing to stand high in the opinion of those we love; and to find
that there be soul that can carry their friendship beyond accident,
beyond body and tie of blood. whatever, my dear creature, be my
shin-time, the time of a friend's adversity be yours. and it would be
almost a fault in I to regret those affliction, which give you an
opportunity so gloriously to exert those quality, which not only
ennoble our sex, but dignify human nature.
but let I proceed to subject less agreeable.
I be sorry you have reason to think Singleton's project be not at an
end. but who know what the sailor have to propose?--Yet have any good
be intend I, this method would hardly have be fall upon.
depend upon it, my dear, your letter shall be safe.
I have make a handle of Mr. Lovelace's bold attempt and freedom, as I
tell you I would, to keep he ever since at a distance, that I may have
an opportunity to see the success of the application to my uncle, and to
be at liberty to embrace any favourable overture that may arise from it.
yet he have be very importunate, and twice bring Mr. Mennell from Mrs.
Fretchvill to talk about the house.--if I should be oblige to make up
with he again, I shall think I be always do myself a spite.
as to what you mention of his newly-detect crime; and your advice to
attach Dorcas to my interest; and to come at some of his letter; these
thing will require more or less of my attention, as I may hope favour or
not from my uncle Harlowe.
I be sorry that my poor Hannah continue ill. Pray, my dear, inform
yourself, and let I know, whether she want any thing that befit her
case.
I will not close this letter till to-morrow be over; for I be resolve to
go to church; and this as well for the sake of my duty, as to see if I be
at liberty to go out when I please without be attend or accompany.
SUNDAY, MAY 14.
I have not be able to avoid a short debate with Mr. Lovelace. I have
order a coach to the door. when I have notice that it be come, I go
out of my chamber to go to it; but meet he dress on the stair head,
with a book in his hand, but without his hat and sword. he ask, with
an air very solemn yet respectful, if I be go abroad. I tell he I
be. he desire leave to attend I, if I be go to church. I
refuse he. and then he complain heavily of my treatment of he; and
declare that he would not live such another week as the past, for the
world.
I own to he very frankly, that I have make an application to my
friend; and that I be resolve to keep myself to myself till I know the
issue of it.
he colour, and seem surprised. but check himself in something he
be go to say, he plead my danger from Singleton, and again desire
to attend I.
and then he tell I, that Mrs. Fretchville have desire to continue a
fortnight long in the house. she find, say he, that I be unable to
determine about enter upon it; and now who know when such a vapourish
creature will come to a resolution? this, Madam, have be an unhappy
week; for have I not stand upon such bad term with you, you might have
be new mistress of that house; and probably have my cousin Montague, if
not Lady Betty, actually with you.
and so, Sir, take all you say for grant, your cousin Montague cannot
come to Mrs. Sinclair's? what, pray, be her objection to Mrs.
Sinclair's? be this house fit for I to live in a month or two, and not
fit for any of your relation for a few days?--And Mrs. Fretchville have
take more time too!--then, push by he, I hurry down stair.
he call to Dorcas to bring he his sword and hat; and follow I down
into the passage, place himself between I and the door; and again
desire leave to attend I.
Mrs. Sinclair come out at that instant, and ask I, if I do not choose
a dish of chocolate?
I wish, Mrs. Sinclair, say I, you would take this man in with you to
your chocolate. I donot know whether I be at liberty to stir out without
his leave or not.
then turn to he, I ask, if he keep I there his prisoner?
Dorcas just then bring he his sword and hat, he open the street-
door, and take my reluctant hand, lead I, in a very obsequious manner,
to the coach. People pass by, stop, star, and whisper--but he
be so graceful in his person and dress, that he generally take every
eye.
I be uneasy to be so gazed at; and he step in after I, and the
coachman drive to St. Paul's.
he be very full of assiduity all the way; while I be as reserve as
possible: and when I return, din, as I have do the great part of
the week, by myself.
he tell I, upon my resolving to do so, that although he would continue
his passive observance till I know the issue of my application, yet I
must expect, that then I should not rest one moment till I have fix his
happy day: for that his very soul be fret with my slight,
resentment, and delay.
a wretch! when can I say, to my infinite regret, on a double account,
that all he complain of be owe to himself!
o that I may have good tiding from my uncle!
Adieu, my dear friend--this shall lie ready for an exchange (as I hope
for one to-morrow from you) that will decide, as I may say, the destiny
of
your
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER XXV
MISS HOWE, to MRS. JUDITH NORTON
THURSDAY, MAY 11.
GOOD MRS. NORTON,
cannot you, without name I as an adviser, who be hat by the family,
contrive a way to let Mrs. Harlowe know, that in an accidental
conversation with I, you have be assure that my beloved friend pine
after a reconciliation with her relation? that she have hitherto, in
hope of it, refuse to enter into any obligation that shall be in the
least a hinderance [sic] to it: that she would fain avoid give Mr.
Lovelace a right to make her family uneasy in relation to her
grandfather's estate: that all she wish for still be to be indulge in
her choice of a single life, and, on that condition, would make she
father's pleasure shebe with regard to that estate: that Mr. Lovelace be
continually press she to marry he; and all his friend likewise: but
that I be sure she have so little like to the man, because of his faulty
moral, and of the antipathy of her relation to he, that if she have any
hope give she of a reconciliation, she would forego all thought of he,
and put herself into her father's protection. but that their resolution
must be speedy; for otherwise she would find herself oblige to give way
to his press entreaty; and it might then be out of her power to
prevent disagreeable litigation.
I do assure you, Mrs. Norton, upon my honour, that our dear friend
know nothing of this procedure of mine: and therefore it be proper to
acquaint you, in confidence, with my ground for it.--These be they:
she have desire I to let Mr. Hickman drop hint to the above effect to
her uncle Harlowe; but indirectly, as from himself, lest, if the
application should not be attend with success, and Mr. Lovelace (who
already take it ill that he have so little of her favour) come to know
it, she may be deprive of every protection, and be perhaps subject to
great inconveniencie from so haughty a spirit.
have this authority from she, and be very solicitous about the
success of the application, I think, that if the weight of so good a
wife, mother, and sister, as Mrs. Harlowe be know to be, be throw
into the same scale with that of Mr. John Harlowe (supposing he could be
engage) it could hardly fail of make a due impression.
Mr. Hickman will see Mr. John Harlowe to-morrow: by that time you may see
Mrs. Harlowe. if Mr. Hickman find the old gentleman favourable, he will
tell he, that you will have see Mrs. Harlowe upon the same account; and
will advise he to join in consultation with she how good to proceed to
melt the most obdurate heart in the world.
this be the fair state of the matter, and my true motive for write to
you. I leave all, therefore, to your discretion; and most heartily wish
success to it; be of opinion that Mr. Lovelace cannot possibly deserve
our admirable friend: nor indeed know I the man who do.
Pray acquaint I by a line of the result of your interposition. if it
prove not such as may be reasonably hop for, our dear friend shall know
nothing of this step from I; and pray let she not from you. for, in
that case, it would only give deep grief to a heart already too much
afflict. I be, dear and worthy Mrs. Norton,
your true friend,
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XXVI
MRS. NORTON, to MISS HOWE
SATURDAY, MAY 13.
DEAR MADAM,
my heart be almost break, to be oblige to let you know, that such be
the situation of thing in the family of my ever-dear Miss Harlowe, that
there can be at present no success expect from any application in her
favour. her poor mother be to be pity. I have a most affect letter
from she; but must not communicate it to you; and she forbid I to let
it be know that she write upon the subject; although she be compel,
as it be, to do it, for the ease of her own heart. I mention it
therefore in confidence.
I hope in God that my beloved young lady have preserve her honour
inviolate. I hope there be not a man breathe who could attempt a
sacrilege so detestable. I have no apprehension of a failure in a virtue
so establish. God for ever keep so pure a heart out of the reach of
surprise and violence! ease, dear Madam, I beseech you, my over-anxious
heart, by one line, by the bearer, although but one line, to acquaint I
(as surely you can) that her honour be unsullied.--if it be not, adieu to
all the comfort this life can give: since none will it be able to afford
to the poor
JUDITH NORTON.
LETTER XXVII
MISS HOWE, to MRS. JUDITH NORTON
SATURDAY EVENING, MAY 13.
dear, good WOMAN,
your beloved's honour be inviolate!--must be inviolate! and will be so,
in spite of man and devil. could I have have hope of a reconciliation,
all my view be, that she should not have have this man.--all that can be
say now, be, she must run the risk of a bad husband: she of whom no man
living be worthy!
you pity her mother--so do not I! I pity no mother that put it out of
her power to show maternal love, and humanity, in order to patch up for
herself a precarious and sorry quiet, which every blast of wind shall
disturb.
I hate tyrant in ever form and shape: but paternal and maternal tyrant
be the bad of all: for they can have no bowel.
I repeat, that I pity none of they. our beloved friend only deserve
pity. she have never be in the hand of this man, but for they. she be
quite blameless. you donot know all her story. be I to tell you that
she have no intention to go off with this man, it would avail her nothing.
it would only deserve to condemn, with those who drive she to
extremity, he who now must be her refuge. I be
your sincere friend and servant,
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XXVIII
MRS. HARLOWE, to MRS. NORTON
[not communicate till the letter come to be collect.]
SATURDAY, MAY 13.
I return an answer in writing, as I promise, to your communication. but
take no notice either to my Bella's Betty, (who I understand sometimes
visit you,) or to the poor wretch herself, nor to any body, that I do
write. I charge you donot. my heart be full: writing may give some vent
to my grief, and perhaps I may write what lie most upon my heart,
without confine myself strictly to the present subject.
you know how dear this ungrateful creature ever be to we all. you know
how sincerely we join with every one of those who ever have see she, or
converse with she, to praise and admire she; and exceed in our praise
even the bound of that modesty, which, because she be our own, should
have restrain we; be of opinion, that to have be silent in the
praise of so apparent a merit must rather have argue blindness or
affectation in we, than that we should incur the censure of vain
partiality to our own.
when therefore any body congratulate we on such a daughter, we receive
their congratulation without any diminution. if it be say, you be
happy in this child! we own, that no parent ever be happy in a
child. if, more particularly, they praise her dutiful behaviour to we,
we say, she know not how to offend. if it be say, Miss Clarissa
Harlowe have a wit and penetration beyond her year; we, instead of
disallow it, would add--and a judgment no less extraordinary than her
wit. if her prudence be praise, and a forethought, which every one see
supply what only year and experience give to other--nobody need to
scruple take lesson from Clarissa Harlowe, be our proud answer.
forgive I, o forgive I, my dear Norton--but I know you will; for your,
when good, be this child, and your glory as well as mine.
but have you not hear stranger, as she pass to and from church, stop
to praise the angel of a creature, as they call she; when it be enough
for those who know who she be, to cry, why, it be Miss Clarissa Harlowe!
--as if every body be oblige to know, or to have hear of Clarissa
Harlowe, and of her excellency. while, accustom to praise, it be
too familiar to she, to cause she to alter either her look or her pace.
for my own part, I could not stifle a pleasure that have perhaps a faulty
vanity for its foundation, whenever I be speak of, or address to, as
the mother of so sweet a child: Mr. Harlowe and I, all the time, love
each other the well for the share each have in such a daughter.
still, still indulge the fond, the overflowing heart of a mother! I
could dwell for ever upon the remembrance of what she be, would but that
remembrance banish from my mind what she be!
in her bosom, young as she be, could I repose all my grief--sure of
receive from her prudence and advice as well as comfort; and both
insinuate in so dutiful a manner, that it be impossible to take those
exception which the distance of year and character between a mother and
a daughter would have make one apprehensive of from any other daughter.
she be our glory when abroad, our delight when at home. every body be
even covetous of her company; and we grudge she to our brother Harlowe,
and to our sister and brother Hervey. no other contention among we,
then, but who should be next favour by she. no chiding ever know she
from we, but the chiding of lover, when she be for shut herself up
too long together from we, in pursuit of those charming amusement and
useful employment, for which, however, the whole family be the well.
our other child have reason (good child as they always be) to
think themselves neglect. but they likewise be so sensible of their
sister's superiority, and of the honour she reflect upon the whole
family, that they confess themselves eclipse, without envy the
eclipser. indeed, there be not any body so equal with she, in their own
opinion, as to envy what all aspire but to emulate. the dear creature,
you know, my Norton, give an eminence to we all!
then her acquirement. her skill in music, her fine needle-work, her
elegance in dress; for which she be so much admire, that the
neighbouring lady use to say, that they need not fetch fashion from
London; since whatever Miss Clarissa Harlowe wear be the good fashion,
because her choice of natural beauty set those of art far behind they.
her genteel ease, and fine turn of person; her deep reading, and these,
join to her open manner, and her cheerful modesty--o my good Norton,
what a sweet child be once my Clary Harlowe!
this, and more, you know she to be: for many of her excellency be
owe to yourself; and with the milk you give she, you give she what no
other nurse in the world could give she.
and do you think, my worthy woman, do you think, that the wilful lapse of
such a child be to be forgive? can she herself think that she deserve
not the severe punishment for the abuse of such talent as be
intrust to she?
her fault be a fault of premeditation, of cunning, of contrivance. she
have deceive every body's expectation. her whole sex, as well as the
family she spring from, be disgrace by it.
would any body ever have believe that such a young creature as this, who
have by her advice save even her over-lively friend from marry a fop,
and a libertine, would herself have go off with one of the vile and
most notorious of libertine? a man whose character she know; and know
it to be bad than the character of he from whom she save her friend;
a man against whom she be warn: one who have her brother's life in her
hand; and who constantly set our whole family at defiance.
think for I, my good Norton; think what my unhappiness must be both as a
wife and a mother. what restless day, what sleepless night; yet my own
rankle anguish endeavour to be smooth over, to soften the anguish
of fiercer spirit, and to keep they from blaze out to far
mischief! o this naughty, naughty girl, who know so well what she do;
and who could look so far into consequence, that we think she would
have die rather than have do as she have do!
her know character for prudence leave she absolutely without excuse.
how then can I offer to plead for she, if, through motherly indulgence,
I would forgive she myself?--And have we not moreover suffer all the
disgrace that can befall we? have not she?
if now she have so little like to his moral, have she not reason before
to have as little? or have she suffer by they in her own person?--O my
good woman, I doubt--I doubt--will not the character of the man make one
doubt an angel, if once in his power? the world will think the bad. I
be tell it do. so likewise her father fear; her brother hear; and
what can I do?
our antipathy to he she know before, as well as his character. these
therefore cannot be new motif without a new reason.--o my dear Mrs.
Norton, how shall I, how can you, support ourselves under the
apprehension to which these thought lead!
he continually press she, you say, to marry he: his friend likewise.
she have reason, no doubt she have reason, for this application to we: and
her crime be glossed over, to bring she to we with new disgrace!
Whither, whither, do one guilty step lead the misguided heart!--And
now, truly, to save a stubborn spirit, we be only to be sound, that
the application may be occasionally retract or deny!
upon the whole: be I inclined to plead for she, it be now the most
improper of all time. now that my brother Harlowe have discourage (as
he last night come hither on purpose to tell we) Mr. Hickman's insinuate
application; and be applaud for it. now, that my brother Antony be
intend to carry his great fortune, through her fault, into another
family:--she expect, no doubt, herself to be put into her
grandfather's estate, in consequence of a reconciliation, and as a reward
for her fault: and insist still upon the same term which she offer
before, and which be reject--not through my fault, I be sure,
reject!
from all these thing you will return such an answer as the case
require. it might cost I the peace of my whole life, at this time, to
move for she. God forgive she! if I do, nobody else will. and let it,
for your own sake, as well as mine, be a secret that you and I have
enter upon this subject. and I desire you not to touch upon it again
but by particular permission: for, o my dear, good woman, it set my
heart a bleeding in as many stream as there be vein in it!
yet think I not impenetrable by a proper contrition and remorse--but
what a torment be it to have a will without a power!
Adieu! adieu! God give we both comfort; and to the once dear--the ever-
dear creature (for can a mother forget her child?) repentance, deep
repentance! and as little suffering as may befit his bless will, and
her grievous fault, pray
your real friend,
CHARLOTTE HARLOWE.
LETTER xxix
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
SUNDAY, MAY 14.
how it be now, my dear, between you and Mr. Lovelace, I cannot tell.
but, wicke as the man be, I be afraid he must be your lord and master.
I call he by several very hard name in my last. I have but just hear
of some of his vileness, when I sit down to write; so my indignation
be raise. but on inquiry, and recollection, I find that the fact lay
to his charge be all of they commit some time ago--not since he have
have strong hope of your favour.
this be say something for he. his generous behaviour to the
innkeeper's daughter be a more recent instance to his credit; to say
nothing of the universal good character he have as a kind landlord. and
then I approve much of the motion he make to put you in possession of
Mrs. Fretchville's house, while he continue at the other widow's, till
you agree that one house shall hold you. I wish this be do. be sure
you embrace this offer, (if you do not soon meet at the altar,) and get
one of his cousin with you.
be you once marry, I should think you cannot be very unhappy, though
you may not be so happy with he as you deserve to be. the stake he have
in his country, and his reversion; the care he take of his affair; his
freedom from obligation; nay, his pride, with your merit, must be a
tolerable security for you, I should think. though particular of his
wickedness, as they come to my knowledge, hurt and incense I; yet, after
all, when I give myself time to reflect, all that I have hear of he to
his disadvantage be comprehend in the general character give of he
long ago, by Lord M.'s and his own dismiss bailiff,* and which be
confirm to I by Mrs. Fortescue, as I heretofore tell you,** and to you
by Mrs. Greme.***
* see Vol. I. Letter IV.
** ibid. Letter XII.
*** see Vol. III. Letter VI.
you can have nothing, therefore, I think, to be deeply concerned about,
but his future good, and the bad example he may hereafter set to his own
family. these indeed be very just concern: but be you to leave he
now, either with or without his consent, his fortune and alliance so
considerable, his person and address so engaging, (every one excuse you
now on those account, and because of your relation' folly,) it would
have a very ill appearance for your reputation. I cannot, therefore, on
the most deliberate consideration, advise you to think of that, while you
have no reason to doubt his honour. may eternal vengeance pursue the
villain, if he give room for an apprehension of this nature!
yet his teasing way be intolerable; his acquiescence with your slight
delay, and his resignedness to the distance you now keep he at, (for a
fault so much slighter, as he must think, than the punishment,) be
unaccountable: he doubt your love of he, that be very probable; but you
have reason to be surprised at his want of ardour; a blessing so great
within his reach, as I may say.
by the time you have read to this place, you will have no doubt of what
have be the issue of the conference between the two gentleman. I be
equally shocked, and enrage against they all. against they all, I say;
for I have try your good Norton's weight with your mother, (though at
first I do not intend to tell you so,) to the same purpose as the
gentleman sound your uncle. never be there such determined brute in
the world! why should I mince the matter? yet would I fain, methink,
make an exception for your mother.
your uncle will have it that you be ruin. 'he can believe every thing
bad of a creature, he say, who could run away with a man; with such a
one especially as Lovelace. they expect application from you, when
some heavy distress have fall upon you. but they be all resolve not
to stir an inch in your favour; no, not to save your life!'
my dear soul, resolve to assert your right. claim your own, and go
and live upon it, as you ought. then, if you marry not, how will the
wretch creep to you for your reversionary disposition!
you be accuse (as in your aunt's letter) 'of premeditation and
contrivance in your escape.' instead of pity you, the mediating
person be call upon 'to pity they; who once, your uncle say, doate
upon you: who take no joy but in your presence: who devour your word
as you speak they: who trod over again your footstep, as you walk
before they.'--and I know not what of this sort.
upon the whole, it be now evident to I, and so it must be to you, when
you read this letter, that you must be his. and the soon you be so
the well. shall we suppose that marriage be not in your power?--i
cannot have patience to suppose that.
I be concern, methink, to know how you will do to condescend, (now you
see you must be his,) after you have keep he at such a distance; and for
the revenge his pride may put he upon take for it. but let I tell
you, that if my go up, and share fortune with you, will prevent
such a noble creature from stoop too low; much more, be it likely to
prevent your ruin, I would not hesitate a moment about it. what be the
whole world to I, weigh against such a friend as you be? think you,
that any of the enjoyment of this life could be enjoyment to I, be
you involve in calamity, from which I could either alleviate or
relieve you, by give up those enjoyment? and what in say this, and
act up to it, do I offer you, but the frit of a friendship your worth
have create?
excuse my warmth of expression. the warmth of my heart want none. I be
enrage at your relation; for, bad as what I have mention be, I have
not tell you all; nor now, perhaps, ever will. I be angry at my own
mother's narrowness of mind, and at her indiscriminate adherence to old
notion. and I be exasperate against your foolish, your low-vanity'd
Lovelace. but let we stoop to take the wretch as he be, and make the
good of he, since you be destine to stoop, to keep groveller and
worldling in countenance. he have not be guilty of a direct indecency
to you. nor dare he--not so much of a devil as that come to neither.
have he such villainous intention, so much in his power as you be, they
would have shew themselves before now to such a penetrate and vigilant
eye, and to such a pure heart as your. let we save the wretch then, if
we can, though we soil our finger in lift he up his dirt.
there be yet, to a person of your fortune and independence, a good deal
to do, if you enter upon those term which ought to be enter upon. I
donot find that he have once talk of settlement; nor yet of the
license. a foolish wretch!--But as your evil destiny have throw you out
of all other protection and mediation, you must be father, mother, uncle,
to yourself; and enter upon the requisite point for yourself. it be
hard upon you; but indeed you must. your situation require it. what
room for delicacy now?--Or would you have I write to he? yet that would
be the same thing as if you be to write yourself. yet write you
should, I think, if you cannot speak. but speaking be certainly good:
for word leave no trace; they pass as breath; and mingle with air; and
may be explain with latitude. but the pen be a witness on record.
I know the gentleness of your spirit; I know the laudable pride of your
heart; and the just notion you have of the dignity of our sex in these
delicate point. but once more, all this in nothing now: your honour be
concerned that the dignity I speak of should not be stand upon.
'Mr. Lovelace,' would I say; yet hate the foolish fellow for his low, his
stupid pride, in wish to triumph over the dignity of his own wife;--
'I be by your mean deprive of every friend I have in the world. in
what light be I to look upon you? I have well consider every thing.
you have make some people, much against my liking, think I a wife:
other know I be not marry; nor do I desire any body should believe I
be: do you think your be here in the same house with I can be to my
reputation? you talk to I of Mrs. Fretchville's house.' this will
bring he to renew his last discourse on the subject, if he do not
revive it of himlsef. 'if Mrs. Fretchville know not her own mind, what
be her house to I? you talk of bring up your cousin Montague to
bear I company: if my brother's scheme be your pretence for not go
yourself to fetch she, you can write to she. I insist upon bring
these two point to an issue: off or on ought to be indifferent to I, if
so to they.'
such a declaration must bring all forward. there be twenty way, my dear,
that you would find out for another in your circumstance. he will
disdain, from his native insolence, to have it think he have any body to
consult. well then, will he not be oblige to declare himself? and if
he do, no delay on your side, I beseech you. give he the day. let
it be a short one. it would be derogate from your own merit, not to be
so explicit as he ought to be, to seem but to doubt his meaning; and to
wait for that explanation for which I should ever despise he, if he
make it necessary. twice already have you, my dear, if not oftener
modesty'd away such opportunity as you ought not to have slip. as
to settlement, if they come not in naturally, e'en leave they to his own
justice, and to the justice of his family, and therebe an end of the
matter.
this be my advice: mend it as circumstance offer, and follow your own.
but indeed, my dear, this, or something like it, would I do. and let he
tell I afterwards, if he dare or would, that he humble down to his
shoe-buckle the person it would have be his glory to exalt.
support yourself, mean time, with reflection worthy of yourself. though
trick into this man's power, you be not meanly subjugate to it. all
his reverence you command, or rather, as I may say, inspire; since it be
never know, that he have any reverence for aught that be good, till you
be with he: and he profess now and then to be so awed and charm by
your example, as that the force of it shall reclaim he.
I believe you will have a difficult task to keep he to it; but the more
will be your honour, if you effect his reformation: and it be my belief,
that if you can reclaim this great, this specious deceiver, who have,
morally speak, such a number of year before he, you will save from
ruin a multitude of innocent; for those seem to I to have be the prey
for which he have spread his wicked snare. and who know but, for this
very purpose, principally, a person may have be permit to swerve,
whose heart or will never be in her error, and who have so much remorse
upon she for have, as she think, err at all? Adieu, my dearest
friend.
ANNA HOWE.
enclosed in the ABOVE.
I must trouble you with my concern, though you own be so heavy upon
you. a piece of news I have to tell you. your uncle Antony be dispose
to marry. with whom, think you? with my mother. true indeed. your
family know it. all be lay with redouble malice at your door. and
there the old soul himself lay it.
take no notice of this intelligence, not so much as in your letter to
I, for fear of accident.
I think it cannot do. but be I to provoke my mother, that might afford
a pretence. else, I should have be with you before now, I fancy.
the first likelihood that appear to I of encouragement, I dismiss
Hickman, thatbe certain. if my mother disoblige I in so important an
article, I shallnot think of oblige she in such another. it be
impossible, surely, that the desire of pop I off to that honest man
can be with such a view.
I repeat, that it cannot come to any thing. but these widow--then such
a love in we all, both old and young, of be court and admired!--and
so irresistible to their eldership to be flatter, that all power be
not over with they; but that they may still class and prank it with their
daughters.--it vex I heartily to have she tell I of this proposal
with self-complaisant simpering; and yet she affect to speak of it as
if she have no intention to encourage it.
these antiquated bachelor (old before they believe themselves to be so)
imagine that when they have once persuade themselves to think of the
state, they have nothing more to do than to make their mind know to the
woman.
your uncle's overgrown fortune be indeed a bait; a tempting one. a saucy
daughter to be get rid of! the memory of the father of that daughter not
precious enough to weigh much!--but let he advance if he dare--let she
encourage--but I hope she willnot.
excuse I, my dear. I be nettle. they have fearfully rumple my
gorget. youwill think I faulty. so, I willnot put my name to this
separate paper. other hand may resemble mine. you do not see I write
it.
LETTER XXX
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
MONDAY AFTERNOON, MAY 15.
now indeed it be evident, my good, my only friend, that I have but one
choice to make. and now I do find that I have carry my resentment
against this man too far; since now I be to appear as if under an
obligation to his patience with I for a conduct, which perhaps he will
think (if not humoursome and childish) plainly demonstrative of my little
esteem of he; of but a secondary esteem at least, where before, his
pride, rather than his merit, have make he expect a first. o my dear! to
be cast upon a man that be not a generous man; that be indeed a cruel
man! a man that be capable of create a distress to a young creature,
who, by her evil destiny be throw into his power; and then of enjoy
it, as I may say! [I verily think I may say so, of this savage!]--what
a fate be mine!
you give I, my dear, good advice, as to the peremptory manner in which I
ought to treat he: but do you consider to whom it be that you give it?--
and then should I take it, and should he be capable of delay, I
unprotected, desolate, nobody to fly to, in what a wretched light must I
stand in his eye; and, what be still as bad, in my own! o my dear, see
you not, as I do, that the occasion for this my indelicate, my shocking
situation should never have be give by I, of all creature; since I
be unequal, utterly unequal, to the circumstance to which my
inconsideration have reduce me?--what! I to challenge a man for a
husband!--i to exert myself to quicken the delayer in his resolution!
and, have as you think lose an opportunity, to begin to try to recall
it, as from myself, and for myself! to threaten he, as I may say, into
the marriage state!--O my dear! if this be right to be do, how
difficult be it, where modesty and self (or where pride, if you please)
be concern, to do that right? or, to express myself in your word, to
be father, mother, uncle, to myself!--especially where one think a
triumph over one be intend.
you say, you have try Mrs. Norton's weight with my mother--bad as the
return be which my application by Mr. Hickman have meet with, you tell
I, 'that you have not acquaint I with all the bad, nor now, perhaps,
ever will.' but why so, my dear? what be the bad, what can be the bad,
which now you will never tell I of?--what bad, than renounce I! and
for ever! 'my uncle, you say, believe I ruin: he declare that he
can believe every thing bad of a creature who could run away with a man:
and they have all make a resolution not to stir an inch in my favour; no,
not to save my life!'--have you bad than this, my dear, behind?--surely
my father have not renew his dreadful malediction!--surely, if so, my
mother have not join in it! have my uncle give their sanction, and
make it a family act? and themselves thereby more really faulty, than
ever they suppose I to be, though I the cause of that great fault in
them?--what, my dear, be the bad, that you will leave for ever
unreveale?
O Lovelace! why com thou not just now, while these black prospect be
before I? for now, couldst thou look into my heart, wouldst thou see a
distress worthy of thy barbarous triumph!
***
I be force to quit my pen. and you say you have try Mrs. Norton's
weight with my mother?
what be do cannot be remedie: but I wish you have not take a step of
this importance to I without first consult I. forgive I, my dear,
but I must tell you that that high-soul'd and noble friendship which you
have ever avow with so obliging and so uncommon a warmth, although it
have be always the subject of my grateful admiration, have be often the
ground of my apprehension, because of its unbridled fervour.
well, but now to look forward, you be of opinion that I must be his: and
that I cannot leave he with reputation to myself, whether with or
without his consent. I must, if so, make the good of the bad matter.
he go out in the morning; intend not to return to dinner, unless (as
he send I word) I would admit he to dine with I.
I excuse myself. the man, whose anger be now to be of such high
importance to I, be, it seem, displeased.
as he (as well as I) expect that I should receive a letter from you
this day by Collins, I suppose he will not be long before he return; and
then, possibly, he be to be mighty stately, mighty mannish, mighty coy,
if you please! and then must I be very humble, very submissive, and try
to insinuate myself into his good grace: with downcast eye, if not by
speech, beg his forgiveness for the distance I have so perversely keep
he at?--Yes, I warrant!--But I shall see how this behaviour will sit
upon me!--You have always rally I upon my meekness, I think: well
then, I will try if I can be still meeker, shall i!--o my dear!--
but let I sit with my hand before I, all patience, all resignation;
for I think I hear he come up. or shall I roundly accost he, in the
word, in the form, which you, my dear, prescribe?
he be come in. he have send to I, all impatience, as Dorcas say, by his
aspect.--But I cannot, cannot see he!
MONDAY NIGHT.
the content of your letter, and my own heavy reflection, render I
incapable of see this expect man. the first word he ask Dorcas,
be, if I have receive a letter since he have be out? she tell I this;
and her answer, that I have; and be fast, and have be in tear ever
since.
he send to desire an interview with I.
I answer by she, that I be not very well. in the morning, if well,
I would see he as soon as he please.
very humble! be it not, my dear? yet he be too royal to take it for
humility; for Dorcas tell I, he rub one side of his face impatiently;
and say a rash word, and be out of humour; stalk about the room.
half an hour later, he send again; desire very earnestly, that I should
admit he to supper with I. he would enter upon no subject of
conversation but what I should lead to.
so I should have be at liberty, you see, to court he!
I again desire to be excuse.
indeed, my dear, my eye be swell: I be very low spirited; and could
not think of enter all at once, after the distance I have keep he at
for several day, into the freedom of conversation which the utter
rejection I have meet with from my relation, as well as your advice, have
make necessary.
he send up to tell I, that as he hear I be fast, if I would promise
to eat some chicken which Mrs. Sinclair have order for supper, he would
acquiesce.--very kind in his anger! be he not?
I promise that I would. can I be more preparatively condescending?--how
happy, Iwill warrant, if I may meet he in a kind and forgive humour!
I hate myself! but I willnot be insult. indeed I willnot, for all this.
LETTER XXXI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
TUESDAY, MAY 16.
I think once more we seem to be in a kind of train; but through a storm.
I will give you the particular.
I hear he in the dining-room at five in the morning. I have rest very
ill, and be up too. but open not my door till six: when Dorcas
bring I his request for my company.
he approach I, and take my hand, as I enter the dining-room, I
go not to bed, Madam, till two, say he; yet sleep not a wink. for
God's sake, torment I not, as you have do for a week past.
he pause. I be silent.
at first, proceed he, I think your resentment of a curiosity, in
which I have be disappoint, could not be deep; and that it would go
off of itself: but, when I find it be to be keep up till you know the
success of some new overture which you have make, and which, comply
with, might have deprive I of you for ever, how, Madam, could I support
myself under the thought of have, with such an union of interest,
make so little impression upon your mind in my favour?
he pause again. I be still silent. he go on.
I acknowledge that I have a proud heart, Madam. I cannot but hope for
some instance of previous and preferable favour from the lady I be
ambitious to call mine; and that her choice of I should not appear, not
flagrantly appear, direct by the perverseness of her selfish
persecutor, who be my irreconcilable enemy.
More to the same purpose he say. you know, my dear, the room he have
give I to recriminate upon he in twenty instance. I do not spare
he.
every one of these instance, say I, (after I have enumerate they)
convince I of your pride indeed, Sir, but not of your merit. I
confess, that I have as much pride as you can have, although I hope it be
of another kind than that you so readily avow. but if, Sir, you have the
least mixture in yours of that pride which may be expect, and think
laudable, in a man of your birth, alliance, and fortune, you should
rather wish, I will presume to say, to promote what you call my pride,
than either to suppress it, or to regret that I have it. it be this my
acknowledge pride, proceed I, that induce I to tell you, Sir, that I
think it beneath I to disown what have be my motif for decline,
for some day past, any conversation with you, or visit from Mr. Mennell,
that might lead to point out of my power to determine upon, until I
hear from my uncle Harlowe; whom, I confess, I have cause to be
sound, whether I might be favour with his interest to obtain for I
a reconciliation with my friend, upon term which I have cause to be
propose.
I know not, say he, and suppose must not presume to ask, what those
term be. but I can but too well guess at they; and that I be to have
be the preliminary sacrifice. but you must allow I, Madam, to say,
that as much as I admire the nobleness of your sentiment in general, and
in particular that laudable pride which you have speak of, I wish that I
could compliment you with such an uniformity in it, as have set you as
much above all submission to mind implacable and unreasonable, (I hope I
may, without offence, say, that your brother's and sister's be such,) as
it have above all favour and condescension to I.
Duty and nature, Sir, call upon I to make the submission you speak of:
there be a father, there be a mother, there be uncle in the one case,
to justify and demand those submission. what, pray, Sir, can be plead
for the condescension, as you call it? will you say, your merit, either
with regard to they, or to myself, may?
this, Madam, to be say, after the persecution of those relation!
after what you have suffer! after what you have make I hope! let I,
my dear creature, ask you, (we have be talk of pride,) what sort
of pride must his be, which can dispense with inclination and preference
in the lady whom he adores?--what must that love--
Love, Sir! who talk of love?--was not merit the thing we be talk
of?--have I ever profess, have I ever require of you profession of a
passion of that nature?--but there be no end of these debating; each so
faultless, each so full of self--
I do not think myself faultless, Madam:--but--
but what, sir!--would you ever more argue with I, as if you be a
child?--seeking palliation, and make promises?--promise of what, Sir?
of be in future the man it be a shame a gentleman be not?--of be
the man--
Good God! interrupt he, with eye lift up, if thou wert to be thus
severe--
well, well, Sir! [impatiently] I need only to observe, that all this
vast difference in sentiment show how unpaired our mind be--so let
us--
let we what, Madam?--My soul be rise into tumult! and he look so
wildly, that I be a good deal terrify--let we what, madam?----
I be, however, resolve not to desert myself--why, Sir! let we resolve
to quit every regard for each other.--Nay, flame not out--I be a poor
weak-minded creature in some thing: but where what I should be, or not
deserve to live, if I be not be in the question, I have a great and
invincible spirit, or my own conceit betray I--let we resolve to quit
every regard for each other that be more than civil. this you may depend
upon: I will never marry any other man. I have see enough of your sex;
at least of you.--a single life shall ever be my choice: while I will
leave you at liberty to pursue your own.
Indifference, bad than indifference! say he, in a passion--
Interrupting he--Indifference let it be--you have not (in my opinion at
least) deserve that it should be other: if you have in your own, you
have cause (at least your pride have) to hate I for misjudge you.
Dearest, dearest creature! snatch my hand with fierceness, let I
beseech you to be uniformly noble! civil regard, madam!--civil regard!
--can you so expect to narrow and confine such a passion as mine?
such a passion as your, Mr. Lovelace, deserve to be narrow and
confine. it be either the passion you do not think it, or I do not. I
question whether your mind be capable of be so narrow and so
widen, as be necessary to make it be what I wish it to be. lift up
your hand and your eye, Sir, in silent wonder, if you please; but what
do that wonder express, what do it convince I of, but that we be
not bear for one another.
by my soul, say he, and grasp my hand with an eagerness that hurt it,
we be bear for one another: you must be mine--you shall be mine [and
put his other hand round I] although my damnation be to be the
purchase!
I be still more terrified--let I leave you, Mr. Lovelace, say I; or do
you be go from I. be the passion you boast of to be thus shockingly
demonstrate?
you must not go, madam!--you must not leave I in anger--
I will return--I will return--when you can be less violent--less
shocking.
and he let I go.
the man quite fright I; insomuch, that when I get into my chamber, I
find a sudden flow of tear a great relief to I.
in half an hour, he send a little billet, express his concern for the
vehemence of his behaviour, and pray to see I.
I go. because I could not help myself, I go.
he be full of excuse--o my dear, what would you, even you, do with such
a man as this; and in my situation?
it be very possible for he now, he say, to account for the working of
a begin phrensy. for his part, he be near distraction. all last
week to suffer as he have suffer; and now to talk of civil regard only,
when he have hop, from the nobleness of my mind--
hope what you will, interrupt I, I must insist upon it, that our mind
be by no mean suit to each other. you have bring I into
difficulty. I be desert by every friend but Miss Howe. my true
sentiment I will not conceal--it be against my will that I must submit
to owe protection from a brother's project, which Miss Howe think be
not give over, to you, who have bring I into these straight: not
with my own concurrence bring I into they; remember that--
I do remember that, Madam!--So often remind, how can I forget it?--
yet I will owe to you this protection, if it be necessary, in the earnest
hope that you will shun, rather than seek mischief, if any further
inquiry after I be make. but what hinder you from leave me?--Cannot
I send to you? the widow Fretchville, it be plain, know not her own
mind: the people here be more civil to I every day than other: but I
have rather have lodging more agreeable to my circumstance. I well know
what will suit they; and be resolve not to be oblige to any body. if
you leave I, I will privately retire to some one of the neighbouring
village, and there wait my cousin Morden's arrival with patience.
I presume, Madam, reply he, from what you have say, that your
application to Harlowe-place have prove unsuccessful: I therefore hope
that you will now give I leave to mention the term in the nature of
settlement, which I have long intend to propose to you; and which
have till now delay to do, through accident not proceed from
myself, I have thought of urge to you the moment you enter upon your
new house; and upon your find yourself as independent in appearance
as you be in fact. permit I, Madam, to propose these matter to you--
not with an expectation of your immediate answer; but for your
consideration.
be not hesitation, a self-feel glow, a downcast eye, encouragement more
than enough? and yet you will observe (as I now do on recollection) that
he be in no great hurry to solicit for a day; since he have no thought
of propose settlement till I have get into my new house; and now, in
his great complaisance to I, he desire leave to propose his term, not
with an expectation of my immediate answer; but for my consideration only
--Yet, my dear, your advice be too much in my head at this time. I
hesitate.
he urge on upon my silence; he would call God to witness to the justice,
nay to the generosity of his intention to I, if I would be so good as
to hear what he have to propose to I, as to settlement.
could not the man have fall into the subject without this parade? many
a point, you know, be refuse, and ought to be refuse, if leave be ask
to introduce it; and when once refuse, the refusal must in honour be
adhere to--whereas, have it be slide in upon one, as I may say, it might
have merit further consideration. if such a man as Mr. Lovelace know
not this, who should?
but he seem to think it enough that he have ask my leave to propose
his settlement. he take no advantage of my silence, as I presume man as
modest as Mr. Lovelace would have do in a like case: yet, gaze in my
face very confidently, and seem to expect my answer, I think myself
oblige to give the subject a more diffuse turn, in order to save myself
the mortification of appear too ready in my compliance, after such a
distance as have be between we; and yet (in pursuance of your advice) I
be willing to avoid the necessity of give he such a repulse as might
again throw we out of the course--a cruel alternative to be reduce to!
you talk of generosity, Mr. Lovelace, say I; and you talk of justice;
perhaps, without have consider the force of the word, in the sense
you use they on this occasion.--let I tell you what generosity be, in my
sense of the word--TRUE GENEROSITY be not confine to pecuniary
instance: it be more than politeness: it be more than good faith: it be
more than honour; it be more than justice; since all of these be but
duty, and what a worthy mind cannot dispense with. but true GENEROSITY
be greatness of soul. it incite we to do more by a fellow-creature than
can be strictly require of we. it oblige we to hasten to the relief of
an object that want relief; anticipate even such a one's hope or
expectation. generosity, Sir, will not surely permit a worthy mind to
doubt of its honourable and beneficent intention: much less will it
allow itself to shock, to offend any one; and, least of all, a person
throw by adversity, mishap, or accident, into its protection.
what an opportunity have he to clear his intention have he be so
dispose, from the latter part of this home observation!--but he run away
with the first, and keep to that.
admirably define! he say--but who, at this rate, Madam, can be say to
be generous to you?--Your generosity I implore, while justice, as it must
be my sole merit, shall be my aim. never be there a woman of such nice
and delicate sentiment!
it be a reflection upon yourself, Sir, and upon the company you have
keep, if you think these notion either nice or delicate. thousand of
my sex be more nice than I; for they would have avoid the devious path
I have be surprise into; the consequence of which surprise have lay
I under the sad necessity of tell a man, who have not delicacy enough
to enter into those part of the female character which be its glory and
distinction, what true generosity be.
his divine monitress, he call I. he would endeavour to form his
manner (as he have often promise) by my example. but he hop I would
now permit he to mention briefly the justice he propose to do I, in
the term of the settlement; a subject so proper, before now, to have
enter upon; and which would have be enter upon long ago, have not
my frequent displeasure [I be ever in fault, my dear!] take from he the
opportunity he have often wish for: but now, have venture to lay hold
of this, nothing should divert he from improve it.
I have no spirit, just now, Sir, to attend such weighty point. what
you have a mind to propose, write to I: and I shall know what answer to
return. only one thing let I remind you of, that if you touch upon a
subject, in which my father have a concern, I shall judge by your
treatment of the father what value you have for the daughter.
he look as if he would choose rather to speak than write: but have he
say so, I have a severe return to have make upon he; as possibly he
might see by my look.
***
in this way be we now: a sort of calm, as I say, succeed a storm.
what may happen next, whether a storm or a calm, with such a spirit as I
have to deal with, who can tell?
but, be that as it will, I think, my dear, I be not meanly off: and that
be a great point with I; and which I know you will be glad to hear: if
it be only, that I can see this man without lose any of that dignity
[what other word can I use, speak of myself, that betoken decency,
and not arrogance?] which be so necessary to enable I to look up, or
rather with the mind's eye, I may say, to look down upon a man of this
man's cast.
although circumstance have so offer, that I could not take your advice
as to the manner of deal with he; yet you give I so much courage by
it, as have enable I to conduct thing to this issue; as well as
determine I against leave he: which, before, I be think to do,
at all adventure. whether, when it come to the point, I should have
do so, or not, I cannot say, because it would have depend upon his
behaviour at the time.
but let his behaviour be what it will, I be afraid, (with you,) that
should any thing offer at last to oblige I to leave he, I shall not
mend my situation in the world's eye; but the contrary. and yet I will
not be treat by he with indignity while I have any power to help
myself.
you, my dear, have accuse I of have modesty'd away, as you phrase it,
several opportunity of be--be what, my dear?--why, the wife of a
libertine: and what a libertine and his wife be my cousin Morden's
letter tell us.--let I here, once for all, endeavour to account for the
motif of behavior to this man, and for the principle I have proceed
upon, as they appear to I upon a close self-examination.
be pleased to allow I to think that my motif on this occasion rise not
altogether from maidenly niceness; nor yet from the apprehension of what
my present tormenter, and future husband, may think of a precipitate
compliance, on such a disagreeable behaviour as his: but they arise
principally from what offer to my own heart; respect, as I may say,
its own rectitude, its own judgment of the fit and the unfit; as I would,
without study, answer for myself to myself, in the first place; to he,
and to the world, in the second only. principle that be in my mind;
that I find there; implant, no doubt, by the first gracious Planter:
which therefore impel I, as I may say, to act up to they, that thereby
I may, to the good of my judgment, be enable to comport myself worthily
in both state, (the single and the married), let other act as they will
by I.
I hope, my dear, I do not deceive myself, and, instead of set about
rectify what be amiss in my heart, endeavour to find excuse for habit
and peculiarity, which I be unwilling to cast off or overcome.
the heart be very deceitful: do you, my dear friend, lie mine open, [but
surely it be always open before you!] and spare I not, if you think it
culpable.
this observation, once for all, as I say, I think proper to make, to
convince you that, to the good of my judgment, my error, in matter as
well of less moment as of great, shall rather be the fault of my
judgment than of my will.
I be, my dear friend,
your ever oblige,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER XXXII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
TUESDAY NIGHT, MAY 16.
Mr. Lovelace have send I, by Dorcas, his proposal, as follow:
'to spare a delicacy so extreme, and to obey you, I write: and the rather
that you may communicate this paper to Miss Howe, who may consult any of
her friend you shall think proper to have intrust on this occasion. I
say intrust; because, as you know, I have give it out to several
person, that we be actually married.
'in the first place, Madam, I offer to settle upon you, by way of
jointure, your whole estate: and moreover to vest in trustee such a part
of mine in Lancashire, as shall produce a clear four hundred pound a
year, to be pay to your sole and separate use quarterly.
'my own estate be a clear not nominnal 2000l. per annum. Lord M.
propose to give I possession either of that which he have in Lancashire,
[to which, by the way, I think I have a well title than he have
himself,] or that we call the Lawn, in Hertfordshire, upon my nuptial
with a lady whom he so greatly admire; and to make that I shall choose a
clear 1000l. per annum.
'my too great contempt of censure have subject I to much slander. it
may not therefore be improper to assure you, on the word of a gentleman,
that no part of my estate be ever mortgage: and that although I live
very expensively abroad, and make large draught, yet that Midsummer-day
next will discharge all that I owe in the world. my notion be not all
bad one. I have be think, in pecuniary case, generous. it would
have deserve another name, have I not first be just.
'if, as your own estate be at present in your father's hand, you rather
choose that I should make a jointure out of mine, tantamount to your, be
it what it will, it shall be do. I will engage Lord M. to write to
you, what he propose to do on the happy occasion: not as your desire or
expectation, but to demonstrate, that no advantage be intend to be
take of the situation you be in with your own family.
'to shew the beloved daughter the consideration I have for she, I will
consent that she shall prescribe the term of agreement in relation to
the large sum, which must be in her father's hand, arise from her
grandfather's estate. I have no doubt, but he will be put upon make
large demand upon you. all those it shall be in your power to comply
with, for the sake of your own peace. and the remainder shall be pay
into your hand, and be entirely at your disposal, as a fund to support
those charitable donation, which I have hear you so famed for our of
your family, and for which you have be so greatly reflect upon in it.
'as to clothe, jewel, and the like, against the time you shall choose
to make your appearance, it will be my pride that you shall not be
beholden for such of these, as shall be answerable to the rank of both,
to those who have have the stupid folly to renounce a daughter they
deserve not. you must excuse I, Madam: you would mistrust my sincerity
in the rest, could I speak of these people without asperity, though so
nearly related to you.
'these, Madam, be my proposal. they be such as I always design to
make, whenever you would permit I to enter into the delightful subject.
but you have be so determined to try every method for reconcile
yourself to your relation, even by give I absolutely up for ever,
that you seem to think it but justice to keep I at a distance, till
the event of that your predominant hope could be see. it be now see!
--and although I have be, and perhaps still be, ready to regret the
want of that preference I wish for from you as Miss Clarissa Harlowe,
yet I be sure, as the husband of Mrs. Lovelace, I shall be more ready
to adore than to blame you for the pang you have give to a heart, the
generosity, or rather, the justice of which, my implacable enemy have
teach you to doubt: and this still the readier, as I be persuade that
those pang never would have be give by a mind so noble, have not the
doubt be entertain (perhaps with too great an appearance of reason);
and as I hope I shall have it to reflect, that the moment the doubt shall
be overcome, the indifference will cease.
'I will only add, that if I have omit any thing, that would have give
you far satisfaction; or if the above term be short of what you
would wish; you will be pleased to supply they as you think fit. and
when I know your pleasure, I will instantly order article to be draw up
comformably, that nothing in my power may be want to make you happy.
'you will now, dearest Madam, judge, how far all the rest depend upon
yourself.'
you see, my dear, what he offer. you see it be all my fault, that he
have not make these offer before. I be a strange creature!--to be to
blame in every thing, and to every body; yet neither intend the ill at
the time, nor know it to be the ill too late, or so nearly too late, that
I must give up all the delicacy he talk of, to compound for my fault!
I shall now judge how far the rest depend upon myself! so coldly
conclude he such warm, and, in the main, unobjectionably proposal:
would you not, as you read, have suppose, that the paper would conclude
with the most earnest demand of a day?--I own, I have that expectation so
strong, result naturally, as I may say, from the premise, that
without study for dissatisfaction, I could not help be dissatisfy
when I come to the conclusion.
but you say there be no help. I must perhaps make further sacrifice.
all delicacy it seem be to be at an end with me!--but, if so, this man
know not what every wise man know, that prudence, and virtue, and
delicacy of mind in a wife, do the husband more real honour in the eye of
the world, than the same quality (be she destitute of they) in
himself, do he: as the want of they in she do he more dishonour: for
be not the wife's error the husband's reproach? how justly his
reproach, be another thing.
I will consider this paper; and write to it, if I be able: for it seem
now, all the rest depend upon myself.
LETTER XXXIII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
WEDNESDAY MORNING, MAY 17.
Mr. Lovelace would fain have engage I last night. but as I be not
prepared to enter upon the subject of his proposal, (intend to
consider they maturely,) and be not highly pleased with his conclusion,
I desire to be excuse see he till morning; and the rather, as there
be hardly any getting from he in tolerable time overnight.
accordingly, about seven o'clock we meet in the dining-room.
I find he be full of expectation that I should meet he with a very
favourable, who know but with a thankful, aspect? and I immediately
find by his sullen countenance, that he be under no small
disappointment that I do not.
my dearest love, be you well? why look you so solemn upon I? will
your indifference never be over? if I have propose term in any respect
short of your expectation--
I tell he, that he have very considerately mention my shew his
proposal to Miss Howe; and as I should have a speedy opportunity to send
they to she by Collins, I desire to suspend any talk upon that subject
till I have her opinion upon they.
good God!--If there be but the least loop-hole! the least room for
delay!--But he be write a letter to Lord M. to give he an account of
his situation with I, and could not finish it so satisfactorily, either
to my Lord or to himself, as if I would condescend to say, whether the
term he have propose be acceptable, or not.
thus far, I tell he, I could say, that my principal point be peace and
reconciliation with my relation. as to other matter, the gentleness of
his own spirit would put he upon do more for I than I should ask, or
expect. wherefore, if all he have to write about be to know what Lord M.
would do on my account, he might spare himself the trouble, for that my
utmost wish, as to myself, be much more easily gratified than he
perhaps imagine.
he ask I then, if I would so far permit he to touch upon the happy
day, as to request the presence of Lord M. on the occasion, and to be my
father?
Father have a sweet and venerable sound with it, I say. I should be glad
to have a father who would own I!
be not this plain speak, think you, my dear? yet it rather, I must
own, appear so to I on reflection, than be design freely at the
time. for I then, with a sigh from the bottom of my heart, think of my
own father; bitterly regretting, that I be an outcast from he and from
my mother.
Mr. Lovelace I think seem a little affected at the manner of my
speaking, and perhaps at the sad reflection.
I be but a very young creature, Mr. Lovelace, say I, [and wipe my eye
as I turn away my face,] although you have kindly, and in love to I,
introduce so much sorry to I already: so you must not wonder, that the
word father strike so sensibly upon the heart of a child ever dutiful
till she know you, and whose tender year still require the paternal
wing.
he turn towards the window--[rejoice with I, my dear, since I seem to
be devoted to he, that the man be not absolutely impenetrable!] his
emotion be visible; yet he endeavour to suppress it. approach I
again; again he be oblige to turn from I; angelic something, he say:
but then, obtain a heart more suitable to his wish, he once more
approach me.--for his own part, he say, as Lord M. be so subject to
gout, he be afraid, that the compliment he have just propose to make
he, might, if make, occasion a large suspension than he could bear to
think of; and if it do, it would vex he to the heart that he have make
it.
I could not say a single word to this, you know, my dear. but you will
guess at my thought of what he say--so much passionate love, lip-deep!
so prudent, and so dutifully patient at heart to a relation he have till
now so undutifully despised!--why, why, be I throw upon such a man,
think I!
he hesitate, as if contend with himself; and after take a turn or
two about the room, he be at a great loss what to determine upon, he
say, because he have not the honour of know when he be to be make the
happy of man--would to God it might that very instant be resolve
upon!
he stop a moment or two, star in his usual confident way, in my
downcast face, [do I not, o my beloved friend, think you, want a father
or a mother just then?] but if he could not, so soon as he wish,
procure my consent to a day; in that case, he think the compliment
might as well be make to Lord M. as not, [see, my dear!] since the
settlement might be draw and engross in the intervenient time, which
would pacify his impatience, as no time would be lose.
you will suppose how I be affect by this speech, by repeat the
substance of what he say upon it; as follow.
but, by his soul, he know not, so much be I upon the reserve, and so
much latent meaning do my eye import, whether, when he most hop to
please I, he be not farth from do so. would I vouchsafe to say,
whether I approve of his compliment to Lord M. or not?
to leave it to I, to choose whether the speedy day he ought to have
urge for with earnestness, should be accelerate or suspended!--miss
Howe, think I, at that moment, say, I must not run away from this man!
to be sure, Mr. Lovelace, if this matter be ever to be, it must be
agreeable to I to have the full approbation of one side, since I cannot
have that of the other.
if this matter be ever to be! good God! what word be these at this
time of day! and full approbation of one side! why that word
approbation? when the great pride of all my family be, that of have
the honour of so dear a creature for their relation? would to heaven, my
dear life, add he, that, without compliment any body, to-morrow
might be the happy day of my life!--what say you, my angel? with a
trembling impatience, that seem not affect--what say you for
to-morrow?
it be likely, my dear, I could say much to it, or name another day, have
I be disposed to the latter, with such an hinted delay from he.
I be silent.
next day, Madam, if not to-morrow?--
have he give I time to answer, it could not have be in the
affirmative, you must think--but, in the same breath, he go on--or the
day after that?--and take both my hand in his, he star I into a
half-confusion--would you have have patience with he, my dear?
no, no, say I, as calmly as possible, you cannot think that I should
imagine there can be reason for such a hurry. it will be most agreeable,
to be sure, for my Lord to be present.
I be all obedience and resignation, return the wretch, with a self-
pluming air, as if he have acquiesce to a proposal make by I, and have
compliment I with a great piece of self denial.
be it not plain, my dear, that he design to vex and tease I? proud,
yet mean and foolish man, if so!--But you say all punctilio be at an end
with I. why, why, will he take pain to make a heart wrap itself up in
reserve, that wish only, and that for his sake as well as my own, to
observe due decorum?
Modesty, I think, require of I, that it should pass as he have put it:
do it not?--i think it do. would to heaven--but what signify
wish?
but when he would have reward himself, as he have heretofore call it,
for this self-suppose concession, with a kiss, I repulse he with a
just and very sincere disdain.
he seem both vex and surprised, as one who have make the most
agreeable proposal and concession, and think they ungratefully
return. he plainly say, that he think our situation would entitle
he to such an innocent freedom: and he be both amazed and grieve to be
thus scornfully repulse.
no reply could be make be I on such a subject.
I abruptly break from he. I recollect, as I pass by one of the pier-
glass, that I see in it his clenched hand offer in wrath to his
forehead: the word, Indifference, by his soul, next to hatred, I hear
he speak; and something of ice he mention: I hear not what.
whether he intend to write to my Lord, or Miss Montague, I cannot tell.
but, as all delicacy ought to be over with I now, perhaps I be to blame
to expect it from a man who may not know what it be. if he do not, and
yet think himself very polite, and intend not to be otherwise, I be
rather to be pity, than he to be censure.
and after all, since I must take he as I find he, I must: that be to
say, as a man so vain and so accustomed to be admire, that, not be
conscious of internal defect, he have take no pain to polish more than
his outside: and as his proposal be high than my expectation; and
as, in his own opinion, he have a great deal to bear from I, I will (no
new offence preventing) sit down to answer they; and, if possible, in
term as unobjectionable to he, as his be to I.
but after all, see you not, my dear, more and more, the mismatch that
there be in our mind?
however, I be willing to compound for my fault, by give up, (if that
may be all my punishment) the expectation of what be deem happiness in
this life, with such a husband as I fear he will make. in short, I will
content myself to be a suffer person through the state to the end of
my life.--a long one it cannot be!
this may qualify he (as it may prove) from sting of conscience from
misbehaviour to a first wife, to be a more tolerable one to a second,
though not perhaps a well deserve one: while my story, to all who
shall know it, will afford these instruction: that the eye be a traitor,
and ought ever to be mistrust: that form be deceitful: in other word;
that a fine person be seldom pair by a fine mind: and that sound
principle and a good heart, be the only basis on which the hope of a
happy future, either with respect to this world, or the other, can be
build.
and so much at present for Mr. Lovelace's proposal: of which I desire
your opinion.*
* we cannot forbear observe in this place, that the Lady have be
particularly censure, even by some of her own sex, as over-nice in her
part of the above conversation: but surely this must be owe to want
of attention to the circumstance she be in, and to her character, as
well as to the character of the man she have to deal with: for, although
she could not be suppose to know so much of his design as the reader
do by mean of his letter to Belford, yet she be but too well
convinced of his faulty moral, and of the necessity there be, from the
whole of his behaviour to she, to keep such an encroacher, as she
frequently call he, at a distance. in Letter XXXIII. of Vol. III. the
reader will see, that upon some favourable appearance she blame herself
for her readiness to suspect he. but his character, his principle,
say she, be so faulty!--He be so light, so vain, so various.----Then,
my dear, I have no guardian to depend upon. in Letter IX. of Vol. III.
must I not with such a man, say she, be want to myself, be I not
jealous and vigilant?
by this time the reader will see, that she have still great reason for
her jealousy and vigilance. and Lovelace will tell the sex, as he do
in Letter XI. of Vol. V., that the woman who resent not initiatory
freedom, must be lose. love be an encroacher, say he: love never go
backward. nothing but the high act of love can satisfy an indulged
love.
but the reader perhaps be too apt to form a judgment of Clarissa's
conduct in critical case by Lovelace's complaint of her coldness; not
consider his view upon she; and that she be propose as an example;
and therefore in her trial and distress must not be allow to
dispense with those rule which perhaps some other of the sex, in her
delicate situation, would not have think themselves so strictly bind
to observe; although, if she have not observe they, a Lovelace would have
carry all his point.
[four letter be write by Mr. Lovelace from the date of his last,
give the state of affair between he and the Lady, pretty much the
same as in hers in the same period, allow for the humour in his,
and for his resentment express with vehemence on her resolution to
leave he, if her friend could be bring to be reconcile to her.--
a few extract from they will be only give.]
what, say he, might have become of I, and of my project, have not her
father, and the rest of the implacable, stand my friend?
[after violent threatening of revenge, he say,]
'tis plain she would have give I up for ever: nor should I have be
able to prevent her abandon of I, unless I have tear up the tree by
the root to come at the fruit; which I hope still to bring down by a
gentle shake or two, if I can but have patience to stay the ripen
seasoning.
[thus triumph in his unpolite cruelty, he say,]
after her haughty treatment of I, I be resolve she shall speak out.
there be a thousand beauty to be discover in the face, in the
accent, in the bush-beat hesitation of a woman who be earnest about a
subject she want to introduce, yet know not how. silly fellow,
call themselves generous one, would value themselves for spar a
lady's confusion: but they be silly fellow indeed; and rob themselves
of prodigious pleasure by their forwardness; and at the same time deprive
she of display a world of charm, which can only be manifest on
these occasion.
Iwill tell thee beforehand, how it will be with my charmer in this case--
she will be about it, and about it, several time: but I will not
understand she: at least, after half a dozen hem--ing, she will be
oblige to speak out--I think, Mr. Lovelace--I think, Sir--I think you
be say some day ago--still I will be all silence--her eye fix
upon my shoe-buckle, as I sit over-against she--lady when put to it
thus, always admire a man's shoe-buckle, or perhaps some particular
beauty in the carpet. I think you say that Mrs. Fretchville--then a
crystal tear trickle down each crimson cheek, vex to have her virgin
pride so little assisted. but, come, my meaning dear, cry I to myself,
remember what I have suffer for thee, and what I have suffer by thee!
thy tearful pausing shall not be help out by I. speak out, love!--o
the sweet confusion! can I rob myself of so many conflict beauty by
the precipitate charmer-pity folly, by which a politer man [thou
know, lovely, that I be no polite man!] betray by his own
tenderness, and unused to female tear, would have be overcome? I will
feign an irresolution of mind on the occasion, that she may not quite
abhor I--that her reflection on the scene in my absence may bring to
her remembrance some beauty in my part of it: an irresolution that
will be owe to awe, to reverence, to profound veneration; and that will
have more eloquence in it than word can have. speak out then, love, and
spare not.
hard-heartedness, as it be call, be an essential of the libertine's
character. familiarize to the distress he occasion, he be seldom
betray by tenderness into a complaisant weakness unworthy of himself.
[mention the settlement, he say,]
I be in earnest as to the term. if I marry she, [and I have no doubt
that I shall, after my pride, my ambition, my revenge, if thou wilt, be
gratify,] I will do her noble justice. the more I do for such a
prudent, such an excellent economist, the more shall I do for myself.--
but, by my soul, Belford, her haughtiness shall be bring down to own
both love and obligation to I. nor will this sketch of settlement
bring we forwarder than I would have it. Modesty of sex will stand my
friend at any time. at the very altar, our hand join, I will engage
to make this proud beauty leave the parson and I, and all my friend who
should be present, though twenty in number, to look like fool upon one
another, while she take wing, and fly out of the church door, or window,
(if that be open, and the door shut); and this only by a single word.
[he mention his rash expression, that she should be his, although his
damnation be to be the purchase.]
at that instant, say he, I be upon the point of make a violent
attempt, but be check in the very moment, and but just in time to save
myself, by the awe I be strike with on again cast my eye upon she
terrified but lovely face, and see, as I think, her spotless heart
in every line of it.
O virtue, virtue! proceed he, what be there in thee, that can thus
against his will affect the heart of a Lovelace!--Whence these
involuntary tremor, and fear of give mortal offence?--what art thou,
that act in the breast of a feeble woman, which never before, no, not
in my first attempt, young as I then be, and frighten at my own
boldness (till I find myself forgive,) have such an effect upon I!
[he paint in lively colour, that part of the scene between he and the
Lady, where she say, the word father have a sweet and venerable sound
with it.]
I be exceedingly affect, say he, upon the occasion, but be ashamed
to be surprised into such a fit of unmanly weakness--so ashamed, that I
be resolve to subdue it at the instant, and to guard against the like
for the future. yet, at that moment, I more than half regret that I
could not permit she to enjoy a triumph which she so well deserve to
glory in--her youth, her beauty, her artless innocence, and her manner,
equally beyond comparison or description. but her indifference, Belford!
--That she could resolve to sacrifice I to the malice of my enemy; and
carry on the design in so clandestine a manner--and yet love she, as I
do, to phrensy!--revere she, as I do, to adoration!--these be the
recollection with which I fortify my recreant heart against her!--Yet,
after all, if she persevere, she must conquer!--coward, as she have make
I, that never be a coward before!
[he conclude his fourth letter in a vehement rage, upon her repulse
he, when he offer to salute she; have suppose, as he own, that
she would have be all condescension on his proposal to she.]
this, say he, I will for ever remember against she, in order to steel my
heart, that I may cut through a rock of ice to her; and repay she for
the disdain, the scorn, which glow in her countenance, and be apparent
in her air, at her abrupt departure for I, after such oblige behaviour
on my side, and after I have so earnestly press she for an early day.
the woman below say she hat I; she despise me!--And 'tis true: she
do; she must.--And why cannot I take their advice? I will not long,
my fair-one, be despise by thee, and laugh at by they!
let I acquaint thee, Jack, add he, by way of postscript, that this
effort of hers to leave I, if she could have be receive; her send
for a coach on Sunday; no doubt, resolve not to return, if she have go
out without I, (for do she not declare that she have thought to retire
to some of the village about town, where she could be safe and private?)
have, all together, so much alarm I, that I have be add to the
write instruction for my fellow and the people below how to act in
case she should elope in my absence: particularly let Will. know what
he shall report to stranger in case she shall throw herself upon any
such with a resolution to abandon I. to these instruction I shall
far add as circumstance offer.
LETTER XXXIV
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY, MAY 18.
I have neither time nor patience, my dear friend, to answer every
material article in your last letter just now receive. Mr. Lovelace's
proposal be all I like of he. and yet (as you do) I think, that he
conclude they not with the warmth and earnestness which we might
naturally have expect from he. never in my life do I hear or read of
so patient a man, with such a blessing in his reach. but wretch of his
cast, between you and I, my dear, have not, I fancy, the ardor that
honest man have. who know, as your Bell once spitefully say, but he
may have half a dozen creature to quit his hand of before he engage
for life?--Yet I believe you must not expect he to be honest on this
side of his grand climacteric.
he, to suggest delay from a compliment to be make to Lord M. and to give
time for settlement! he, a part of whose character it be, not to know
what complaisance to his relation be--I have no patience with he! you
do indeed want an interpose friend on the affect occasion which you
mention in your of yesterday morning. but, upon my word, be I to have
be that moment in your situation, and be so treat, I would have
tear his eye out, and leave it to his own heart, when I have do, to
furnish the reason for it.
would to Heaven to-morrow, without compliment any body, might be his
happy day!--villain! after he have himself suggest the compliment!--And
I think he accuse you of delaying!--fellow, that he is!--How my heart be
wrung--
but as matter now stand betwixt you, I be very unseasonable in
express my resentment against him.--Yet I donot know whether I be or
not, neither; since it be the most cruel of fate, for a woman to be
force to have a man whom her heart despise. you must, at least,
despise he; at time, however. his clench fist offer to his
forehead on your leave he in just displeasure--I wish it have be a
pole-axe, and in the hand of his bad enemy.
I will endeavour to think of some method, of some scheme, to get you from
he, and to fix you safely somewhere till your cousin Morden arrive--a
scheme to lie by you, and to be pursue as occasion may be give. you
be sure, that you can go abroad when you please? and that our
correspondence be safe? I cannot, however (for the reason heretofore
mention respect your own reputation,) wish you to leave he while he
give you not cause to suspect his honour. but your heart I know would be
the easy, if you be sure of some asylum in case of necessity.
yet once more, I say, I can have no notion that he can or dare mean your
dishonour. but then the man be a fool, my dear--thatbe all.
however, since you be throw upon a fool, marry the fool at the first
opportunity; and though I doubt that this man will be the most
ungovernable of fool, as all witty and vain fool be, take he as a
punishment, since you cannot as a reward: in short, as one give to
convince you that there be nothing but imperfection in this life.
and what be the result of all I have write, but this--either marry,
my dear, or get from they all, and from he too.
you intend the latter, youwill say, as soon as you have opportunity.
that, as above hint, I hope quickly to furnish you with: and then come
on a trial between you and yourself.
these be the very fellow that we woman do not naturally hate. we donot
always know what be, and what be not, in our power to do. when some
principal point we have long have in view become so critical, that we
must of necessity choose or refuse, then perhaps we look about we; be
affright at the wild and uncertain prospect before we; and, after a few
struggle and heart-ache, reject the untried new; draw in your horn,
and resolve to snail-on, as we do before, in a track we be acquaint
with.
I shall be impatient till I have your next. I be, my dear friend,
your ever affectionate and faithful
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XXXV
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY, MAY 17.
I cannot conceal from you any thing that relate to yourself so much as
the enclose do. you will see what the noble writer apprehend from
you, and wish of you, with regard to Miss Harlowe, and how much at
heart all your relation have it that you do honourably by she. they
compliment I with an influence over you, which I wish with all my soul
you would let I have in this article.
let I once more entreat thee, Lovelace, to reflect, before it be too
late (before the mortal offence be give) upon the grace and merit of
this lady. let thy frequent remorse at last end in one effectual
remorse. let not pride and wantonness of heart ruin the fairer
prospect. by my faith, Lovelace, there be nothing but vanity, conceit,
and nonsense, in our wild scheme. as we grow old, we shall be wise,
and look back upon our foolish notion of the present hour, (our youth
dissipate,) shall certainly despise ourselves when we think of the
honourable engagement we might have make: thou, more especially, if thou
lett such a matchless creature slide through thy finger. a creature
pure from her cradle. in all her action and sentiment uniformly noble.
Strict in the performance of all her even unrewarded duty to the most
unreasonable of father; what a wife will she make the man who shall have
the honour to call she his!
what apprehension wouldst thou have have reason for, have she be
prevail upon by giddy or frail motif, for which one man, by
importunity, might prevail, as well as another?
we all know what an inventive genius thou art master of: we be all
sensible, that thou hast a head to contrive, and a heart to execute.
have I not call thine the plotting'st heart in the universe? I call
it so upon knowledge. what woulds't thou more? why should it be the
most villainous, as well as the most able?--marry the lady; and, when
marry, let she know what a number of contrivance thou hadst in
readiness to play off. Beg of she not to hate thee for the
communication; and assure she, that thou gavest they up for remorse, and
in justice to her extraordinary merit: and let she have the opportunity
of congratulate herself for subdue a heart so capable of what thou
call glorious mischief. this will give her room for triumph; and even
thee no less: she, for her over thee; thou, for thine over thyself.
reflect likewise upon her suffering for thee. actually at the time thou
art form scheme to ruin she, (at least in her sense of the word,) be
she not labour under a father's curse lay upon she by thy mean, and
for thy sake? and wouldst thou give operation and completion to that
curse, which otherwise cannot have effect?
and what, Lovelace, all the time be thy pride?--Thou that vainly
imagin that the whole family of the Harlowes, and that of the Howes
too, be but thy machine, unknown to themselves, to bring about thy
purpose, and thy revenge, what art thou more, or well, than the
instrument even of her implacable brother, and envious sister, to
perpetuate the disgrace of the most excellent of sister, to which they
be move by vilely low and sordid motives?--Canst thou bear, Lovelace,
to be think the machine of thy inveterate enemy James Harlowe?--Nay,
art thou not the cully of that still viler Joseph Leman, who serve
himself as much by thy money, as he do thee by the double part he act
by thy direction?--and far still, art thou not the devil's agent, who
only can, and who certainly will, suitably reward thee, if thou
proceed, and if thou effectest thy wicked purpose?
could any man but thee put together upon paper the follow question
with so much unconcern as thou seemest to have write them?--give they
a reperusal, o heart of adamant! 'whither can she fly to avoid I? her
parent will not receive she. her uncle will not entertain she. her
beloved Norton be in their direction, and cannot. Miss Howe dare not.
she have not one friend in town but I--be entirely a stranger to the
town.'*--what must that heart be that can triumph in a distress so deep,
into which she have be plunge by thy elaborate art and contrivance?
and what a sweet, yet sad reflection be that, which have like to have have
its due effect upon thee, arise from thy name Lord M. for her nuptial
father? her tender year incline she to wish for a father, and to hope
a friend.--o my dear Lovelace, canst thou resolve to be, instead of the
father thou hast rob she of, a devil?
* see Letter XXI. of this volume.
Thou know, that I have no interest, that I can have no view, in
wish thee to do justice to this admirable creature. for thy own sake,
once more I conjure thee, for thy family's sake, and for the sake of our
common humanity, let I beseech thee to be just to Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
no matter whether these expostulation be in character from I, or not.
I have be and be bad enough. if thou tak my advice, which be (as
the enclose will shew thee) the advice of all thy family, thou wilt
perhaps have it to reproach I (and but perhaps neither) that thou art
not a bad man than myself. but if thou dost not, and if thou ruin
such a virtue, all the complicated wickedness of ten devil, let loose
among the innocent with full power over they, will not do so much vile
and base mischief as thou wilt be guilty of.
it be say that the prince on his throne be not safe, if a mind so
desperate can be find, as value not its own life. so may it be say,
that the most immaculate virtue be not safe, if a man can be meet with who
have no regard to his own honour, and make a jest of the most solemn vow
and protestation.
Thou mayest by trick, chicane, and false colour, thou who art bad than
a pickeroon in love, overcome a poor lady so entangle as thou hast
entangle she; so unprotected as thou hast make she: but consider, how
much more generous and just to she, and noble to thyself, it be, to
overcome thyself.
once more, it be no matter whether my past or future action countenance
my preachment, as perhaps thou'lt call what I have write: but this I
promise thee, that whenever I meet with a woman of but one half of Miss
Harlowe's perfection, who will favour I with her acceptance, I will
take the advice I give, and marry. nor will I offer to try her honour
at the hazard of my own.
in other word, I will not degrade an excellent creature in her own eye,
by trial, when I have no cause for suspicion. and let I add, with
respect to thy eagleship's manifestation, of which thou boastest, in thy
attempt upon the innocent and uncorrupted, rather than upon those whom
thou humourously comparest to wren, wagtail, and phyl-tit, as thou
call they,* that I hope I have it not once to reproach myself, that I
ruin the moral of any one creature, who otherwise would have be
uncorrupted. guilt enough in contribute to the continued guilt of other
poor wretch, if I be one of those who take care she shall never rise
again, when she have once fall.
* see Letter XVII. of this volume.
whatever the capital devil, under whose banner thou hast list, will let
thee do, with regard to this incomparable woman, I hope thou wilt act
with honour in relation to the enclosed, between Lord M. and I; since
his Lordship, as thou wilt see, desire, that thou may not know he
write on the subject; for reason, I think, very far from be
creditable to thyself: and that thou wilt take as mean, the honest zeal
for thy service, of
Thy real friend,
J. BELFORD.
letter xxxvi
LORD M., to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[enclosed in the PRECEDING.]
M. HALL, MONDAY, MAY 15.
SIR,
if any man in the world have power over my nephew, it be you. I therefore
write this, to beg you to interfere in the affair depend between he
and the most accomplished of woman, as every one say; and what every one
say must be true.
I donot know that he have any bad design upon she; but I know his temper
too well, not to be apprehensive upon such long delay: and the lady
here have be for some time in fear for she: Lady Sarah in particular,
who (as you must know) be a wise woman, say, that these delay, in the
present case, must be from he, rather than from the lady.
he have always indeed a strong antipathy to marriage, and may think of
play his dog's trick by she, as he have by so many other. if therebe
any danger of this, 'tis good to prevent it in time: for when a thing be
do, advice come too late.
he have always have the folly and impertinence to make a jest of I for
use proverb: but as they be the wisdom of whole nation and age
collect into a small compass, I be not to be sham out of sentence
that often contain more wisdom in they than the tedious harangue of most
of our parson and moralist. let he laugh at they, if he please: you
and I know well thing, Mr. Belford--though you have keep company with
a wolf, you have not learn to howl of he.
but nevertheless, you must let he know that I have write to you on
this subject. I be ashamed to say it; but he have ever treat I as if I
be a man of very common understanding; and would, perhaps, think never
the well of the good advice in the world for come from I. those,
Mr. Belford, who most love, be least set by.--but who would expect
velvet to be make out of a sow's ear?
I be sure he have no reason however to slight I as he do. he may and
will be the well for I, if he outlive I; though he once tell I to
my face, that I might do as I would with my estate; for that he, for his
part, love his liberty as much as he despise money. and at another
time, twit I with my phrase, that the man be above controul, who
want not either to borrow or flatter. he think, I suppose, that I
could not cover he with my wing, without peck at he with my bill;
though I never use to be peck at he, without very great occasion:
and, God know, he might have my very heart, if he would but endeavour
to oblige I, by study his own good; for that be all I desire of he.
indeed, it be his poor mother that first spoil he; and I have be
but too indulgent to he since. a fine grateful disposition, youwill say,
to return evil for good! but that be always his way. it be a good
saying, and which be verify by he with a witness--child when
little, make their parent fool; when great, mad. have his parent live
to see what I have see of he, they would have be mad indeed.
this match, however, as the lady have such an extraordinary share of
wisdom and goodness, might set all to right; and if you can forward it,
I would enable he to make whatever settlement he could wish; and should
not be unwilling to put he in possession of another pretty estate
besides. I be no covetous man, he know. and, indeed, what be a
covetous man to be liken to so fitly, as to a dog in a wheel which
roast meat for other? and what do I live for, (as I have often say,)
but to see he and my two niece well married and settle. may Heaven
settle he down to a well mind, and turn his heart to more of goodness
and consideration!
if the delay be on his side, I tremble for the lady; and, if on hers,
(as he tell my niece Charlotte,) I could wish she be apprize that
delay be dangerous. excellent as she be, she ought not to depend on
her merit with such a changeable fellow, and such a prof marriage-
hater, as he have be. Desert and reward, I can assure she, seldom keep
company together.
but let he remember, that vengeance though it come with leaden foot,
strike with iron hand. if he behave ill in this case, he may find it
so. what a pity it be, that a man of his talent and learning should be
so vile a rake! alas! alas! Une poignee de bonne vie vaut mieux que
plein muy de clergee; a handful of good life be well than a whole
bushel of learn.
you may throw in, too, as a friend, that, should he provoke I, it may
not be too late for I to marry. my old friend Wycherly do so, when he
be old than I be, on purpose to plague his nephew: and, in spite of
this gout, I might have a child or two still. I have not be without
some thought that way, when he have anger I more than ordinary: but
these thought have go off again hitherto, upon my considering, that
the child of very young and very old man (though I be not so very old
neither) last not long; and that old man, when they marry young woman,
be say to make much of death: yet who know but that matrimony might be
good against the gouty humour I be trouble with?
no man be every thing--you, Mr. Belford, be a learn man. I be a peer.
and do you (as you good know how) inculcate upon he the force of these
wise saying which follow, as well as those which go before; but yet so
indiscreetly, as that he may not know that you borrow your dart from my
quiver. these be they--Happy be the man who know his folly in his
youth. he that live well, live long. again, he that live ill one
year, will sorrow for it seven. and again, as the Spaniards have it--who
live well, see afar off! far off indeed; for he see into eternity, as
a man may say. then that other fine saying, he who perish in needless
danger, be the Devil's martyr. another proverb I pick up at Madrid,
when I accompany Lord Lexington in his embassy to Spain, which might
teach my nephew more mercy and compassion than be in his nature I doubt
to shew; which be this, that he who pity another, remember himself.
and this that be go to follow, I be sure he have prove the truth of a
hundred time, that he who do what he will seldom do what he ought.
nor be that unworthy of his notice, young man's frolic old man feel. my
devilish gout, God help I--but I will not say what I be go to say.
I remember, that you yourself, compliment I for my taste in pithy and
wise sentence, say a thing that give I a high opinion of you; and it
be this: 'man of talent,' say you, 'be soon to be convince by
short sentence than by long preachment, because the short sentence
drive themselves into the heart and stay there, while long discourse,
though ever so good, tire the attention; and one good thing drive out
another, and so on till all be forget.'
may your good counsel, Mr. Belford, found upon these hint which I have
give, pierce his heart, and incite he to do what will be so happy for
himself, and so necessary for the honour of that admirable lady whom I
long to see his wife; and, if I may, I will not think of one for myself.
should he abuse the confidence she have place in he, I myself shall
pray, that vengeance may fall upon his head--raro--I quite forget all my
Latin; but I think it be, raro antecedentem scelestum deseruit pede paean
claudo: where vice go before, vengeance (soon or later) will follow.
but why do I translate these thing for you?
I shall make no apology for this trouble. I know how well you love he
and I; and there be nothing in which you could serve we both more
importantly, than in forward this match to the utmost of your power.
when it be do, how shall I rejoice to see you at M. Hall! mean time, I
shall long to hear that you be likely to be successful with he; and be,
Dear Sir,
your most faithful friend and servant,
M.
[Mr. Lovelace have not return an answer to Mr. Belford's expostulary
letter so soon as Mr. Belford expect, he write to he, express
his apprehension that he have disoblige he by his honest freedom.
among other thing, he says--]
I pass my time here at Watford, attend my die uncle, very heavily.
I cannot therefore, by any mean, dispense with thy correspondence. and
why shouldst thou punish I, for have more conscience and more remorse
than thyself? Thou who never thoughtest either conscience or remorse an
honour to thee. and I have, besides, a melancholy story to tell thee, in
relation to Belton and his Thomasine; and which may afford a lesson to
all the keeping-class.
I have a letter from each of our three companion in the time. they have
all the wickedness that thou hast, but not the wit. some new roguery
do two of they boast of, which, I think, if complete, deserve the
gallow.
I be far from hat intrigue upon principle. but to have awkward
fellow plot, and commit their plot to paper, destitute of the
seasoning, of the acuman, which be thy talent, how extremely shocking
must their letter be!--But do thou, Lovelace, whether thou art, or art
not, determine upon thy measure with regard to the fine lady in thy
power, enliven my heavy heart by thy communication; and thou wilt oblige
Thy melancholy friend,
J. BELFORD.
LETTER XXXVII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY NIGHT, MAY 19.
when I have open my view to thee so amply as I have do in my former
letter; and have tell thee, that my principal design be but to bring
virtue to a trial, that, if virtue, it need not be afraid of; and that
the reward of it will be marriage (that be to say, if, after I have
carry my point, I cannot prevail upon she to live with I the life of
honour;* for that thou know be the wish of my heart); I be amazed at
the repetition of thy wambling nonsense.
* see Vol. III. Letter XVIII.
I be of opinion with thee, that some time hence, when I be grow wiser, I
shall conclude, that there be nothing but vanity, conceit, and nonsense,
in my present wild scheme. but what be this saying, but that I must
be first wise?
I do not intend to let this matchless creature slide through my finger.
art thou able to say half the thing in her praise, that I have say, and
be continually say or write?
her gloomy father curse the sweet creature, because she put it out of
his wicked power to compel she to have the man she hat. Thou know
how little merit she have with I on this score.--and shall I not try the
virtue I intend, upon full proof, to reward, because her father be a
tyrant?--why art thou thus eternally reflect upon so excellent a
woman, as if thou wert assure she would fail in the trial?--Nay, thou
declarest, every time thou writ on the subject, that she will, that
she must yield, entangle as she be: and yet makest her virtue the
pretence of thy solicitude for she.
an instrument of the vile James Harlowe, dost thou call me?--O Jack! how
could I curse thee!--i be instrument of that brother! of that sister!
but mark the end--and thou shalt see what will become of that brother,
and of that sister!
play not against I my own acknowledge sensibility, I desire thee.
sensibility, which at the same time that they contradict thy charge of
an adamantine heart in thy friend, thou hadst know nothing of, have I not
communicate they to thee.
if I ruin such a virtue, sayest thou!--eternal monotonist!--again; the
most immaculate virtue may be ruin by man who have no regard to their
honour, and who make a jest of the most solemn oath, &c. what must be
the virtue that will be ruin without oath? be not the world full of
these deception? and be not lover' oath a jest of hundred of year'
stand? and be not caution against the perfidy of our sex a
necessary part of the female education?
I do intend to endeavour to overcome myself; but I must first try, if I
cannot overcome this lady. have I not say, that the honour of her sex
be concerned that I should try?
whenever thou meet with a woman of but half her perfection, thou wilt
marry--do, Jack.
can a girl be degrade by trial, who be not overcome?
I be glad that thou tak crime to thyself, for not endeavour to
convert the poor wretch whom other have ruin. I will not
recriminate upon thee, Belford, as I might, when thou flatterest thyself
that thou never ruinedst the moral of any young creature, who otherwise
would not have be corrupt--the palliate consolation of an Hottentot
heart, determine rather to gluttonize on the garbage of other foul
feeder than to reform.--But tell I, Jack, wouldst thou have spar such
a girl as my Rosebud, have I not, by my example, engage thy generosity?
nor be my Rosebud the only girl I spared:--when my power be
acknowledge, who more merciful than thy friend?
it be resistance that inflame desire,
sharpen the dart of love, and blow its fire.
Love be disarm'd that meet with too much ease;
he languish, and do not care to please.
the woman know this as well as the man. they love to be address with
spirit:
and therefore 'tis their golden fruit they guard
with so much care, to make profession hard.
whence, for a by-reflection, the ardent, the complaisant gallant be so
often prefer to the cold, the unadore husband. and yet the sex do
not consider, that variety and novelty give the ardour and the
obsequiousness; and that, be the rake as much use to they as the
husband be, he would be [and be to his own wife, if marry] as
indifferent to their favour, as their husband be; and the husband, in
his turn, would, to another woman, be the rake. let the woman, upon the
whole, take this lesson from a lovelace--'alway to endeavour to make
themselves as new to a husband, and to appear as elegant and as oblige
to he, as they be desirous to appear to a lover, and actually be to
he as such; and then the rake, which all woman love, will last long in
the husband, than it generally do.'
but to return:--if I have not sufficiently clear my conduct to thee in
the above; I refer thee once more to mine of the 13th of last month.*
and pr'ythee, Jack, lie I not under a necessity to repeat the same
thing so often. I hope thou readest what I write more than once.
* see Vol. II. Letter XIV.
I be not displeased that thou art so apprehensive of my resentment, that
I cannot miss a day without make thee uneasy. thy conscience, 'tis
plain, tell thee, that thou have deserve my displeasure: and if it have
convince thee of that, it will make thee afraid of repeat thy fault.
see that this be the consequence. else, now that thou hast tell I how I
can punish thee, it be very likely that I do punish thee by my silence,
although I have as much pleasure in writing on this charming subject, as
thou canst have in read what I write.
when a boy, if a dog run away from I through fear, I generally look
about for a stone, or a stick; and if neither offer to my hand, I
skin my hat after he to make he afraid for something. what
signify power, if we do not exert it?
let my Lord know, that thou hast scribble to I. but give he not the
content of thy epistle. though a parcel of crude stuff, he would think
there be something in it. poor argument will do, when bring in
favour of what we like. but the stupid peer little think that this lady
be a rebel to love. on the contrary, not only he, but all the world
believe she to be a volunteer in his service.--so I shall incur blame,
and she will be pity, if any thing happen amiss.
since my Lord's heart be set upon this match, I have write already to
let he know, 'that my unhappy character have give my beloved an
ungenerous diffidence of I. that she be so mother-sick and father-fond,
that she have rather return to Harlowe-place than marry. that she be even
apprehensive that the step she have take of go off with I will make
the lady of a family of such rank and honour as ours think slightly of
she. that therefore I desire his lordship (though this hint, I tell he,
must be very delicately touch) to write I such a letter as I can shew
she; (let he treat I in it ever so freely, I shall not take it amiss, I
tell he, because I know his Lordship take pleasure in write to I in
a corrective style). that he may make what offer he please on the
marriage. that I desire his presence at the ceremony; that I may take
from his hand the great blessing that mortal man can give I.'
I have not absolutely tell the lady that I would write to his Lordship to
this effect; yet have give her reason to think I will. so that without
the last necessity I shall not produce the answer I expect from he: for
I be very loth, I own, to make use of any of my family's name for the
furthering of my design. and yet I must make all secure, before I pull
off the mask. be not this my motive for bring her hither?
thus thou seest that the old peer's letter come very seasonably. I thank
thee for that. but as to his sentence, they cannot possibly do I good.
I be early suffocated with his wisdom of nation. when a boy, I never
ask anything of he, but out fly a proverb; and if the tendency of
that be to deny I, I never could obtain the least favour. this give I
so great an aversion to the very word, that, when a child, I make it a
condition with my tutor, who be an honest parson, that I would not read
my Bible at all, if he would not excuse I one of the wise book in it:
to which, however, I have no other objection, than that it be call the
Proverbs. and as for Solomon, he be then a hat character with I, not
because of his polygamy, but because I have conceive he to be such
another musty old fellow as my uncle.
well, but let we leave old saw to old I. what signify thy tedious
whine over thy depart relation? be it not generally agree that he
cannot recover? will it not be kind in thee to put he out of his
misery? I hear that he be pester still with visit from doctor, and
apothecary, and surgeon; that they cannot cut so deep as the
mortification have go; and that in every visit, in every scarification,
inevitable death be pronounce upon he. why then do they keep
torment he? be it not to take away more of his live fleece than of
his dead flesh?--when a man be give over, the fee should surely be
refuse. be they not now rob his heirs?--what have thou to do, if
the will be as thou'dst have it?--he send for thee [do he not?] to close
his eye. he be but an uncle, be he?
let I see, if I mistake not, it be in the Bible, or some other good
book: can it be in herodotus?--o I believe it be in Josephus, a half-
sacred, and half-profane author. he tell we of a king of Syria put out
of his pain by his prime minister, or one who deserve to be so for his
contrivance. the story say, if I be right, that he spread a wet cloth
over his face, which kill he, he reign in his place. a notable
fellow! perhaps this wet cloth in the original, be what we now call
laudanum; a potion that overspread the faculty, as the wet cloth do
the face of the royal patient; and the translator know not how to render
it.
but how like forlorn varlet thou subscrib, 'thy melancholy friend, J.
BELFORD!' melancholy! for what? to stand by, and see fair play between
an old man and death? I think thou hadst be more of a man; that thou
art not afraid of an acute death, a sword's point, to be so plaugily
hip'd at the consequence of a chronical one!--what though the
scarificator work upon he day by day? itbe only upon a caput mortuum:
and pr'ythee go to, to use the stylum veterum, and learn of the royal
butcher; who, for sport, (an hundred time bad man than thy Lovelace,)
widow ten thousand at a brush, and make twice as many fatherless--learn
of they, I say, how to support a single death.
but art thou sure, Jack, it be a mortification?--My uncle once give
promise of such a root-and-branch distemper: but, alas! it turn to a
smart gout-fit; and I have the mortification instead of him.--I have hear
that bark, in proper dos, will arrest a mortification in its progress,
and at last cure it. let thy uncle's surgeon know, that it be worth more
than his ear, if he prescribe one grain of the bark.
I wish my uncle have give I the opportunity of set thee a well
example: thou shouldst have see what a brave fellow I have be. and have
I have occasion to write, my conclusion would have be this: 'I hope the
old Trojan's happy. in that hope, I be so; and
'thy rejoicing friend,
'R. LOVELACE.'
Dwell not always, Jack, upon one subject. let I have poor Belton's
story. the soon the well. if I can be of service to he, tell
he he may command I either in purse or person. yet the former with
a free will than the latter; for how can I leave my goddess? but
Iwill issue my command to my other vassal to attend thy summon.
if ye want head, let I know. if not, my quota, on this occasion, be
money.
LETTER XXXVIII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SATURDAY, MAY 20.
not one word will I reply to such an abandon wretch, as thou hast shew
thyself to be in thine of last night. I will leave the lady to the
protection of that power who only can work miracle; and to her own
merit. still I have hope that these will save she.
I will proceed, as thou desir, to poor Belton's case; and the rather,
as it have throw I into such a train of think upon our past life,
our present course, and our future view, as may be of service to we
both, if I can give due weight to the reflection that arise from it.
the poor man make I a visit on Thursday, in this my melancholy
attendance. he begin with complaint of his ill health and spirit, his
hectic cough, and his increase malady of spit blood; and then lead to
his story.
a confound one it be; and which highly aggravate his other malady:
for it have come out, that his Thomasine, (who, truly, would be new
christen, you know, that her name might be near in sound to the
christian name of the man whom she pretend to doat upon) have for many
year carry on an intrigue with a fellow who have be hostler to her
father (an innkeeper at Darking); of whom, at the expense of poor Belton,
she have make a gentleman; and manage it so, that have the art to make
herself his cashier, she have be unable to account for large sum, which
he think forthcoming at demand, and have trust to her custody, in
order to pay off a mortgage upon his parental estate in Kent, which his
heart have run upon leave clear, but which now cannot be do, and will
soon be foreclose. and yet she have so long pass for his wife, that he
know not what to resolve upon about she; nor about the two boy he be
so fond of, suppose they to be his; whereas now he begin to doubt his
share in they.
so keep donot do, Lovelace. 'tis not the eligible wife. 'a man must
keep a woman, say the poor fellow to I, but not his estate!--two
interests!--then, my tottering fabric!' point to his emaciated
carcass.
we do well to value ourselves upon our liberty, or to speak more
properly, upon the liberty we take. we have need to run down matrimony
as we do, and to make that state the subject of our frothy jest; when we
frequently render ourselves (for this of Tom's be not a singular case)
the dupe and tool of woman who generally govern we (by art our wise
head penetrate not) more absolutely than a wife would attempt to do.
let we consider this point a little; and that upon our own principle, as
libertine, set aside what be exact from we by the law of our
country, and its custom; which, nevertheless, we cannot get over, till
we have get over almost all moral obligation, as member of society.
in the first place, let we consider (we, who be in possession of estate
by legal descent) how we should have like to have be such naked
destitute varlet, as we must have be, have our father be as wise as
ourselves; and despise matrimony as we do--and then let we ask
ourselves, if we ought not to have the same regard for our posterity, as
we be glad our father have for theirs?
but this, perhaps, be too moral a consideration.--to proceed therefore to
those consideration which will be more striking to we: how can we
reasonably expect economy or frugality (or anything indeed but riot and
waste) from creature who have an interest, and must therefore have
view, different from our own?
they know the uncertain tenure (our fickle humour) by which they hold:
and be it to be wonder at, suppose they to be provident harlot, that
they should endeavour, if they have the power, to lay up against a rainy
day? or, if they have not the power, that they should squander all they
can come at, when they be sure of nothing but the present hour; and when
the life they live, and the sacrifice they have make, put conscience and
honour out of the question?
whereas a wife, have the same family-interest with her husband, lie
not under either the same apprehension or temptation; and have not
break through (of necessity, at least, have not) those restraint which
education have fasten upon she: and if she make a private purse, which
we be tell by anti-matrimonialist, all wife love to do, and have
child, it go all into the same family at the long-run.
then as to the great article of fidelity to your bed--be not woman of
family, who be well-educate, under great restraint, than creature,
who, if they ever have reputation, sacrifice it to sordid interest, or to
more sordid appetite, the moment they give it up to you? do not the
example you furnish, of have succeed with she, give encouragement
for other to attempt she likewise? for with all her blandishment, can
any man be so credulous, or so vain, as to believe, that the woman he
could persuade, another may not prevail upon?
adultery be so capital a guilt, that even rake and libertine, if not
wholly abandon, and as I may say, invite by a woman's levity, disavow
and condemn it: but here, in a state of keeping, a woman be in no danger
of incur (legally, at least) that guilt; and you yourself have break
through and overthrow in she all the fence and boundary of moral
honesty, and the modesty and reserve of her sex: and what tie shall hold
she against inclination, or interest? and what shall deter an attempter?
while a husband have this security from legal sanction, that if his wife
be detect in a criminal conversation with a man of fortune, (the most
likely by bribe to seduce she,) he may recover very great damage, and
procure a divorce besides: which, to say nothing of the ignominy, be a
consideration that must have some force upon both party. and a wife
must be vicious indeed, and a reflection upon a man's own choice, who,
for the sake of change, and where there be no quality to seduce, nor
affluence to corrupt, will run so many hazard to injure her husband in
the tenderest of all point.
but there be difficulty in procure a divorce--[and so there ought]--
and none, say the rake, in part with a mistress whenever you suspect
she; or whenever you be weary of she, and have a mind to change she for
another.
but must not the man be a brute indeed, who can cast off a woman whom he
have seduce, [if he take she from the town, thatbe another thing,]
without some flagrant reason; something that will well justify he to
himself, as well as to she, and to the world, than mere power and
novelty?
but I donot see, if we judge by fact, and by the practice of all we have
be acquaint with of the keeping-class, that we know how to part with
they when we have they.
that we know we can if we will, be all we have for it: and this lead we
to bear many thing from a mistress, which we would not from a wife.
but, if we be good-natured and humane: if the woman have art: [and what
woman want it, who have fall by art? and to whose precarious situation
art be so necessary?] if you have give she the credit of be call by
your name: if you have a settle place of abode, and have receive and
pay visit in her company, as your wife: if she have bring you child
--you will allow that these be strong obligation upon you in the
world's eye, as well as to your own heart, against tear yourself from
such close connection. she will stick to you as your skin: and it will
be next to flay yourself to cast she off.
even if there be cause for it, by infidelity, she will have manage ill,
if she have not her defender. nor do I ever know a cause or a person
so bad, as to want advocate, either from ill-will to the one, or pity to
the other: and you will then be think a hard-hearted miscreant: and
even be she to go off without credit to herself, she will leave you as
little; especially with all those whose good opinion a man would wish to
cultivate.
well, then, shall this poor privilege, that we may part with a woman if
we will, be deem a balance for the other inconveniencie? shall it be
think by we, who be man of family and fortune, an equivalent for
give up equality of degree; and take for the partner of our bed, and
very probably more than the partner in our estate, (to the breach of all
family-rule and order,) a low-bear, a low-educate creature, who have not
bring any thing into the common stock; and can possibly make no return
for the solid benefit she receive, but those libidinous one, which a
man cannot boast of, but to his disgrace, nor think of, but to the shame
of both?
moreover, as the man advance in year, the fury of his libertinism will
go off. he will have different aim and pursuit, which will diminish
his appetite to range, and make such a regular life as the matrimonial
and family life, palatable to he, and every day more palatable.
if he have child, and have reason to think they his, and if his lewd
course have leave he any estate, he will have cause to regret the
restraint his boasted liberty have lay he under, and the valuable
privilege it have deprive he of; when he find that it must descend to
some relation, for whom, whether near or distant, he care not one
farthing; and who perhaps (if a man of virtue) have hold he in the
utmost contempt for his dissolute life.
and be we to suppose his estate in his power to bequeath as he please;
why should a man resolve, for the gratifying of his foolish humour only,
to bastardize his race? why should he wish to expose his child to the
scorn and insult of the rest of the world? why should he, whether they
be son or daughter, lie they under the necessity of comply with
proposal of marriage, either inferior as to fortune, or unequal as to
age? why should he deprive the child he love, who themselves may be
guilty of no fault, of the respect they would wish to have, and to
deserve; and of the opportunity of associate themselves with proper,
that be to say, with reputable company? and why should he make they think
themselves under obligation to every person of character, who will
vouchsafe to visit they? what little reason, in a word, would such
child have to bless their father's obstinate defiance of the law and
custom of his country; and for give they a mother, of whom they could
not think with honour; to whose crime it be that they owe their very
being, and whose example it be their duty to shun?
if the education and moral of these child be leave to chance, as too
generally they be, (for the man who have humanity and a feeling heart,
and who be capable of fondness for his offspring, I take it for grant
will marry,) the case be still bad; his crime be perpetuate, as I may
say, by his child: and the sea, the army, perhaps the highway, for the
boy; the common for the girl; too often point out the way to a bad
catastrophe.
what therefore, upon the whole, do we get by treading in these crooked
path, but danger, disgrace, and a too-late repentance?
and after all, do we not frequently become the cullie of our own
libertinism; slide into the very state with those half-wear-out doxy,
which perhaps we might have enter into with their lady; at least with
their superior both in degree and fortune? and all the time live
handsomely like ourselves; not sneak into hole and corner; and, when
we creep abroad with our woman, look about we, and at ever one that
pass we, as if we be confessedly accountable to the censure of all
honest people.
my cousin Tony Jenyns, thou knew. he have not the actively mischievous
spirit, that thou, Belton, Mowbray, Tourville, and myself, have: but he
imbibe the same notion we do, and carry they into practice.
how do he prate against wedlock! how do he strut about as a wit and a
smart! and what a wit and a smart do all the boy and girl of our
family (myself among the rest, then an urchin) think he, for the air he
give himself?--marry! no, not for the world; what man of sense would
bear the insolence, the petulance, the expensiveness of a wife! he
could not for the heart of he think it tolerable, that a woman of equal
rank and fortune, and, as it might happen, superior talent to his own,
should look upon herself to have a right to share the benefit of that
fortune which she bring he.
so, after he have flutter about the town for two or three year, in all
which time he have a well opinion of himself than any body else have,
what do he do, but enter upon an affair with his fencing-master's
daughter?
he succeed; take private lodging for she at Hackney; visit she by
stealth; both of they tender of reputation that be extremely tender,
but which neither have quite give up; for rake of either sex be always
the last to condemn or cry down themselves: visit by nobody, nor
visit: the life of a thief, or of a man best by creditor, afraid to
look out of his own house, or to be see abroad with she. and thus go
on for twelve year, and, though he have a good estate, hardly make both
end meet; for though no glare, there be no economy; and, beside, he have
ever year a child, and very fond of his child be he. but none of
they live above three year. and be now, on the death of the
dozenth, grow as dully sober, as if he have be a real husband, his good
Mrs. Thomas (for he have not permit she to take his own name) prevail
upon he to think the loss of their child a judgment upon the parent
for their wicked way of life; [a time will come, Lovelace, if we live to
advanced year, in which reflection will take hold of the enfeeble
mind;] and then it be not difficult for his woman to induce he, by way
of compound with Heaven, to marry she. when this be do, he have
leisure to sit down, and contemplate; an to recollect the many offer of
person of family and fortune to which he have decline in the prime of
life: his expense equal at least: his reputation not only less, but
lose: his enjoyment steal: his partnership unequal, and such as he have
always be ashamed of. but the woman say, that after twelve or
thirteen year' cohabitation, Tony do an honest thing by she. and that
be all my poor cousin get by make his old mistress his new wife--not a
drum, not a trumpet, not a fife, not a tabret, nor the expectation of a
new joy, to animate he on!
what Belton will do with his Thomasine I know not! nor care I to advise
he: for I see the poor fellow do not like that any body should curse
she but himself. this he do very heartily. and so low be he reduce,
that he blubber over the reflection upon his past fondness for her cub,
and upon his present doubt of their be his: 'what a damn'd thing be
it, Belford, if Tom and Hal should be the hostler dog's puppy and not
mine!'
very true! and I think the strong health of the chubby-face muscular
whelp confirm the too great probability.
but I say not so to he.
you, he say, be such a gay, lively mortal, that this sad tale would
make no impression upon you: especially now, that your whole heart be
engage as it be. Mowbray would be too violent upon it: he have not, he
say, a feeling heart. Tourville have no discretion: and, a pretty jest!
although he and his Thomasine live without reputation in the world,
(people guess that they be not marry, notwithstanding she go by
his name,) yet 'he would not too much discredit the curse ingrate
neither!'
could a man act a weak part, have he be really marry; and be he
sure he be go to separate from the mother of his own child?
I leave this as a lesson upon thy heart, without make any application:
only with this remark, 'that after we libertine have indulge our
licentious appetite, reflect, (in the conceit of our vain heart,)
both with our lip and by our life, upon our ancestor and the good old
way, we find out, when we come to year of discretion, if we live till
then (what all who know we find out before, that be to say, we find
out), our own despicable folly; that those good old way would have be
good for we, as well as for the rest of the world; and that in every step
we have deviate from they we have only expose our vanity and our
ignorance at the same time.'
J. BELFORD.
LETTER XXXIX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SATURDAY, MAY 20.
I be pleased with the sober reflection with which thou concludest thy
last; and I thank thee for it. poor Belton!--I do not think his
Thomasine would have prove so very a devil. but this must everlastingly
be the risk of a keeper, who take up with a low-breed girl. this I never
do. nor have I occasion to do it. such a one as I, Jack, need only,
till now, to shake the stateliest tree, and the mellow fruit dropt into
my mouth:--alway of Montaigne's taste thou knowest:--thought it a glory
to subdue a girl of family.--more truly delightful to I the seduction-
progress than the crown act: for thatbe a vapour, a bubble! and most
cordially do I thank thee for thy indirect hint, that I be right in my
pursuit.
from such a woman as Miss Harlowe, a man be secure from all the
inconveniencie thou expatiat upon.
once more, therefore, do I thank thee, Belford, for thy approbation!--a
man need not, as thou sayest, sneak into hole and corner, and shun the
day, in the company of such a woman as this. how friendly in thee, thus
to abet the favourite purpose of my heart!--nor can it be a disgrace to
I, to permit such a lady to be call by my name!--nor shall I be at all
concerned about the world's censure, if I live to the year of
discretion, which thou mentionest, should I be take in, and prevail
upon to tread with she the good old path of my ancestor.
a blessing on thy heart, thou honest fellow! I think thou wert in
jest, and but acquit thyself of an engagement to Lord M. when thou
wert plead for matrimony in behalf of this lady!--it could not be
principle, I know, in thee: it could not be compassion--a little envy
indeed I suspected!--but now I see thee once more thyself: and once more,
say I, a blessing on thy heart, thou true friend, and very honest fellow!
now will I proceed with courage in all my scheme, and oblige thee with
the continued narrative of my progression towards bring they to
effect!--but I could not forbear to interrupt my story, to show my
gratitude.
LETTER XL
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
and now will I favour thee with a brief account of our present situation.
from the high to the low we be all extremely happy.--dorcas stand
well in her lady's grace. Polly have ask her advice in relation to a
courtship-affair of her own. no oracle ever give well. Sally have have
a quarrel with her woollen-draper; and make my charmer lady-chancellor in
it. she blame Sally for behave tyrannically to a man who love she.
dear creature! to stand against a glass, and to shut her eye because she
will not see her face in it!--mr. Sinclair have pay her court to so
unerre a judge, by request her advice with regard to both niece.
this the way we have be in for several day with the people below. yet
sola generally at her meal, and seldom at other time in their company.
they now, use to her way, [perseverance must conquer,] never press she;
so when they meet, all be civility on both side. even married people, I
believe, Jack, prevent abundance of quarrel, by see one another but
seldom.
but how stand it between thyself and the lady, methink thou askest,
since her abrupt departure from thee, and undutiful repulse of Wednesday
morning?
why, pretty well in the main. Nay, very well. for why? the dear saucy-
face know not how to help herself. can fly to no other protection. and
have, besides, overheard a conversation [who would have think she have
be so near?] which pass between Mrs. Sinclair, Miss Martin, and
myself, that very Wednesday afternoon; which have set her heart at ease
with respect to several doubtful point.
such as, particularly, 'Mrs. Fretchville's unhappy state of mind--most
humanely pity by Miss Martin, who know she very well--the husband she
have lose, and herself, (as Sally say,) lover from their cradle. pity
from one beget pity from another, be the occasion for it either strong
or weak; and so many circumstance be give to poor Mrs. Fretchville's
distress, that it be impossible but my beloved must extremely pity she
whom the less tender-hearted Miss Martin greatly pity.
'my Lord M.'s gout his only hindrance from visit my spouse. Lady
Betty and Miss Montague soon expect in town.
'my earnest desire signify to have my spouse receive those lady in
her own hose, if Mrs. Fretchville would but know her own mind; and I
pathetically lament the delay occasion by she not know it.
'my intention to stay at Mrs. Sinclair's, as I say I have tell they
before, while my spouse reside in her own hose, (when Mrs. Fretchville
could be bring to quit it,) in order to gratify her utmost punctilio.
'my passion for my beloved (which, as I tell they in a high and fervent
accent, be the truest that man could have for woman) I boast of. it
be, in short, I say, of the true platonic kind; or I have no notion of
what platonic love be.'
so it be, Jack; and must end as platonic love generally do end.
'Sally and Mrs. Sinclair next praise, but not grossly, my beloved.
Sally particularly admire her purity; call it exemplary; yet (to avoid
suspicion) express her thought that she be rather over-nice, if she
might presume to say so before I. but nevertheless she applaud I for
the strict observation I make of my vow.
'I more freely blame her reserve to I; call she cruel; inveigh
against her relation; doubt her love. every favour I ask of she
deny I. yet my behaviour to she as pure and delicate when alone, as
when before they. hint at something that have pass between we that
very day, that shew her indifference to I in so strong a light, that I
could not bear it. but that I would ask she for her company to the play
of Venice preserve, give out for Sunday night as a benefit-play; the
prime actor to be in it; and this, to see if I be to be deny every
favour.--Yet, for my own part, I love not tragedy; though she do, for
the sake of the instruction, the warning, and the example generally give
in they.
'I have too much feeling, I say. there be enough in the world to make
our heart sad, without carry grief in our diversion, and make the
distress of other our own.'
true enough, Belford; and I believe, generally speak, that all the man
of our cast be of my mind--they love not any tragedy but those in
which they themselves act the part of tyrant and executioner; and,
afraid to trust themselves with serious and solemn reflection, run to
comedy, in order to laugh away compunction on the distress they have
occasion, and to find example of man as immoral as themselves. for
very few of our comic performance, as thou know, give we good ones.--
I answer, however, for myself--yet thou, I think, on recollection, lovest
to deal in the lamentable.
Sally answer for Polly, who be absent; Mrs. Sinclair for herself, and
for all her acquaintance, even for Miss Partington, in prefer the
comic to the tragic scenes.--And I believe they be right; for the
devil's in it, if a confide-in rake do not give a girl enough of
tragedy in his comedy.
'I ask Sally to oblige my fair-one with her company. she be engage,
[that be right, thou'lt suppose]. I ask Mrs. Sinclair's leave for
Polly. to be sure, she answer, Polly would think it an honour to
attend Mrs. Lovelace: but the poor thing be tender-hearted; and as the
tragedy be deep, would weep herself blind.
'Sally, meantime, object Singleton, that I might answer the objection,
and save my beloved the trouble of make it, or debate the point with
I; and on this occasion I regret that her brother's project be not
lay aside; since, if they have be give up, I would have go in person
to bring up the lady of my family to attend my spouse.
'I then, from a letter just before receive from one in her father's
family, warn they of a person who have undertake to find we out, and
whom I thus in writing [have call for pen and ink] describe, that
they might arm all the family against him--"a sun-burn, pock-fretten
sailor, ill-look, big-boned; his stature about six foot; an heavy eye,
an overhang brow, a deck-treading stride in his walk; a couteau
generally by his side; lip parch from his gum, as if by star at
the sun in hot climate; a brown coat; a coloured handkerchief about his
neck; an oaken plant in his hand near as long as himself, and
proportionately thick."
'no question ask by this fellow must be answer. they should call I
to he. but not let my beloved know a tittle of this, so long as it
could be help. and I add, that if her brother or Singleton come, and
if they behave civilly, I would, for her sake, be civil to they: and in
this case, she have nothing to do but to own her marriage, and there could
be no pretence for violence on either side. but most fervently I swear,
that if she be convey away, either by persuasion or force, I would
directly, on miss she but one day, go to demand she at Harlowe-place,
whether she be there or not; and if I recover not a sister, I would
have a brother; and should find out a captain of a ship as well as he.'
and now, Jack, dost thou think shewill attempt to get from I, do what I
will?
'Mrs. Sinclair begin to be afraid of mischief in her house--I be
apprehensive that she would over-do the matter, and be out of character.
I therefore wink at she. she prim; nod, to show she take I;
twang out a high-ho through her nose, lap one horse-lip over the
other, and be silent.'
here's preparation, belford!--dost think I will throw it all away for any
thing thou canst say, or Lord M. write?--No, indeed--as my charmer say,
when she bridle.
***
and what must necessarily be the consequence of all this with regard to
my beloved's behaviour to I? Canst thou doubt, that it be all
complaisance next time she admit I into her presence?
Thursday we be very happy. all the morning extremely happy. I kiss
her charming hand.--I need not describe to thee her hand and arm. when
thou saw she, I take notice that thy eye dwelt upon they whenever
thou couldst spare they from that beauty spot of wonder, her face--fifty
time kiss her hand, I believe--once her cheek, intend her lip, but
so rapturously, that she could not help seem angry.
have she not thus keep I at arm-length; have she not deny I those
innocent liberty which our sex, from step to step, aspire to; could I
but have gain access to she in her hour of heedlessness and
dishabille, [for full dress create dignity, augment consciousness, and
compel distance;] we have familiarize to each other long ago. but keep
she up ever so late, meet she ever so early, by breakfast-time she be
dress for the day, and at her early hour, as nice as other dress.
all her form thus keep up, wonder not that I have make so little
progress in the propose trial.--but how must all this distance
stimulate!
Thursday morning, as I say, we be extremely happy--about noon, she
number the hour she have be with I; all of they to be but as one
minute; and desire to be leave to herself. I be loth to comply: but
observe the sun-shine begin to shut in, I yield.
I din out. return, I talk of the house, and of Mrs. Fretchville--
have see Mennell--have press he to get the widow to quit: she pity
Mrs. Fretchville [another good effect of the overhear conversation]--had
write to Lord M., expect an answer soon from he. I be admit to
sup with she. I urge for her approbation or correction of my write
term. she again promise an answer as soon as she have hear from Miss
Howe.
then I press for her company to the play on Saturday night. she make
objection, as I have foresee: her brother's project, warmth of the
weather, &c. but in such a manner, as if half afraid to disoblige I
[another happy effect of the overhear conversation]. I soon get over
these, therefore; and she consent to favour I.
Friday pass as the day before.
here be two happy day to both. why cannot I make every day equally
happy? it look as if it be in my power to do so. strange, I should
thus delight in tease a woman I so dearly love! I must, I doubt, have
something in my temper like Miss Howe, who love to plague the man who
put himself in her power.--But I could not do thus by such an angel as
this, do I not believe that, after her probation time shall be expire,
and if she be not to be bring to cohabitation, (my darling view,) I
shall reward she as she wish.
Saturday be half over. we be equally happy--prepare for the play.
Polly have offer her company, and be accept. I have direct she
where to weep: and this not only to show her humanity, [a weeping eye
indicate a gentle heart,] but to have a pretence to hide her face with a
fan or handkerchief.--Yet Polly be far from be every man's girl; and
we shall sit in the gallery green-box.
the woe of other, so well represent as those of Belvidera
particularly will be, must, I hope, unlock and open my charmer's heart.
whenever I have be able to prevail upon a girl to permit I to attend
her to a play, I have think myself sure of she. the female heart (all
gentleness and harmony by nature) expand, and forget its form, when
its attention be carry out of itself at an agreeable or affect
entertainment--music, and perhaps a collation afterwards, co-operate.
indeed, I have no hope of such an effect here; but I have more than one
end to answer by get she to a play. to name but one.--Dorcas have a
master-key, as I have tell thee.--but it be worth while to carry she to
the play of Venice preserve, be it but to show she, that there have
be, and may be, much deep distress than she can possibly know.
thus exceedingly happy be we at present. I hope we shall not find any
of Nat. Lee's left-hand god at work, to dash our bowl of joy with
wormwood.
R. LOVELACE.
LETTER xli
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
FRIDAY, MAY 19.
I would not, if I could help it, be so continually brood over the dark
and gloomy face of my condition [all nature, you know, my dear, and every
thing in it, have a bright and a gloomy side] as to be think unable to
enjoy a more hopeful prospect. and this, not only for my own sake, but
for your, who take such generous concern in all that befall I.
let I tell you then, my dear, that I have know four-and-twenty hour
together not unhappy one, my situation consider.
[she then give the particular of the conversation which she have
overhear between Mr. Lovelace, Mrs. Sinclair, and Miss Martin; but
account more minutely than he have do for the opportunity she have of
overhear it, unknown to they.
she give the reason she have to be pleased with what she hear from
each: but be shock at the measure he be resolve to take, if he
miss she but for one day. yet be pleased that he propose to avoid
aggressive violence, if her brother and he meet in town.]
even Dorcas, say she, appear less exceptionable to I than before; and
I cannot but pity she for her neglect education, as it be matter of so
much regret to herself: else, there would not be much in it; as the low
and illiterate be the most useful people in the common-wealth (since
such constitute the labour part of the public); and as a lettered
education but too generally set people above those servile office by
which the business of the world be carry on. nor have I any doubt
but there be, take the world through, twenty happy people among the
unlettered, to one among those who have have a school-education.
this, however, conclude not against learning or letter; since one would
wish to lift to some little distinction, and more genteel usefulness,
those who have capacity, and whose parentage one respect, or whose
service one would wish to reward.
be my mind quite at ease, I could enlarge, perhaps not unusefully, upon
this subject; for I have consider it with as much attention as my
year, and little experience and observation, will permit.
but the extreme illiterateness and indocility of this maid be
surprising, consider that she want not inquisitiveness, appear
willing to learn, and, in other respect, have quick part. this confirm
to I what I have hear remark, that there be a docible season, a
learning-time, as I may say, for every person, in which the mind may be
lead, step by step, from the low to the high, (year by year,) to
improvement. how industriously ought these season, as they offer, to be
take hold of by tutor, parent, and other friend, to whom the
cultivation of the genius of child and youth be commit; since, one
elapse, and no foundation lay, they hardly ever return!--And yet it
must be confess, that there be some genius, which, like some fruit,
ripen not till late. and industry and perseverance will do prodigious
thing--but for a learner to have those first rudiment to master at
twenty year of age, suppose, which other be teach, and they
themselves might have attain, at ten, what an uphill labour!
these kind of observation you have always wish I to intersperse, as
they arise to my thought. but it be a sign that my prospect be a
little mend, or I should not, among so many more interesting one that
my mind have be of late fill with, have have heart's ease enough to
make they.
let I give you my reflection on my more hopeful prospect.
I be now, in the first place, well able to account for the delay about
the house than I be before--Poor Mrs. fretchville!--though I know she
not, I pity her!--next, it look well, that he have apprize the woman
(before this conversation with they, of his intention to stay in this
house, after I be remove to the other. by the tone of his voice he
seem concerned for the appearance of this new delay would have with I.
so handsomely do Miss Martin express herself of I, that I be sorry,
methink, that I judge so hardly of she, when I first come hither--free
people may go a great way, but not all the way: and as such be generally
unguarded, precipitate, and thoughtless, the same quickness,
changeableness, and suddenness of spirit, as I may call it, may intervene
(if the heart be not corrupt) to recover they to thought and duty.
his reason for decline to go in person to bring up the lady of his
family, while my brother and Singleton continue their machination,
carry no bad face with it; and one may the rather allow for their
expectation, that so proud a spirit as his should attend they for this
purpose, as he speak of they sometimes as person of punctilio.
other reason I will mention for my be easy in my mind than I be
before I overheard this conversation.
such as, the advice he have receive in relation to Singleton's mate;
which agree but too well with what you, my dear, write to I in your's
of May the 10th.*
* see Letter XXIII. of this volume.
his not intend to acquaint I with it.
his caution to the servant about the sailor, if he should come and make
inquiry about we.
his resolution to avoid violence, be he to fall in either with my
brother, or this Singleton; and the easy method he have chalk out, in
this case, to prevent mischief; since I need only not to deny my being
his. but yet I should be drive into such a tacit acknowledgement to any
new person, till I be so, although I have be lead (so much against my
liking) to give countenance to the belief of the person below that we
be marry.
I think myself oblige, from what pass between Mr. Lovelace and I on
Wednesday, and from what I overheard he say, to consent to go with he
to the play; and the rather, as he have the discretion to propose one of
the niece to accompany I.
I cannot but acknowledge that I be pleased to find that he have actually
write to Lord M.
I have promise to give Mr. Lovelace an answer to his proposal as soon
as I have hear from you, my dear, on the subject.
I hope that in my next letter I shall have reason to confirm these
favourable appearance. favourable I must think they in the wreck I have
suffer.
I hope, that in the trial which you hint may happen between I and
myself, (as you* express it,) if he should so behave as to oblige I to
leave he, I shall be able to act in such a manner as to bring no
discredit upon myself in your eye; and that be all now that I have to
wish for. but, if I value he so much as you be pleased to suppose I
do, the trial, which you imagine will be so difficult to I, will not, I
conceive, be upon get from he, when the mean to affect my escape
be lend I; but how I shall behave when get from he; and if, like the
Israelites of old, I shall be so weak as to wish to return to my egyptian
bondage.
* see Letter XXXIV. of this volume.
I think it will not be amiss, notwithstanding the present favourable
appearance, that you should perfect the scheme (whatever it be) which
you tell I* you have think of, in order to procure for I an asylum,
in case of necessity. Mr. Lovelace be certainly a deep and dangerous
man; and it be therefore but prudence to be watchful, and to be provide
against the bad. Lord bless I, my dear, how I be reduced!--could I
ever have think to be in such a situation, as to be oblige to stay
with a man, of whose honour by I I could have but the shadow of a doubt!
--But I will look forward, and hope the good.
* ibid.
I be certain that your letter be safe. be perfectly easy, therefore,
on that head.
Mr. Lovelace will never be out of my company by his good will, otherwise
I have no doubt that I be mistress of my going-out and coming-in; and
do I think it needful, and be I not afraid of my brother and Captain
Singleton, I would oftener put it to trial.
LETTER XLII
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
SATURDAY, MAY 20.
I do not know, my dear, that you defer give an answer to Mr.
Lovelace's proposal till you have my opinion of they. a particular hand,
occasionally go to town, will leave this at Wilson's, that no delay
may be make on that account.
I never have any doubt of the man's justice and generosity in matter of
settlement; and all his relation be as noble in their spirit as in
their descent; but now, it may not be amiss for you to wait, to see what
return my Lord make to his letter of invitation.
the scheme I think of be this:
there be a person, whom I believe you have see with I, her name
townsend, who be a great dealer in indian silk, Brussels and French
lace, cambrick, linen, and other valuable good; which she have a way
of come at duty-free; and have a great vend for they (and for other
curiosity which she import) in the private family of the gentry
round we.
she have her day of be in town, and then be at a chamber she rent at
an inn in Southwark, where she keep patter of all her silk, and much
of her portable good, for the conveniency of her London customer. but
her place of residence, and where she have her principal warehouse, be at
Depford, for the opportunity of get her good on shore.
she be first bring to I by my mother, to whom she be recommend on
the supposal of my speedy marriage, 'that I might have an opportunity to
be as fine as a princess,' be my mother's expression, 'at a moderate
expense.'
now, my dear, I must own, that I do not love to encourage these
contraband trader. what be it, but bid defiance to the law of our
country, when we do, and hurt fair trader; and at the same time
rob our prince of his legal due, to the diminution of those duty
which possibly must be make good by new levity upon the public?
but, however, Mrs. Townsend and I, though I have not yet have dealing
with she, be upon a very good foot of understanding. she be a sensible
woman; she have be abroad, and often go abroad in the way of her
business, and give very entertaining account of all she have see.
and have apply to I to recommend she to you, (as it be her view to
be know to young lady who be likely to change their condition,) I be
sure I can engage she to give you protection at her house at Deptford;
which she say be a populous village, and one of the last, I should
think, in which you would be seek for. she be not much there, you will
believe, by the course of her dealing, but, no doubt, must have somebody
on the spot, in whom she can confide: and there, perhaps, you might be
safe till your cousin come. and I should not think it amiss that you
write to he out of hand. I cannot suggest to you what you should write.
that must be leave to your own discretion. for you will be afraid, no
doubt, of the consequence of a variance between the two man.
but, notwithstanding all this, and be I sure of get you safely out
of his hand, I will nevertheless forgive you, be you to make all up
with he, and marry to-morrow. yet I will proceed with my project
scheme in relation to Mrs. Townsend; though I hope there will be no
occasion to prosecute it, since your prospect seem to be change, and
since you have have twenty-four not unhappy hour together. how my
indignation rise for this poor consolation in the courtship [courtship
must I call it?] of such a woman! let I tell you, my dear, that be you
once your own absolute and independent mistress, I should be tempt,
notwithstanding all I have write, to wish you to be the wife of any man
in the world, rather than the wife either of Lovelace or of Solmes.
Mrs. Townsend, as I have recollect, have two brother, each a master of
a vessel; and who know, as she and they have concern together, but
that, in case of need, you may have a whole ship's crew at your devotion?
if Lovelace give you cause to leave he, take no thought for the people
at Harlowe-place. let they take care of one another. it be a care they
be use to. the law will help to secure they. the wretch be no
assassin, no night-murderer. he be an open, because a fearless enemy;
and should he attempt any thing that would make he obnoxious to the law
of society, you might have a fair riddance of he, either by flight or
the gallow; no matter which.
have you not be so minute in your account of the circumstance that
attend the opportunity you have of overhear the dialogue between Mr.
Lovelace and two of the woman, I should have think the conference
contrive on purpose for your ear.
I show Mr. Lovelace's proposal to Mr. Hickman, who have chamber once
in Lincoln's-inn, be design for the law, have his eld brother
live. he look so wise, so proud, and so important, upon the occasion;
and want to take so much consideration about they--would take they home
if I please--and weigh they well--and so forth--and the like--and all
that--that I have no patience with he, and snatch they back with anger.
o dear!--to be so angry, an't please I, for his zeal!--
yes, zeal without knowledge, I say--like most other zeal--if there be
no objection that strike he at once, there be none.
so hasty, dearest madam--
and so slow, un-dearest Sir, I could have say--but SURELY, say I, with
a look that imply, would you rebel, Sir!
he beg my pardon--see no objection, indeed!--But might he be allow
once more--
no matter--no matter--I would have show they to my mother, I say, who,
though of no inn of court, know more of these thing than half the
lounge lubber of they; and that at first sight--only that she would
have be angry at the confession of our continued correspondence.
but, my dear, let the article be draw up, and engross; and solemnize
upon they; and therebe no more to be say.
let I add, that the sailor-fellow have be tamper with my Kitty, and
offer a bribe, to find where to direct to you. next time he come, I
will have he lay hold of; and if I can get nothing out of he, will
have he draw through one of our deep fishpond. his attempt to
corrupt a servant of mine will justify my order.
I send this letter away directly. but will follow it by another; which
shall have for its subject only my mother, myself, and your uncle Antony.
and as your prospect be more promising than they have be, I will
endeavour to make you smile upon the occasion. for you will be please
to know, that my mother have have a formal tender from that grey goose,
which may make her skill in settlement useful to herself, be she to
encourage it.
may your prospect be still more and more happy, pray
your own,
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER xliii
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
SAT. SUNDAY, MAY 20, 21.
now, my dear, for the promise subject. you must not ask I how I come
by the original [such they really be] that I be go to present you
with: for my mother would not read to I those part of your uncle's
letter which bear hard upon myself, and which leave he without any title
to mercy from I: nor would she let I hear but what she please of shebe
in answer; for she have condescend to answer he--with a denial,
however; but such a denial as no one but an old bachelor would take from
a widow.
any body, except myself, who could have be acquaint with such a
fal-lal courtship as this must have be have it proceed, would have
be glad it have go on: and I dare say, but for the saucy daughter, it
have. my good mamma, in that case, would have be ten year the young
for it, perhaps: and, could I but have approve of it, I should have be
consider by she as if ten year old than I be: since, very likely, it
would have be: 'we widow, my dear, know not how to keep man at a
distance--so as to give they pain, in order to try their love.--you must
advise I, child: you must teach I to be cruel--yet not too cruel
neither--so as to make a man heartless, who have no time, God wot, to
throw away.'--Then would my behaviour to Mr. Hickman have be well
like; and my mother would have bridle like her daughter.
o my dear, how might we have be divert by the practising for the
recovery of the long forgotten! could I have be sure that it would
have be in my power to have put they asunder, in the irish style,
before they have come together. but therebe no trusting to the widow
whose good and chattel be in her own hand, address by an old
bachelor who have fine thing, and offer to leave she ten thousand pound
well than he find she, and sole mistress, besides, of all her
notable! for these, as you will see by-and-by, be his proposal.
the old Triton's address carry the writer's mark upon the very
subscription--to the equally amiable and worthy admire [therebe for
you!] Mrs. ANABELLA HOWE, widow, the last word add, I suppose as
Esquire to a man, as a word of honour; or for fear the bella to Anna,
should not enough distinguish the person mean from the spinster: [vain
hussy youwill call I, I know:] and then follows;--these humbly present.
--put down as a memorandum, I presume, to make a leg, and behave
handsomely at present it, he intending, very probably, to deliver it
himself.
and now stand by--to see
enter old NEPTUNE.
his head adorn with sea-weed, and a crown of cockle-shell; as we see
he deck out in Mrs. Robinson's grotto.
MONDAY, MAY 15.
MADAM,
I do make a sort of resolution ten year ago never to marry. I see in
other family, where they live well, you will be pleased to mark that,
queerness I could not away with. then like well enough to live single
for the sake of my brother's family; and for one child in it more than
the rest. but that girl have turn we all off the hinge: and why should
I deny myself any comfort for they, as will not thank I for so do, I
donot know.
so much for my motif as from self and family: but the dear Mrs. Howe
make I go far.
I have a very great fortune, I bless God for it, all of my own getting,
or most of it; you will be pleased to mark that; for I be the young
brother of three. you have also, God be thank, a great estate, which
you have improve by your own frugality and wise management. frugality,
let I stop to say, be one of the great virtue in this mortal life,
because it enable we to do justice to all, and put it in our power to
benefit some by it, as we see they deserve.
you have but one child; and I be a bachelor, and have never a one--all
bachelor cannot say so: wherefore your daughter may be the well for
I, if she will keep up with my humour; which be never think bad:
especially to my equal. servant, indeed, I donot matter be angry
with, when I please; they be pay for bear it, and too-too often
deserve it; as we have frequently take notice of to one another. and,
moreover, if we keep not servant at distance, they will be familiar.
I always make it a rule to find fault, whether reasonable or not, that so
I might have no reason to find fault. young woman and servant in
general (as worthy Mr. Solmes observe) be well govern by fear than
love. but this my humour as to servant will not effect either you or
Miss, you know.
I will make very advantageous settlement; such as any common friend
shall judge to be so. but must have all in my own power, while I live:
because, you know, Madam, it be as creditable to the wife, as to the
husband, that it should be so.
I be not at fine word. we be not child; though it be hop we may
have some; for I be a very healthy sound man. I bless God for it: and
never bring home from my voyage and travel a worse constitution than
I take out with I. I be none of those, I will assure you. but this I
will undertake, that, if you be the survivor, you shall be at the least
ten thousand pound the well for I. what, in the contrary case, I
shall be the well for you, I leave to you, as you shall think my
kindness to you shall deserve.
but one thing, Madam, I shall be glad of, that Miss Howe might not live
with we then--[she need not know I write thus]--but go home to Mr.
Hickman, as she be upon the point of marriage, I hear: and if she behave
dutifully, as she should do, to we both, she shall be the well; for I
say so before.
you shall manage all thing, both mine and your own; for I know but
little of land-matter. all my opposition to you shall be out of love,
when I think you take too much upon you for your health.
it will be very pretty for you, I should think, to have a man of
experience, in a long winter's evening, to sit down by you, and tell you
story of foreign part, and the custom of the nation he have consort
with. and I have fine curiosity of the indian growth, such as lady
love, and some that even my niece Clary, when she be good, never see.
these, one by one, as you be kind to I, (which I make no question of,
because I shall be kind to you,) shall be all your. pretty
entertainment by much, than sit with a too smartish daughter,
sometimes out of humour; and thwarting, and vexing, as daughter will,
(when woman-grow especially, as I have hear you often observe;) and
think their parent old, without pay they the reverence due to
year; when, as in your case, I make no sort of doubt, they be young
enough to wipe their nose. you understand I, Madam.
as for I myself, it will be very happy, and I be delighted with the
thinking of it, to have, after a pleasant ride, or so, a lady of like
experience with myself to come home to, and but one interest betwixt we:
to reckon up our coming-in together; and what this day and this week have
produce--o how this will increase love!--most mightily will it increase
it!--and I believe I shall never love you enough, or be able to show you
all my love.
I hope, Madam, there need not be such maiden nicety and hanging-off,
as I may call they, between we, (for hang-off sake,) as that you will
deny I a line or two to this proposal, write down, although you would
not answer I so readily when I speak to you; your daughter be, I
suppose, hard by; for you look round you, as if not willing to be
overhear. so I resolve to write: that my writing may stand as upon
record for my upright meaning; be none of your Lovelaces; you will
mark that, Madam; but a downright, true, honest, faithful Englishman. so
hope you will not disdain to write a line or two to this my proposal: and
I shall look upon it as a great honour, I will assure you, and be proud
thereof. what can I say more?--for you be your own mistress, as I be my
own master: and you shall always be your own mistress, be pleased to mark
that; for so a lady of your prudence and experience ought to be.
this be a long letter. but the subject require it; because I would not
write twice where once would do. so would explain my sense and mean
at one time.
I have have writing in my head two whole month very near; but hardly know
how (be unpracticed in these matter) to begin to write. and now,
good lady, be favourable to
your most humble lover,
and obedient servant,
ANT. HARLOWE.
***
herebe a letter of courtship, my dear!--and let I subjoin to it, that if
now, or hereafter, I should treat this hideous lover, who be so free with
I to my mother, with asperity, and you should be disgust at it, I
shall think you donot give I that preference in your love which you have
in mine.
and now, which shall I first give you; the answer of my good mamma; or
the dialogue that pass between the widow mother, and the pert daughter,
upon she let the latter know that she have a love-letter?
I think you shall have the dialogue. but let I promise one thing; that
if you think I too free, you must not let it run in your head that I be
writing of your uncle, or of my mother; but of a couple of old lover, no
matter whom. reverence be too apt to be forget by child, where the
reverend forget first what belong to their own character. a grave
remark, and therefore at your service, my dear.
well then, suppose my mamma, (after twice come into my closet to I,
and as often go out, with very meaning feature, and lip ready to
burst open, but still close, as if by compulsion, a speech go off in
a slight cough, that never go near the lung,) grow more resolute the
third time of entrance, and sit down by I, thus begin:
Mother. I have a very serious matter to talk with you upon, Nancy, when
you be disposed to attend to matter within ourselves, and not let
matter without ourselves wholly engross you.
a good selve-ish speech!--But I think that friendship, gratitude, and
humanity, be matter that ought to be deem of the most intimate
concern to we. but not to dwell upon word.
Daughter. I be now disposed to attend to ever thing my manna be
disposed to say to I.
M. why then, child--why then, my dear--[and the good lady's face look
so plump, so smooth, and so shining!]--I see you be all attention,
nancy!--but donot be surprised!--don't be uneasy!--but I have--I have--
where be it?--[and yet it lie next her heart, never another near it--so
no difficulty to have find it]--i have a letter, my dear!--[and out from
her bosom it come: but she still hold it in her hand]--I have a letter,
child.--It be--it be--it be from--from a gentleman, I assure you!--
[lift up her head, and smile.]
there be no delight to a daughter, think I, in such surprise as seem
to be collect. I will deprive my mother of the satisfaction of make
a gradual discovery.
D. from Mr. Antony Harlowe, I suppose, Madam?
M. [lip draw close: eye raise] why, my dear!--i cannot but own--
but how, I wonder, could you think of Mr. Anthony Harlowe?
D. how, Madam, could I think of any body else?
M. how could you think of any body else?--[angry, and draw back her
face]. but do you know the subject, Nancy?
D. you have tell it, Madam, by your manner of break it to I. but,
indeed, I question not that he have two motif in his visit--both
equally agreeable to I; for all that family love I dearly.
M. no love lose, if so, between you and they. but this [rise] be
what I get--so like your papa!--i never could open my heart to he!
D. Dear Madam, excuse I. be so good as to open your heart to me.--
I donot love the Harlowes--but pray excuse I.
M. you have put I quite out with your forward temper! [angrily sit
down again.]
D. I will be all patience and attention. may I be allow to read his
letter?
M. I want to advise with you upon it.--but you be such a strange
creature!--you be always for answer one before one speak!
D. youwill be so good as to forgive I, madam.--but I think every body
(he among the rest) know that you have always declare against a second
marriage.
M. and so I have. but then it be in the mind I be in. thing may
offer----
I star.
M. Nay, donot be surprised!--i donot intend--I donot intend--
D. not, perhaps, in the mind you be in, Madam.
M. Pert creature! [rise again]----we shall quarrel, I see!--there's
no----
D. once more, dear Madam, I beg your excuse. I will attend in silence.
--Pray, Madam, sit down again--pray do [she sit down.]--May I see the
letter?
no; there be some thing in it you willnot like.--your temper be know, I
find, to be unhappy. but nothing bad against you; intimation, on the
contrary, that you shall be the well for he, if you oblige he.
not a live soul but the Harlowes, I say, think I ill-temper: and
I be content that they should, who could do as they have do by the
most universally acknowledge sweetness in the world.
here we break out a little; but at last she read I some of the passage
in the letter. but not the most mightily ridiculous: yet I could hardly
keep my countenance neither, especially when she come to that passage
which mention his sound health; and at which she stop; she well know
why--but soon resume:
M. well now, Nancy, tell I what you think of it.
D. Nay, pray, Madam, tell I what you think of it.
M. I expect to be answer by an answer; not by a question! you donot
use to be so shy to speak your mind.
D. not when my mamma command I to do so.
M. then speak it now.
D. without hear the whole of the letter?
M. speak to what you have hear.
D. why then, Madam----you willnot be my mamma HOWE, if you give way to
it.
M. I be surprised at your assurance, Nancy!
D. I mean, Madam, you will then be my mamma Harlowe.
M. o dear heart!--but I be not a fool.
and her colour go and come.
D. Dear Madam, [but, indeed, I donot love a Harlowe--thatbe what I
mean,] I be your child, and must be your child, do what you will.
M. a very pert one, I be sure, as ever mother bore! and you must be
my child, do what I will!--as much as to say, you would not, if you could
help it, if I--
D. how could I have such a thought!--It would be forward, indeed, if I
have--when I donot know what your mind be as to the proposal:--when the
proposal be so very advantageous a one too.
M. [look a little less discompose] why, indeed, ten thousand
pounds----
D. and to be sure of outlive he, Madam!
M. sure!--nobody can be sure--but it be very likely that----
D. not at all, Madam. you be go to read something (but stop)
about his constitution: his sobriety be well know--why, Madam, these
gentleman who have use the sea, and be in different climate, and come
home to relax from care in a temperate one, and be sober--be the
likeliest to live long of any man in the world. donot you see that his
very skin be a fortification of buff?
M. strange creature!
D. God forbid, that any body I love and honour should marry a man in
hope to bury he--but suppose, Madam, at your time of life----
M. my time of life?--Dear heart!--What be my time of life, pray?
D. not old, Madam; and that you be not, may be your danger!
as I hope to live (my dear) my mother smile, and look not displeased
with I.
M. why, indeed, child--why, indeed, I must need say--and then I should
choose to do nothing (forward as you be sometimes) to hurt you.
D. why, as to that, Madam, I cannot expect that you should deprive
yourself of any satisfaction--
M. Satisfaction, my dear!--i donot say it would be a satisfaction--but
could I do any thing that would benefit you, it would perhaps be an
inducement to hold one conference upon the subject.
D. my fortune already will be more considerable than my match, if I be
to have Mr. Hickman.
M. why so?--mr. Hickman have fortune enough to entitle he to your's.
D. if you think so, thatbe enough.
M. not but I should thin the bad of myself, if I desire any body's
death; but I think, as you say, Mr. Antony Harlowe be a healthy man, and
bid fair for a long life.
bless I, think I, how shall I do to know whether this be an objection
or a recommendation!
D. will you forgive I, Madam?
M. what would the girl say? [look as if she be half afraid to hear
what.]
D. only, that if you marry a man of his time of life, you stand two
chance instead of one, to be a nurse at your time of life.
M. Saucebox!
D. Dear Madam!--What I mean be only that these healthy old man
sometimes fall into linger disorder all at once. and I humbly
conceive, that the infirmity of age be uneasily bear with, where the
remembrance of the pleasanter season come not in to relieve the
healthier of the two.
M. a strange girl!--yet his healthy constitution an objection just now!
---but I have always tell you, that you know either too much to be argue
with, or too little for I to have patience with you.
D. I cannot but say, I should be glad of your command, Madam, how to
behave myself to Mr. Antony Harlowe next time he come.
M. how to behave yourself!--why, if you retire with contempt of he,
when he come next, it will be but as you have be use to do of late.
D. then he be to come again, Madam?
M. and suppose he be?
D. I cannot help it, if it be your pleasure, Madam. he desire a line
in answer to his fine letter. if he come, it will be in pursuance of
that line, I presume?
M. none of your arch and pert leer, girl!--you know I willnot bear they.
I have a mind to hear what you would say to this matter. I have not
write; but I shall presently.
D. it be mighty good of you, Madam, (I hope the man will think so,) to
answer his first application by letter.--pity he should write twice, if
once will do.
M. that fetch willnot let you into my intention as to what I shall write.
it be too saucily put.
D. perhaps I can guess at your intention, Madam, be it to become I
so to do.
M. perhaps I would not make Mr. Hickman of any man; use he the bad
for respect I.
D. nor, perhaps, would I, Madam, if I like his respect.
M. I understand you. but, perhaps, it be in your power to make I
hearken, or not, to Mr. Harlowe.
D. Young man, who have probably a good deal of time before they need
not be in haste for a wife. Mr. Hickman, poor man! must stay his time,
or take his remedy.
M. he bear more from you than a man ought.
D. then, I doubt, he give a reason for the treatment he meet with.
M. Provoking creature!
D. I have but one request to make to you, Madam.
M. a dutiful one, I suppose. what be it, pray?
D. that if you marry, I may be permit to live single.
M. Perverse creature, Ibe sure!
D. how can I expect, Madam, that you should refuse such term? ten
thousand pounds!--at the least ten thousand pounds!--a very handsome
proposal!--so many fine thing too, to give you one by one!--dear
Madam, forgive me!--I hope it be not yet so far go, that rally this
man will be think want of duty to you.
M. your rallying of he, and your reverence to I, it be plain, have
one source.
D. I hope not, Madam. but ten thousand pounds----
M. be no unhandsome proposal.
D. indeed I think so. I hope, Madam, you will not be behind-hand with
he in generosity.
M. he willnot be ten thousand pound the well for I, if he survive I.
D. No, Madam; he cannot expect that, as you have a daughter, and as he
be a bachelor, and have not a child!--poor old soul!
M. Old soul, Nancy!--And thus to call he for be a bachelor, not
have a child!--doe this become you?
D. not old soul for that, Madam--but half the sum; five thousand
pound; you cannot engage for less, Madam.
M. that sum have your approbation then? [look as if shewould be even
with I].
D. as he leave it to your generosity, Madam, to reward his kindness to
you, it cannot be less.--do, dear Madam, permit I, without incur your
displeasure, to call he poor old soul again.
M. never be such a whimsical creature!--[turning away to hide her
involuntary smile, for I believe I look very archly; at least I
intend to do so]--i hate that wicked sly look. you give yourself very
free air--don't you?
D. I snatch her hand, and kiss it--my dear Mamma, be not angry with
your girl!--You have tell I, that you be very lively formerly.
M. formerly! good lack!--but be I to encourage his proposal, you
may be sure, that for Mr. Hickman's sake, as well as your's, I should
make a wise agreement.
D. you have both live to year of prudence, Madam.
M. yes, I suppose I be an old soul too.
D. he also be for make a wise agreement, or hint at one, at least.
M. Well, the short and the long I suppose be this: I have not your
consent to marry.
D. indeed, Madam, you have not my wish to marry.
M. let I tell you, that if prudence consist in wish well to one's
self, I see not but the young flirt be as prudent as the old soul.
D. Dear Madam, would you blame I, if to wish you not to marry Mr.
Antony Harlowe, be to wish well to myself?
M. you be mighty witty. I wish you be as dutiful.
D. I be more dutiful, I hope, than witty; or I should be a fool as well
as a saucebox.
M. let I be judge of both--parent be only to live for their
child, let they deserve it or not. thatbe their dutiful notion!
D. Heaven forbid that I should wish, if there be two interest between
my mother and I, that my mother postpone her own for mine!--or give up
any thing that would add to the real comfort of her life to oblige me!--
tell I, my dear Mamma, if you think the closing with this proposal will?
M. I say, that ten thousand pound be such an acquisition to one's
family, that the offer of it deserve a civil return.
D. not the offer, Madam: the chance only!--if indeed you have a view to
an increase of family, the money may provide--
M. you cannot keep within tolerable bounds!--that saucy fleer I cannot
away with--
D. Dearest, dear Madam, forgive I; but old soul run in my head
again!--nay, indeed, and upon my word, I will not be rob of that
charming smile! and again I kiss her hand.
M. Away, bold creature! nothing can be so provoking as to be make to
smile when one would choose, and ought, to be angry.
D. but, dear Madam, if it be to be, I presume you willnot think of it
before next winter.
M. what now would the pert one be at?
D. because he only propose to entertain you with pretty story of
foreign nation in a winter's evening.--dearest, dear Madam, let I
have all the reading of his letter through. I will forgive he all he
say about I.
M. it may be a very difficult thing, perhaps, for a man of the good
sense to write a love-letter that may not be cavil at.
D. thatbe because lover in their letter hit not the medium. they
either write too much nonsense, or too little. but do you call this odd
soul's letter [no more will I call he old soul, if I can help it] a
love-letter?
M. Well, well, I see you be averse to this matter. I be not to be
your mother; you will live single, if I marry. I have a mind to see if
generosity govern you in your view. I shall pursue my own inclination;
and if they should happen to be suitable to your, pray let I for the
future be well reward by you than hitherto I have be.
and away she fling, without stay for a reply.--vexed, I dare say, that
I do not well approve of the proposal--be it only that the merit of
deny might have be all her own, and to lay the strong obligation
upon her saucy daughter.
she write such a widow-like refusal when she go from I, as might not
exclude hope in any other wooer; whatever it may do in Mr. Tony Harlowe.
it will be my part, to take care to beat she off the visit she half-
promise to make he (as you will see in her answer) upon condition that
he will withdraw his suit. for who know what effect the old bachelor's
exotic [far-fetched and dear-buy you know be a proverb] might
otherwise have upon a woman's mind, want nothing but unnecessarie,
gewgaw, and finery, and offer such as be not easily to be meet with,
or purchase?
well, but now I give you leave to read here, in this place, the copy of
my mother's answer to your uncle's letter. not one comment will I make
upon it. I know my duty well. and here, therefore, take the liberty
to hope, that I may, in your present less disagreeable, though not wholly
agreeable situation, provoke a smile from you, I conclude myself,
your ever affectionate and faithful,
ANNA HOWE.
MRS. ANNABELLA HOWE, to ANTONY HARLY, ESQ.
MR. ANTONY HARLOWE,
FRIDAY, MAY 19.
SIR,
it be not usual I believe for our sex to answer by pen and ink the first
letter on these occasion. the first letter! how odd be that! as if I
expect another; which I do not. but then I think, as I do not judge
proper to encourage your proposal, there be no reason why I should not
answer in civility, where so great a civility be intend. indeed, I be
always of opinion that a person be entitle to that, and not to ill
usage, because he have a respect for I. and so I have often and often
tell my daughter.
a woman I think make but a poor figure in a man's eye afterwards, and
do no reputation to her sex neither, when she behave like a tyrant to
he beforehand.
to be sure, Sir, if I be to change my condition, I know not a gentleman
whose proposal could be more agreeable. your nephew and your niece have
enough without you: my daughter have a fine fortune without I, and I
should take care to double it, live or dying, be I to do such a
thing: so nobody need to be the bad for it. but Nancy would not think
so.
all the comfort I know of in child, be, that when young they do with
we what they will, and all be pretty in they to their very fault; and
when they be grow up, they think their parent must live for they only;
and deny themselves every thing for their sake. I know Nancy could not
bear a father-in-law. she would fly at the very thought of my be in
earnest to give her one. not that I stand in fear of my daughter
neither. it be not fit I should. but she have her poor papa's spirit.
a very violent one that be. and one would not choose, you know, Sir, to
enter into any affair, that, one know, one must renounce a daughter for,
or she a mother--except indeed one's heart be much in it; which, I
bless God, mine be not.
I have now be a widow these ten year; nobody to controul I: and I be
say not to bear controul: so, Sir, you and I be good as we be, I
believe: nay, I be sure of it: for we want not what either have; have
both more than we know what to do with. and I know I could not be in the
least accountable for any of my way.
my daughter indeed, though she be a fine girl, as girl go, (she have too
much sense indeed for one of her sex, and know she have it,) be more a
check to I than one would wish a daughter to be: for who would choose to
be always snap at each other? but she will soon be marry; and
then, not live together, we shall only come together when we be
pleased, and stay away when we be not; and so, like other lover, never
see any thing but the good side of each other.
I own, for all this, that I love she dearly; and she I, I dare say: so
would not wish to provoke she to do otherwise. besides, the girl be so
much regard every where, that have live so much of my prime a widow,
I would not lay myself open to her censure, or even to her indifference,
you know.
your generous proposal require all this explicitness. I thank you for
your good opinion of I. when I know you acquiesce with this my civil
refusal [and indeed, Sir, I be as much in earnest in it, as if I have
speak broader] I donot know but Nancy and I may, with your permission,
come to see your fine thing; for I be a great admirer of rarity that
come from abroad.
so, Sir, let we only converse occasionally as we meet, as we use to do,
without any other view to each other than good wish: which I hope may
not be lessen for this declining. and then I shall always think myself
your obliged servant,
ANNABELLA HOWE.
P.S. I send word by Mrs. Lorimer, that I would write an answer: but
would take time for consideration. so hope, Sir, you willnot think it a
slight, I do not write soon.
LETTER XLIV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY, MAY 21.
I be too much disturb in my mind to think of any thing but revenge; or
I do intend to give thee an account of Miss Harlowe's observation on
the play. Miss Harlowe's I say. Thou know that I hate the name of
Harlowe; and I be exceedingly out of humour with she, and with her saucy
friend.
whatbe the matter now? thou'lt ask.
Matter enough; for while we be at the play, Dorcas, who have her order,
and a key to her lady's chamber, as well as a master-key to her drawer
and mahogany chest, closet-key and all, find mean to come at some of
Miss Howe's last-write letter. the vigilant wench be direct to
they by see her lady take a letter out of her stay, and put it to the
other, before she go out with I--afraid, as the woman upbraidingly
tell I, that I should find it there.
Dorcas no soon find they, than she assemble three ready writer of
the non-apparent; and Sally, and she, and they employ themselves with
the utmost diligence, in make extract, accord to former direction,
from these cursed letter, for my use. curse, may I well call them--
such abuses!--such virulence!--O this little fury Miss Howe!--Well might
her saucy friend (who have be equally free with I, or the occasion
could not have be give) be so violent as she lately be, at my
endeavouring to come at one of these letter.
I be sure, that this fair-one, at so early an age, with a constitution
so firm, health so blooming, eye so sparkling, expectation therefore so
lively, and hope so predominating, could not be absolutely, and from her
own vigilance, so guarded, and so apprehensive, as I have find she to
be.
sparkle eye, Jack, when the poetical tribe have say all they can for
they, be an infallible sign of a rogue, or room for a rogue, in the
heart.
Thou mayest go on with thy preachment, and Lord M. with his wisdom of
nation, I be now more assured of she than ever. and now my revenge be
up, and join with my love, all resistance must fall before it. and
most solemnly do I swear, that Miss Howe shall come in for her snack.
and here, just now, be another letter bring from the same little
virulent devil. I hope to procure script from that too, very speedily,
if it be put to the test; for the saucy fair-one be resolve to go to
church this morning; no so much from a spirit of devotion, I have reason
to think, as to try whether she can go out without check, controul, or
my attention.
***
I have be deny breakfast with she. indeed she be a little
displeased with I last night: because, on our return from the play, I
oblige she to pass the rest of the night with the woman and I, in their
parlour, and to stay till near one. she tell I at parting, that she
expect to have the whole next day to herself. I have not read the
extract then; so I have resolve to begin a new course, and, if possible,
to banish all jealousy and suspicion from her heart: and yet I have no
reason to be much troubled at her past suspicion; since, if a woman will
continue with a man whom she suspect, when she can get from he, or
think she can, I be sure it be a very hopeful sign.
***
she be go. Slipt down before I be aware. she have order a chair, on
purpose to exclude my personal attendance. but I have take proper
precaution. will. attend she by consent; Peter, the house-servant,
be within Will.'s call.
I have, by Dorcas, represent her danger from Singleton, in order to
dissuade she from go at all, unless she allow I to attend she; but
I be answer, with her usual saucy smartness, that if there be no
cause of fear of be meet with at the playhouse, when there be but two
playhouse, surely there be less at church, when there be so many
church. the chairman be order to carry she to St. James's Church.
but she would not be so careless of oblige I, if she know what I have
already come at, and how the woman urge I on; for they be continually
complain of the restraint they lie under in their behaviour; in their
attendance; neglect all their concern in the front house; and keep
this elegant back one entirely free from company, that she may have no
suspicion of they. they doubt not my generosity, they say: but why for
my own sake, in Lord M.'s style, should I make so long a harvest of so
little corn?
woman, ye reason well. I think I will begin my operation the moment she
come in.
***
I have come at the letter bring she from Miss Howe to-day. plot,
conjuration, sorcery, witchcraft, all go forward! I shall not be able
to see this Miss Harlowe with patience. as the nymph below ask, so do
I, why be night necessary? and Sally and Polly upbraidingly remind I of
my first attempt upon themselves. yet force answer not my end--and yet
it may, if there be truth in that part of the libertine's creed, that
once subdue, be always subdue! and what woman answer affirmatively to
the question?
***
she be return: but refuse to admit I: and insist upon have the day
to herself. Dorcas tell I, that she believe her denial be from
motif of piety.--oon, Jack, be there impiety in see me?--would it
not be the high act of piety to reclaim I? and be this to be do by
she refuse to see I when she be in a devouter frame than usual?--but I
hate she, hate she heartily! she be old, ugly, and deformed.--but o the
blasphemy! yet she be a Harlowe: and I do and can hate she for that.
but since I must not see she, [she will be mistress of her own will, and
of her time, truly!] let I fill up my time, by tell thee what I have
come at.
the first letter the woman meet with, be date April 27.* where can she
have put the precede ones!--it mention Mr. Hickman as a busy fellow
between they. Hickman have good take care of himself. she say in it, 'I
hope you have no cause to repent return my Norris--it be forthcoming
on demand.' now, what the devil can this mean!--her Norris forthcoming
on demand!--the devil take I, if I be out-norris'd!--if such innocent
can allow themselves to plot (to Norris), well may I.
* see Vol. IV. Letter II.
she be sorry, that 'her Hannah cannot be with she.'--and what if she
could?--what could Hannah do for she in such a house as this?
'the woman in the house be to be find out in one breakfasting.' the
woman be enrage at both the correspondent for this; and more than ever
make a point of my subdue she. I have a good mind to give Miss Howe to
they in full property. say but the word, Jack, and it shall be do.
'she be glad that Miss Harlowe have thought of take I at my word. she
wonder I do not offer again.' advise she, if I donot soon, 'not to
stay with I.' caution she, 'to keep I at a distance; not to permit
the least familiarity.'--see, Jack! see belford!--exactly as I thought!--
her vigilance all owe to a cool friend; who can sit down quietly, and
give that advice, which in her own case she could not take. what an
encouragement to I to proceed in my device, when I have reason to think
that my beloved's reserve be owe more to Miss Howe's caution than to
her own inclination! but 'it be my interest to be honest,' Miss Howe
tell her.--interest, fools!--I think these girl know, that my
interest be ever subservient to my pleasure.
what would I give to come at the copy of the letter to which those of
Miss Howe be answer!
the next letter be date May 3.* in this the little termagant express
her astonishment, that her mother should write to Miss Harlowe, to forbid
she to correspond with her daughter. Mr. Hickman, she say, be of
opinion, 'that she ought not to obey her mother.' how the creep
fellow trim between both! I be afraid, that I must punish he, as well
as this virago; and I have a scheme rumble in my head, that want but
half an hour's musing to bring into form, that will do my business upon
both. I cannot bear, that the parental authority should be thus
despise, thus trample under foot. but observe the vixen, ''tis well he
be of her opinion; for her mother have set she up, she must have
somebody to quarrel with.'--Could a Lovelace have allow himself a
great license? this girlbe a devilish rake in her heart. have she be
a man, and one of we, shewould have outdo we all in enterprise and spirit.
* see Vol. IV. Letter X.
'she want but very little farth provocation,' she say, 'to fly
privately to London. and if she do, she will not leave she till she
see she either honourably marry, or quit of the wretch.' here, Jack,
the transcriber Sally have add a prayer--'for the Lord's sake, dear Mr.
Lovealce, get this fury to London!'--Her fate, I can tell thee, Jack, if
we have she among we, should not be so long decide as her friend's.
what a gantelope would she run, when I have do with she, among a dozen
of her own pitiless sex, whom my charmer shall never see!--but more of
this anon.
I find by this letter, that my saucy captive have be draw the
character of every varlet of ye. nor be I spar in it more than you.
'the manbe a fool, to be sure, my dear.' let I perish, if they either
of they find I one!--'a silly fellow, at least.' Cursed contemptible!--
'I see not but they be a set of infernal!' therebe one for thee,
Lovelace! and yet she would have her friend marry a beelzebub.--and what
have any of we do, (within the knowledge of Miss Harlowe,) that she
should give such an account of we, as should excuse so much abuse from
Miss howe!--but the occasion that shall warrant this abuse be to come!
she blame she, for 'not admit Miss Partington to her bed--watchful,
as you be, what could have happened?--if violence be intend, he
would not stay for the night.' I be ashamed to have this hint to I by
this virago. Sally write upon this hint--'see, Sir, what be expect
from you. an hundred, and an hundred time have we tell you of this.'--
and so they have. but to be sure, the advice from they be not half the
efficacy as it will be from Miss howe.--'you might have sit up after she,
or not go to bed,' proceed she.
but can there be such apprehension between they, yet the one advise she
to stay, and the other resolve to wait my imperial motion for marriage?
I be glad I know that.
she approve of my proposal of Mrs. Fretchville's house. she put she
upon expect settlement; upon name a day: and conclude with
insist upon her writing, notwithstanding her mother's prohibition;
or bid she 'take the consequence.' undutiful wretch! how I long to
vindicate against they both the insult parental character!
thou wilt say to thyself, by this time, and can this proud and insolent
girl be the same Miss Howe, who sigh for an honest Sir George Colmar;
and who, but for this her beloved friend, would have follow he in all
his broken fortune, when he be oblige to quit the kingdom?
yes, she be the very same. and I always find in other, as well as in
myself, that a first passion thoroughly subdue, make the conqueror of it
a rover; the conqueress a tyrant.
well, but now come mince in a letter, from one who have 'the honour of
dear Miss Howe's command'* to acquaint Miss Harlowe, that Miss Howe be
'excessively concerned for the concern she have give she.'
* see Vol. IV. Letter XII.
'I have great temptation, on this occasion,' say the prim Gothamite,
'to express my own resentment upon your present state.'
'my own resentments!'----and why do he not fall into this temptation?
--why, truly, because he know not what that state be which give he so
tempt a subject--only by a conjecture, and so forth.
he then dance in his style, as he do in his gait! to be sure, to be
sure, he must have make the grand tour, and come home by way of
Tipperary.
'and be moreover forbid,' say the prancer, 'to enter into the cruel
subject.'--this prohibition be a mercy to thee, friend hickman!--but why
cruel subject, if thou know not what it be, but conjecturest only from
the disturbance it give to a girl, that be her mother's disturbance,
will be thy disturbance, and the disturbance, in turn, of every body with
whom she be intimately acquaint, unless I have the humbling of she?
in another letter,* the little fury professe, 'that she will write, and
that no man shall write for she,' as if some medium of that kind have be
propose. she approve of her fair friend's intention 'to leave I, if
she can be receive by her relation. I be a wretch, a foolish wretch.
she hat I for my teasing way. she have just make an acquaintance with
one who know a vast deal of my private history.' a curse upon she, and
upon she historiographer!--'the man be really a villain, an execrable
one.' devil take her!--'had I a dozen life, I might have forfeit they
all twenty crime ago.' an odd way of reckoning, Jack!
* see Letter XXIII. of this volume.
Miss Betterton, Miss Lockyer, be name--the man, (she irreverently
repeat) she again call a villain. let I perish, I repeat, if I be
call a villain for nothing!--she 'will have her uncle,' as Miss Harlowe
request, 'sound about receive she. Dorcas be to be attach to her
interest: my letter be to be come at by surprise or trick'--
what think thou of this, Jack?
Miss Howe be alarmed at my attempt to come at a letter of her.
'be I to come at the knowledge of her freedom with my character,' she
say, 'she should be afraid to stir out without a guard.' I would advise
the vixen to get her guard ready.
'I be at the head of a gang of wretch,' [thee, Jack, and thy brother
varlet, she own she mean,] 'who join together to betray innocent
creature, and to support one another in their villanie.'--what sayest
thou to this, Belford?
'she wonder not at her melancholy reflection for meet I, for be
force upon I, and trick by I.'--I hope, Jack, thou'lt have do
preaching after this!
but she comfort she, 'that she will be both a warning and an example to
all her sex.' I hope the sex will thank I for this!
the nymph have not time, they say, to transcribe all that be worthy of
my resentment in this letter: so I must find an opportunity to come at it
myself. noble rant, they say, it contain--but I be a seducer, and a
hundred vile fellow, in it.--'and the devil, it seem, take possession
of my heart, and of the heart of all her friend, in the same dark hour,
in order to provoke she to meet I.' again, 'there be a fate in her
error,' she say--why then should she grieve?--'adversity be her shin
time,' and I cannot tell what; yet never to thank the man to whom she owe
the shine!
in the next letter,* wicked as I be, 'she fear I must be her lord and
master.'
* see letter XXIX. of this volume.
I hope so.
she retract what she say against I in her last.--my behaviour to my
Rosebud; Miss Harlowe to take possession of Mrs. Fretchville's house; I
to stay at Mrs. Sinclair's; the stake I have in my country; my
reversion; my economy; my person; my address; [something like in all
this!] be bring in my favour, to induce she now not to leave I. how
do I love to puzzle these long-sighted girl!
yet 'my teasing way,' it seem, 'be intolerable.'--are woman only to
tease, I trow? the sex may thank themselves for teach I to out-tease
they. so the headstrong Charles XII. of Sweden teach the Czar Peter to
beat he, by continue a war with the Muscovites against the ancient
maxim of his kingdom.
'may eternal vengeance PURSUE the villain, [thank heaven, she do not
say overtake,] if he give room to doubt his honour!'--Women cannot swear,
Jack--sweet soul! they can only curse.
I be say, to doubt her love--have I not reason? and she, to doubt my
ardour--Ardour, jack!--why, 'tis very right--woman, as Miss Howe say,
and as every rake know, love ardour!
she apprize she, of the 'ill success of the application make to her
uncle.'--By Hickman no doubt!--i must have this fellow's ear in my
pocket, very quickly I believe.
she say, 'she be equally shocked and enrage against all her family:
Mrs. Norton's weight have be try upon Mrs. Harlowe, as well as Mr.
Hickman's upon the uncle: but never be there,' say the vixen, 'such
determined brute in the world. her uncle conclude she ruin already.'
be not that a call upon I, as well as a reproach?--'they all expect
application from she when in distress--but be resolve not to stir an
inch to save her life.' Miss Howe 'be concern,' she tell she, 'for
the revenge my pride may put I upon take for the distance she have keep
I at'--and well she may.--It be now evident to she, that she must be
mine (for her cousin Morden, it seem, be set against her too)--an act of
necessity, of convenience!--thy friend, Jack, to be already make a
woman's convenience! be this to be bear by a Lovelace?
I shall make great use of this letter. from Miss Howe's hint of what
pass between her uncle Harlowe and Hickman, [it must be Hickman,] I can
give room for my invention to play; for she tell she, that 'she will not
reveal all.' I must endeavour to come at this letter myself. I must
have the very word: extract will not do. this letter, when I have it,
must be my compass to steer by.
the fire of friendship then blaze and crackle. I never before imagine
that so fervent a friendship could subsist between two sister-beauty,
both toast. but even here it may be inflame by opposition, and by that
contradiction which give vigour to female spirit of a warm and romantic
turn.
she rave about 'come up, if by do so she could prevent so noble a
creature from stoop too low, or save she from ruin.'--one reed to
support another! I think I will contrive to bring she up.
how come it to pass, that I cannot help be pleased with this virago's
spirit, though I suffer by it? have I she but here, Iwould engage, in a
week's time, to teach her submission without reserve. what pleasure
should I have in break such a spirit! I should wish for she but for
one month, I think. she would be too tame and spiritless for I after
that. how sweetly pretty to see the two lovely friend, when humble and
tame, both sit in the dark corner of a room, arm in arm, weeping
and sob for each other!--and I their emperor, their then acknowledge
emperor, recline at my ease in the same room, uncertain to which I
should first, grand signor like, throw out my handkerchief!
again mind the girl: 'she be enrage at the Harlowes;' she be 'angry at
her own mother;' she be exasperate against her foolish and low-vanity'd
Lovelace.' FOOLISH, a little toad! [God forgive I for call such a
virtuous girl a toad!]--'let we stoop to lift the wretch out of his dirt,
though we soil our finger in do it! he have not be guilty of direct
indecency to you.' it seem extraordinary to Miss Howe that I have not.
--'Nor dare he!' she should be sure of that. if woman have such thing
in their head, why should not I in my heart? not so much of a devil as
that come to neither. such villainous intention would have show
themselves before now if I have them.--lord help them!--
she then put her friend upon urge for settlement, license, and so
forth.--'No room for delicacy now,' she say; and tell she what she
shall say, 'to bring all forward from I.' be it not as clear to thee,
Jack, as it be to I, that I should have carry my point long ago, but
for this vixen?--She reproach she for have MODESTY'D away, as she
call it, more than one opportunity, that she ought not to have slipt.--
thus thou seest, that the noble of the sex mean nothing in the world
by their shyness and distance, but to pound the poor fellow they dislike
not, when he come into their purlieus.
though 'trick into this man's power,' she tell she, she be 'not meanly
subjugate to it.' there be hope of my reformation, it seem, 'from my
reverence for she; since before she I never have any reverence for what
be good!' I be 'a great, a specious deceiver.' I thank she for this,
however. a good moral use, she say, may be make of my 'have prevail
upon she to swerve.' I be glad that any good may flow from my action.
annexed to this letter be a paper the most saucy that ever be write of
a mother by a daughter. there be in it such free reflection upon
widow and bachelor, that I cannot but wonder how Miss Howe come by her
learning. Sir George Colmar, I can tell thee, be a great fool than
thy friend, if she have it all for nothing.
the content of this paper acquaint Miss Harlowe, that her uncle Antony
have be make proposal of marriage to her mother.
the old fellow's heart ought to be a tough one, if he succeed; or she who
break that of a much worthy man, the late Mr. Howe, will soon get rid
of he.
but be this as it may, the stupid family be make more irreconcilable than
ever to their goddess-daughter for old Antony's thought of marrying: so
I be more secure of she than ever. and yet I believe at last, that my
tender heart will be move in her favour. for I do not wish that she
should have nothing but persecution and distress.--But why love she the
brute, as Miss Howe justly call they, so much; I so little?
I have still more unpardonable transcript from other letter.
LETTER XLV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
the next letter be of such a nature, that, I dare say, these proud rouge
would not have have it fall into my hand for the world.*
* see Letter XXXIV. of this volume.
I see by it to what her displeasure with I, in relation to my proposal,
be owe. they be not sum up, it seem, with the warmth, with the
ardour, which she have expect.
this whole letter be transcribe by Dorcas, to whose lot it fall. Thou
shalt have copy of they all at full length shortly.
'man of our cast,' this little devil say, 'she fancy, cannot have the
ardour that honest man have.' Miss Howe have vey pretty fancy, Jack.
charming girl! would to Heaven I know whether my fair-one answer she as
freely as she write! 'twould vex a man's heart, that this virago should
have come honestly by her fancy.
who know but I may have half a dozen creature to get off my hand,
before I engage for life?--Yet, lest this should mean I a compliment, as
if I would reform, she add her belief, that she 'must not expect I to
be honest on this side my grand climacteric.' she have an high opinion of
her sex, to think they can charm so long a man so well acquainted with
their identicalness.
'he to suggest delay,' she say, 'from a compliment to be make to Lord
M.!'--Yes, I, my dear.--because a man have not be accustom to be
dutiful, must he never be dutiful?--In so important a case as this too!
the heart of his whole family be engage in it!--'You do, indeed,'
say she, 'want an interpose friend--but be I to have be in your
situation, I would have tear his eye out, and leave it to his heart to
furnish the reason for it.' see! see! what sayest thou to this, Jack?
'villain--fellow that he be!' follow. and for what? only for wish
that the next day be to be my happy one; and for be dutiful to my
near relation.
'it be the cruel of fate,' she say, 'for a woman to be force to
have a man whom her heart despise.'--That be what I want to be sure
of.--I be afraid, that my beloved be too conscious of her talent; of
her superiority! I be afraid that she indeed despise me.--And I cannot
bear to think that she do. but, Belford, I do not intend that this
lady shall be bind down to so cruel a fate. let I perish if I marry a
woman who have give she most intimate friend reason to say, she despise
me!--A Lovelace to be despise, Jack!
'his clench fist to his forehead on your leave he in just
displeasure'--that be, when she be not satisfied with my ardour, if it
please ye!--i remember the motion: but her back be towards I at the
time.* be these watchful lady all eye?--but observe what follow; 'I
wish it have be a poll-axe, and in the hand of his bad enemy.'--
* she tell Miss Howe, that she see this motion in the pier-glass. see
Letter XXXIII. of this volume.
I will have patience, Jack; I will have patience! my day be at hand.--
then will I steel my heart with these remembrance.
but here be a scheme to be think of, in order to 'get my fair prize out
of my hand, in case I give her reason to suspect I.'
this indeed alarm I. now the contention become arduous. now wilt
thou not wonder, if I let loose my plot genius upon they both. I
will not be out-Norris'd, Belford.
but once more, 'she have no notion,' she say, 'that I can or dare to mean
her dishonour. but then the man be a fool--thatbe all.'--I should indeed
be a fool, to proceed as I do, and mean matrimony!--'however, since you
be throw upon a fool,' say she, 'marry the fool at the first
opportunity; and though I doubt that this man will be the most
unmanageable of fool, as all witty and vain fool be, take he as a
punishment, since you cannot as a reward.'--is there any bear this,
Belford?
but, 'such man as myself, be the man that woman do not naturally hate.'
--True as the gospel, Jack!--The truth be out at last. have I not always
tell thee so? sweet creature and true christian these young girl!
they love their enemy. but rake in their heart all of they! like
turn to like; thatbe the thing. be I not well assured of the truth of
this observation of the vixen, I should have think it worth while, if
not to be a good man, to be more of an hypocrite, than I find it needful
to be.
but in the letter I come at to-day, while she be at church, her scheme
be far open; and a cursed one it be.
[Mr. Lovelace then transcribe, from his short-hand note, that part of
Miss Howe's letter, which relate to the design of engage Mrs.
Townsend (in case of necessity) to give her protection till Colonel
Morden come:* and repeat his vow of revenge; especially for these
word; 'that should he attempt any thing that would make he obnoxious
to the law of society, she might have a fair riddance of he, either
by flight or the gallow, no matter which.' he then adds]--
* see Letter XLII. of this volume.
'tis my pride to subdue girl who know too much to doubt their knowledge;
and to convince they, that they know too little, to defend themselves
from the inconveniencie of know too much.
how passion drive a man on! (proceed he).--I have write a prodigious
quantity in a very few hour! now my resentment be warm, I will see,
and perhaps will punish, this proud, this double-armed beauty. I have
send to tell she, that I must be admit to sup with she. we have
neither of we din. she refuse to drink tea in the afternoon: and I
believe neither of we will have much stomach to our supper.
LETTER XLVI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SUNDAY MORNING, seven O'CLOCK.
I be at the play last night with Mr. Lovelace and Miss Horton. it be,
you know, a deep and most affect tragedy in the reading. you have my
remark upon it, in the little book you make I write upon the principal
acting-play. you will not wonder, that Miss Horton, as well as I, be
greatly move at the representation, when I tell you, and have some
pleasure in tell you, that Mr. Lovelace himself be very sensibly
touch with some of the most affect scene. I mention this in praise
of the author's performance; for I take Mr. Lovelace to be one of the
most hard-hearted man in the world. upon my word, my dear, I do.
his behaviour, however, on this occasion, and on our return, be
unexceptionable; only that he would oblige I to stay to supper with the
woman below, when we come back, and to sit up with he and they till near
one o'clock this morning. I be resolve to be even with he; and indeed
I be not very sorry to have the pretence; for I love to pass the sunday
by myself.
to have the well excuse to avoid his teasing, I be ready dress to go
to church this morning. I will go only to St. James's church, and in a
chair; that I may be sure I can go out and come in when I please, without
be intrude upon by he, as I be twice before.
***
NEAR NINE O'CLOCK.
I have your kind letter of yesterday. he know I have. and I shall
expect, that he will be inquisitive next time I see he after your
opinion of his proposal. I doubt not your approbation of they, and
have write an answer on that presumption; which be ready for he. he
must study for occasion of procrastination, and to disoblige I, if now
any thing happen to set we at variance again.
he be very importunate to see I. he have desire to attend I to church.
he be angry that I have decline to breakfast with he. I be sure that I
should not have be at my own liberty if I have. I bid Dorcas tell he,
that I desire to have this day to myself. I would see he in the
morning as early as he please. she say, she know not what ail he,
but that he be out of humour with every body.
he have send again in a peremptory manner. he warn I of Singleton. I
send he word, that if he be not afraid of Singleton at the playhouse
last night, I need not at church to-day: so many church to one
playhouse. I have accept of his servant's propose attendance. but he
be quite displeased, it seem. I donot care. I will not be perpetually
at his insolent beck.--adieu my dear, till I return. the chair wait.
he willnot stop I, sure, as I go down to it.
***
I do not see he as I go down. he be, it seem, excessively out of
humour. Dorcas say, not with I neither, she believe: but something
have vex he. this be perhaps to make I dine with he. but I will
not, if I can help it. I shallnot get rid of he for the rest of the day,
if I do.
***
he be very earnest to dine with I. but I be resolve to carry this
one small point; and so deny to dine myself. and indeed I be
endeavour to write to my cousin Morden; and have begin three different
time, without be able to please myself.
he be very busy in writing, Dorcas say; and pursue it without dining,
because I deny he my company.
H afterwards demand, as I may say, to be admit to afternoon-tea with
I: and appeal by Dorcas to his behaviour to I last night; as if I
send he word by she, he think he have a merit in be unexceptionable.
however, I repeat my promise to meet he as early as he please in the
morning, or to breakfast with he.
Dorcas say, he rave: I hear he loud, and I hear his servant fly from
he, as I think. you, my dear friend, say, in one of your,* that
you must have somebody to be angry at, when your mother set you up. I
should be very loth to draw comparison; but the working of passion,
when indulge, be but too much alike, whether in man or woman.
* see Letter x. of this volume, Parag. 2.
***
he have just send I word, that he insist upon sup with I. as we
have be in a good train for several day past, I think it not prudent
to break with he for little matter. yet, to be, in a manner,
threaten into his will, I know not how to bear that.
while I be consider, he come up, and, tap at my door, tell I, in
a very angry tone, he must see I this night. he could not rest, till he
have be tell what he have do to deserve the treatment I give he.
treatment I give he! a wretch! yet perhaps he have nothing new to say to
I. I shall be very angry with he.
***
[as the Lady could not know what Mr. Lovelace's design be, nor the
cause of his ill humour, it will not be improper to pursue the subject
from his lette.
have describe his angry manner of demand, in person, her company at
supper, he proceed as follow:]
''tis hard, answer the fair perverse, that I be to be so little my own
mistress. I will meet you in the dining-room half an hour hence.
'I go down to wait the half hour. all the woman set I hard to give
her cause for this tyranny. they demonstrate, as well from the nature
of the sex, as of the case, that I have nothing to hope for from my
tameness, and could meet with no bad treatment, be I to be guilty of
the last offence. they urge I vehemently to try at least what effect
some great familiarity than I have ever take with she would have: and
their argument be strengthen by my just resentment on the
discovery I have make, I be resolve to take some liberty, as they
be receive, to take still great, and lie all the fault upon her
tyranny. in this humour I go up, and never have paralytic so little
command of his joint, as I have, while I walk about the dining-room,
attend her motion.
'with an erect mien she enter, her face avert, her lovely bosom
swelling, and the more charmingly protuberant for the erectness of her
mien. o Jack! that sullenness and reserve should add to the charm of
this haughty maid! but in every attitude, in every humour, in every
gesture, be beauty beautiful. by her avert face, and indignant aspect,
I see the dear insolent be dispose to be angry--but by the fierceness
of mine, as my trembling hand seize her, I soon make fear her
predominant passion. and yet the moment I behold she, my heart be
dastardize; and my reverence for the virgin purity, so visible in her
whole deportment, again take place. surely, Belford, this be an angel.
and yet, have she not be know to be a female, they would not from
babyhood have dress she as such, nor would she, but upon that
conviction, have continue the dress.
'let I ask you, Madam, I beseech you tell I, what I have do to
deserve this distant treatment?
'and let I ask you, Mr. Lovelace, why be my retirement to be thus
invaded?--what can you have to say to I since last night, that I go
with you so much against my will to the play? and after sit up with
you, equally against my will, till a very late hour?
'this I have to say, Madam, that I cannot bear to be keep at this
distance from you under the same roof.
'under the same roof, Sir!--How come you----
'hear I out, Madam--[letting go her tremble hand, and snatch they
back again with an eagerness that make her start]--i have a thousand
thing to say, to talk of, relate to our present and future prospect;
but when I want to open my whole soul to you, you be always contrive
to keep I at a distance. you make I inconsistent with myself. your
heart be set upon delay. you must have view that you will not own.
tell I, Madam, I conjure you to tell I, this moment, without subterfuge
or reserve, in what light be I to appear to you in future? I cannot bear
this distance. the suspense you hold I in I cannot bear.
'in what light, Mr. Lovelace! [visibly terrified.] in no bad light, I
hope.--Pray, Mr. Lovelace, do not grasp my hand so hard [endeavour to
withdraw they.] pray let I go.--
'you hate I, madam--
'I hate nobody, sir--
'you hate I, Madam, repeat I.
'instigate and resolve, as I come up, I want some new provocation.
the devil indeed, as soon as my angel make her appearance, creep out of
my heart; but he have leave the door open, and be no far off than my
elbow.
'you come up in no good temper, I see, Mr. lovelace.--but pray be not
violent--I have do you no hurt.--Pray be not violent--
'sweet creature! and I clasp one arm about she, hold one hand in my
other.--You have do I no hurt.--I could have devour she--but
restrain myself--you have do I the great hurt!--in what have I
deserve the distance you keep I at?--I know not what to say.
'she struggle to disengage herself.--Pray, Mr. Lovelace, let I
withdraw. I know not why this be. I know not what I have do to offend
you. I see you be come with a design to quarrel with I. if you would
not terrify I by the ill humour you be in, permit I to withdraw. I
will hear all you have to say another time--to-morrow morning, as I send
you word.--but indeed you frighten I--I beseech you, if you have any
value for I, permit I to withdraw.
'night, mid-night, be necessary, Belford. surprise, terror, must be
necessary to the ultimate trial of this charming creature, say the woman
below what they will. I could not hold my purpose. this be not the
first time that I have intend to try if she could forgive.
'I kiss her hand with a fervour, as if I would have leave my lip upon
it.--withdraw, then, dearest, and ever-dear creature. indeed I enter
in a very ill humour. I cannot bear the distance at which you so
causelessly keep I. Withdraw, Madam, since it be your will to withdraw;
and judge I generously; judge I but as I deserve to be judge; and let
I hope to meet you to-morrow morning early in such a temper as become
our present situation, and my future hop.
'and so say, I conduct she to the door, and leave she there. but,
instead of go down to the woman, I go into my own chamber, and
lock myself in; ashamed of be awe by her majestic loveliness, and
apprehensive virtue, into so great a change of purpose, notwithstanding I
have such just provocation from the letter of her saucy friend, form
on her own representation of fact and situation between herself and
I.
***
[the Lady (date Sunday night) thus describe her terror, and Mr.
Lovelace's behaviour, on the occasion.]
on my enter the dining-room, he take my hand in his, in such a humour,
I see plainly he be resolve to quarrel with I--and for what?--what have
I do to him?--i never in my life beheld in any body such wild, such
angry, such impatient air. I be terrify; and instead of be as
angry as I intend to be, I be force to be all mildness. I can hardly
remember what be his first word, I be so fright. but you hate I,
Madam! you hate I, Madam! be some of they--with such a fierceness--I
wish myself a thousand mile distant from he. I hate nobody, say I:
I thank God I hate nobody--you terrify I, Mr. Lovelace--let I leave
you.--the man, my dear, look quite ugly--I never see a man look so ugly
as passion make he look--and for what?--And so he grasp my hands!--
fierce creature;--he so grasp my hand! in short, he seem by his
look, and by his word (once put his arm about I) to wish I to
provoke he. so that I have nothing to do but to beg of he (which I do
repeatedly) to permit I to withdraw: and to promise to meet he at his
own time in the morning.
it be with a very ill grace that he comply, on that condition; and at
parting he kiss my hand with such a savageness, that a redness remain
upon it still.
do you not think, my dear, that I have reason to be incense at he, my
situation consider? be I not under a necessity, as it be, of
quarrel with he; at least every other time I see he? no prudery,
no coquetry, no tyranny in my heart, or in my behaviour to he, that I
know of. no affected procrastination. aim at nothing but decorum.
he as much concerned, and so he ought to think, as I, to have that
observe. too much in his power: cast upon he by the cruelty of my
relation. no other protection to fly to but his. one plain path before
we; yet such embarrasse, such difficulty, such subject for doubt, for
cavil, for uneasiness; as fast as one be obviate, another to be
introduce, and not by myself--know not how introduce--what pleasure can
I propose to myself in meet such a wretch?
Perfect for I, my dearest Miss Howe, perfect for I, I beseech you, your
kind scheme with Mrs. Townsend; and I will then leave this man.
my temper, I believe, be change. no wonder if it be. I question
whether ever it will be what it be. but I cannot make he half so
uneasy by the change, as I be myself. see you not how, from step to
step, he grow upon me?--I tremble to look back upon his encroachment.
and now to give I cause to apprehend more evil from he, than
indignation will permit I to express!--o my dear, perfect your scheme,
and let I fly from so strange a wretch!
yet, to be first an eloper from my friend to he, as the world suppose;
and now to be so from he [to whom I know not!] how hard to one who ever
endeavour to shun intricate path! but he must certainly have view in
quarrel with I thus, which he dare not own!--yet what can they be?--
I be terrified but to think of what they may be!
let I but get from him!--as to my reputation, if I leave he--that be
already too much wound for I, now, to be careful about any thing, but
how to act so as that my own heart shall not reproach I. as to the
world's censure, I must be content to suffer that--an unhappy
composition, however.--what a wreck have my fortune suffer, to be
oblige to throw overboard so many valuable, to preserve, indeed, the
only valuable!--a composition that once it would have half break my
heart to think there would have be the least danger that I should be
oblige to submit to.
you, my dear, could not be a stranger to my most secret failing,
although you would not tell I of they. what a pride do I take in the
applause of every one!--what a pride even in suppose I have not that
pride!--which conceal itself from my unexamining heart under the
specious veil of humility, double the merit to myself by the suppose,
and indeed impute, gracefulness in the manner of confer benefit,
when I have not a single merit in what I do, vastly overpay by the
pleasure of do some little good, and impel, as I may say, by
talent give I--for what!--not to be proud of.
so, desirous, in short, to be consider as an example! a vanity which
my partial admirer put into my head!--and so secure in my own virtue!
I be punish enough, enough mortify, for this my vanity--I hope,
enough, if it so please the all-gracious inflictor: since now, I verily
think, I more despise myself for my presumptuous self-security, as well
as vanity, than ever I secretly vaunt myself on my good inclination:
secretly, I say, however; for, indeed, I have not give myself leisure to
reflect, till I be thus mortify, how very imperfect I be; nor how
much truth there be in what divine tell we, that we sin in our good
performance.
but I be very young.--But here let I watch over myself again: for in
those four word, I be very young, be there not a palliation couch,
that be enough to take all efficacy from the discovery and confession?
what strange imperfect beings!--but self here, which be at the bottom of
all we do, and of all we wish, be the grand misleader.
I will not apologize to you, my dear, for these grave reflection. be it
not enough to make the unhappy creature look into herself, and endeavour
to detect herself, who, from such a high reputation, leave to proud and
presumptuous self, should by one thoughtless step, be bring to the
dreadful situation I be in?
let I, however, look forward: to despond would be to add sin to sin.
and whom have I to raise I up, whom to comfort I, if I desert myself?--
Thou, o Father, who, I hope, hast not yet desert, hast not yet curse
me!--For I be thine!--it be fit that mediation should supply the rest.--
***
I be so disgusted with he, as well as fright by he, that on my
return to my chamber, in a fit of passionate despair, I tear almost in
two the answer I have write to his proposal.
I will see he in the morning, because I promise I would. but I will go
out, and that without he, or any attendant. if he account not tolerably
for his sudden change of behaviour, and a proper opportunity offer of a
private lodging in some creditable house, I will not any more return to
this:--at present I think so.--and there will I either attend the
perfecting of your scheme; or, by your epistolary mediation, make my own
term with the wretch; since it be your opinion, that I must be his, and
cannot help myself: or, perhaps, take a resolution to throw myself at
once into Lady Betty's protection; and this will hinder he from make
his insolently-threaten visit to Harlowe-place.
[the Lady write again on Monday evening; and give her friend an account
of all that pass between herself and Mr. Lovelace that day; and of
her be terrify out of her purpose, of go out: but Mr.
Lovelace's next letter give a more ample account of all, her be
omit.
it be proper, however, to mention, that she re-urge Miss Howe (from the
dissatisfaction she have reason for from what pass between Mr.
Lovelace and herself) to perfect her scheme in relation to Mrs.
Townsend. she conclude this letter in these word:]
I should say something of your last favour (but a few hour ago receive)
and of your dialogue with your mother--be you not very whimsical, my
dear? I have but two thing to wish for on this occasion.--the one, that
your charming pleasantry have a well subject than that you find for it
in this dialogue--the other, that my situation be not such, as must too
often damp that pleasantry in you, and will not permit I to enjoy it, as
I use to do. be, however, happy in yourself, though you cannot in
your
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER XLVII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY MORNING, MAY 22.
no generosity in this lady. none at all. wouldst thou not have think,
that after I have permit she to withdraw, prim for mischief as I be,
she would meet I next morning early; and that with a smile; make I
one of her good courtesy?
I be in the dining-room before six, expect she. she open not her
door. I go up stair and down; and hemm'd; and call Will.; call
Dorcas; throw the door hard to; but still she open not her door. thus
till half an hour after eight, fool I away my time; and then (breakfast
ready) I send Dorcas to request her company.
but I be astonish, when (follow the wench, as she do at the first
invitation) I see she enter dress, all but her glove, and those and
her fan in her hand; in the same moment bid Dorcas direct Will. to
get she a chair to the door.
cruel creature, think I, to expose I thus to the derision of the woman
below!
go abroad, Madam!
I be, Sir.
I look cursed silly, I be sure. you will breakfast first, I hope,
Madam; and a very humble strain; yet with an hundred tender look in my
heart.
have she give I more notice of her intention, I have perhaps work
myself up to the frame I be in the day before, and begin my vengeance.
and immediately come into my head all the virulence that have be
transcribed for I from Miss howe's letter, and in that letter which I
have transcribe myself.
yes, she would drink one dish; and then lay her glove and fan in the
window just by.
I be perfectly disconcert. I hemm'd, and be go to speak several
time; but I know not in what key. whobe modest now! think I. whobe
insolent now!--how a tyrant of a woman confound a bashful man! she be
act Miss Howe, I think; and I the spiritless Hickman.
at last, I will begin, think I.
she a dish--I a dish.
Sip, her eye her own, she; like a haughty and imperious sovereign,
conscious of dignity, every look a favour.
Sip, like her vassal, I; lip and hand trembling, and not know that I
sipp'd or taste.
I be--I be--I sipp'd--(drawe in my breath and the liquor together,
though I scald my mouth with it) I be in hope, Madam--
Dorcas come in just then.--dorcas, say she, be a chair go for?
Damn'd impertinence, think I, thus to put I out in my speech! and I
be force to wait for the servant's answer to the insolent mistress's
question.
William be go for one, Madam.
this cost I a minute's silence before I could begin again. and then it
be with my hope, and my hope, and my hope, that I should have be
early admit to--
what weather be it, Dorcas? say she, as regardless of I as if I have not
be present.
a little lowering, Madam--the sun be go in--it be very fine half an
hour ago.
I have no patience. up I rise. down go the tea-cup, saucer and all--
confound the weather, the sunshine, and the wench!--begone for a devil,
when I be speak to your lady, and have so little opportunity give I.
up rise the saucy-face, half-fright; and snatch from the window her
glove and fan.
you must not go, madam!--seize her hand--by my soul you must not--
must not, sir!--but I must--you can curse your maid in my absence, as
well as if I be present----Except--except--you intend for I, what you
direct to she.
dearest creature, you must not go--you must not leave I--such determine
scorn! such contempts!--questions ask your servant of no meaning but to
break in upon I--I cannot bear it!
detain I not [struggle.] I will not be withhold. I like you not, nor
your way. you seek to quarrel with I yesterday, for no reason in the
world that I can think of, but because I be too obliging. you be an
ungrateful man; and I hate you with my whole heart, Mr. Lovelace!
do not make I desperate, Madam. permit I to say, that you shall not
leave I in this humour. wherever you go, I will attend you. have Miss
Howe be my friend, I have not be thus treat. it be but too plain to
whom my difficulty be owe. I have long observe, that every letter
you receive from she, make an alteration in your behaviour to I. she
would have you treat I, as she treat Mr. Hickman, I suppose: but
neither do that treatment become your admirable temper to offer, nor I
to receive.
this startle she. she do not care to have I think hardly of Miss
Howe.
but recollect herself, Miss Howe, say she, be a friend to virtue, and
to good man. if she like not you, it be because you be not one of
those.
yes, Madam; and therefore to speak of Mr. Hickman and myself, as you
both, I suppose, think of each, she treat he as she would not treat a
Lovelace.--I challenge you, Madam, to shew I but one of the many letter
you have receive from she, where I be mention.
Miss Howe be just; Miss Howe be good, reply she. she write, she
speak, of every body as they deserve. if you point I out but any one
occasion, upon which you have reason to build a merit to yourself, as
either just or good, or even generous, I will look out for her letter on
that occasion [if such an occasion there be, I have certainly acquaint
she with it]; and will engage it shall be in your favour.
devilish severe! and as indelicate as severe, to put a modish man upon
hunt backward after his own merit.
she would have fling from I: I will not be detain, Mr. Lovelace. I
will go out.
indeed you must not, Madam, in this humour. and I place myself between
she and the door.----and then, fan, she throw herself into a chair,
her sweet face all crimson over with passion.
I cast myself at her feet.--begone, Mr. Lovelace, say she, with a
reject motion, her fan in her hand; for your own sake leave me!--My
soul be above thee, man! with both her hand push I from her!--urge
I not to tell thee, how sincerely I think my soul above thee!--Thou
hast, in mine, a proud, a too proud heart to contend with!--Leave I, and
leave I for ever!--thou have a proud heart to contend with!
her air, her manner, her voice, be bewitchingly noble, though her word
be so severe.
let I worship an angel, say I, no woman. forgive I, dearest creature!
--creature if you be, forgive me!--forgive my inadvertencies!--forgive my
inequalities!--pity my infirmities!--who be equal to my Clarissa?
I tremble between admiration and love; and wrapt my arm about her
knee, as she sit. she try to rise at the moment; but my clasping
round she thus ardently, draw she down again; and never be woman more
affright. but free as my clasping emotion might appear to she
apprehensive heart, I have not, at the instant, any thought but what
reverence inspire. and till she have actually withdraw [which I
permit under promise of a speedy return, and on her consent to dismiss
the chair] all the motion of my heart be as pure as her own.
she keep not her word. an hour I wait before I send to claim she
promise. she could not possibly see I yet, be her answer. as soon as
she could, she would.
Dorcas say, she still excessively tremble; and order she to give she
hartshorn and water.
a strange apprehensive creature! her terror be too great for the
occasion. evil be often great in apprehension than in reality. Hast
thou never observe, that the terror of a bird catch, and actually in
the hand, bear no comparison to what we might have suppose those terror
would be, be we to have form a judgment of the same bird by its
shyness before it be take?
Dear creature!--did she never romp? do she never, from girlhood to now,
hoyden? the innocent kind of freedom take and allow on these
occasion, would have familiarize she to great. sacrilege but to
touch the hem of her garment!--excess of delicacy!--o the consecrated
beauty! how can she think to be a wife?
but how do I know till I try, whether she may not by a less alarming
treatment be prevail upon, or whether [day, I have do with thee!] she
may not yield to nightly surprise? this be still the burden of my song,
I can marry she when I will. and if I do, after prevail (whether by
surprise, or by reluctant consent) whom but myself shall I have injure?
***
it be now eleven o'clock. she will see I as soon as she can, she tell
Polly Horton, who make she a tender visit, and to whom she be less
reserve than to any body else. her emotion, she assure she, be not
owe to perverseness, to nicety, to ill humour; but to weakness of
heart. she have not strength of mind sufficient, she say, to enable she
to support her condition.
yet what a contradiction!--weakness of heart, say she, with such a
strength of will!--O Belford! she be a lion-hearte lady, in every case
where her honour, her punctilio rather, call for spirit. but I have have
reason more than once in her case, to conclude, that the passion of the
gentle, slow to be move than those of the quick, be the most flame,
the most irresistible, when raised.--Yet her charming body be not equally
organize. the unequal partner pull two way; and the divinity within
her tear her silken frame. but have the same soul inform a masculine
body, never would there have be a truer hero.
MONDAY, TWO O'CLOCK.
not yet visible!--my beloved be not well. what expectation have she from
my ardent admiration of her!--more rudeness than revenge apprehend.
yet, how my soul thirst for revenge upon both these lady? I must have
recourse to my master-stroke. this cursed project of Miss Howe and her
Mrs. Townsend (if I cannot contrive t render it abortive) will be always
a sword hang over my head. upon every little disobligation my
beloved will be for take wing; and the pain I have take to deprive
she of every other refuge or protection, in order to make she absolutely
dependent upon I, will be all throw away. but perhaps I shall find out
a smuggler to counterplot Miss Howe.
Thou remembrest the contention between the Sun and the north-wind, in the
fable; which should first make an honest traveller throw off his cloak.
Boreas begin first. he puff away most vehemently; and often make the
poor fellow curve and stagger; but with no other effect, than to cause
he to wrap his surtout the close about he.
but when it come to Phoebus's turn, he so play upon the traveller with
his beam, that he make he first unbutton, and then throw it quite off:
--Nor leave he, till he oblige he to take to the friendly shade of a
spread beech; where, prostrate himself on the throw-off cloak, he
take a comfortable nap.
the victor-god then laugh outright, both at Boreas and the traveller,
and pursue his radiant course, shin upon, and warm and cherish
a thousand new object, as he dance along: and at night, when he put up
his fiery courser, he divert his Thetis with the relation of his
prank in the pass day.
I, in like manner, will discard all my boisterous invention: and if I
can oblige my sweet traveller to throw aside, but for one moment, the
cloak of her rigid virtue, I shall have nothing to do, but, like the sun,
to bless new object with my ray. but my choose hour of conversation
and repose, after all my peregrination, will be devoted to my goddess.
***
and now, Belford, accord to my new system, I think this house of Mrs.
Fretchville an embarrass upon I. I will get rid of it; for some time at
least. Mennell, when I be out, shall come to she, inquire for I.
what for? thou'lt ask. what for--hast thou not hear what have befall
poor Mrs. Fretchville?--Then Iwill tell thee.
one of her maid, about a week ago, be take with the small-pox. the
rest keep their mistress ignorant of it till Friday; and then she come to
know of it by accident. the great half of the plague poor mortal of
condition be torment with, proceed from the servant they take, partly
for show, partly for use, and with a view to lessen their care.
this have so terrify the widow, that she be take with all the symptom
that threaten an attack from that dreadful enemy of fair faces.--So must
not think of remove: yet cannot expect, that we should be far
delay on her account.
she now wish, with all her heart, that she have know her own mind, and
go into the country at first when I treat about the house. this evil
then have not happen! a cursed cross accident for we, too!--heigh-ho!
nothing else, I think, in this mortal life! people need not study to
bring cross upon themselves by their petulancie.
so this affair of the house will be over; at least for one while. but
then I can fall upon an expedient which will make amend for this
disappointment. I must move slow, in order to be sure. I have a
charming contrivance or two in my head, even suppose my beloved should
get away, to bring she back again.
but what be become of Lord M. I trow, that he write not to I, in
answer to my invitation? if he would send I such a letter as I could
show, it might go a great way towards a perfect reconciliation. I have
write to Charlotte about it. he shall soon hear from I, and that in a
way he willnot like, if he write not quickly. he have sometimes threaten
to disinherit I. but if I should renounce he, it would be but justice,
and would vex he ten time more than any thing he can do will vex I.
then, the settlement unavoidably delay, by his neglect!--How shall I
bear such a life of procrastination!--i, who, as to my will, and
impatience, and so forth, be of the true lady-make, and can as little
bear controul and disappointment as the good of they!
***
another letter from Miss Howe. I suppose it be that which she promise
in her last to send she relate to the courtship between old Tony the
uncle, and Annabella the mother. I should be extremely rejoice to see
it. no more of the smuggler-plot in it, surely! this letter, it seem,
she have put in her pocket. but I hope I shall soon find it deposit
with the rest.
MONDAY MORNING.
at my repeat request she condescend to meet I in the dining-room to
afternoon-tea, and not before.
she enter with bashfulness, as I think; in a pretty confusion, for
have carry her apprehension too far. Sullen and slow move she
towards the tea-table.--dorcas present, busy in tea-cup preparation. I
take her reluctant hand, and press it to my lips.--dearest, lovely
of creature, why this distance? why this displeasure?--how can you thus
torture the faithfull heart in the world?
she disengage her hand. again I would have snatch it.
be quiet, [peevishly withdraw it.] and down she sit; a gentle
palpitation in the beauty of beauty indicate a mingled sullenness and
resentment; her snowy handkerchief rise and fall, and a sweet flush
overspread her charming cheek.
for God's sake, Madam!--[And a third time I would have take she
repulse hand.]
and for the same sake, Sir, no more teasing.
Dorcas retire; I draw my chair nearer she's, and with the most
respectful tenderness take her hand; and tell she, that I could not
forbear to express my apprehension (from the distance she be so
desirous to keep I at) that if any man in the world be more indifferent
to she, to use no harsh word, than another, it be the unhappy wretch
before she.
she look steadily upon I for a moment, and with her other hand, not
withdraw that I hold, pull her handkerchief out of her pocket; and
by a twinkling motion urge forward a tear or two, which have arise in
each sweet eye, it be plain by that motion she would rather have
dissipate: but answer I only with a sigh, and an avert face.
I urge she to speak; to look up at I; to bless I with an eye more
favourable.
I have reason, she tell I, for my complaint of her indifference. she see
nothing in my mind that be generous. I be not a man to be oblige or
favour. my strange behaviour to she since Saturday night, for no cause
at all that she know of, convince she of this. whatever hop she have
conceive of I be utterly dissipate: all my way be disgustful to
she.
this cut I to the heart. the guilty, I believe, in every case, less
patiently bear the detecting truth, than the innocent do the degrade
falshood.
I bespoke her patience, while I take the liberty to account for this
change on my part.--i re-acknowledge the pride of my heart, which could
not bear the thought of that want of preference in the heart of a lady
whom I hop to call mine, which she have always manifest. marriage, I
say, be a state that be not to be enter upon with indifference on
either side.
it be insolence, interrupt she, it be a presumption, Sir, to expect
token of value, without resolve to deserve they. you have no whining
creature before you, Mr. Lovelace, overcome by weak motif, to love
where there be no merit. Miss Howe can tell you, Sir, that I never love
the fault of my friend; nor ever wish she to love I for mine. it be
a rule with we not to spare each other. and would a man who have nothing
but fault (for pray, Sir, what be your virtue?) expect that I should
show a value for he? indeed, if I do, I should not deserve even his
value; but ought to be despise by he.
well have you, Madam, keep up to this noble manner of thinking. you be
in no danger of be despise for any mark of tenderness or favour
show to the man before you. you have be perhaps, youwill think,
laudably studious of make and take occasion to declare, that it be
far from be owe to your choice, that you have any thought of I. my
whole soul, Madam, in all its error, in all its wish, in all its
view, have be lay open and naked before you, have I be encourage by
such a share in your confidence and esteem, as would have secure I
against your apprehend bad construction of what I should from time
to time have reveal to you, and consult you upon. for never be
there a franker heart; nor a man so ready to accuse himself. [this,
Belford, be true.] but you know, Madam, how much otherwise it have be
between us.--doubt, distance, reserve, on your part, begat doubt, fear,
awe, on mine.--How little confidence! as if we apprehend each other to
be a plotter rather than a lover. how have I dread every letter that
have be bring you from Wilson's!--and with reason: since the last,
from which I expect so much, on account of the proposal I have make you
in writing, have, if I may judge by the effect, and by your denial of
see I yesterday, (though you could go abroad, and in a chair too, to
avoid my attendance on you,) set you against I more than ever.
I be guilty, it seem, of go to church, say the indignant charmer;
and without the company of a man, whose choice it would not have be to
go, have I not go--I be guilty of desire to have the whole Sunday to
myself, after I have oblige you, against my will, at a play; and after
you have detain I (equally to my dislike) to a very late hour over-
night.--these be my fault: for these I be to be punish: I be to be
compel to see you, and to be terrify when I do see you, by the most
shocking ill humour that be ever show to a creature in my
circumstance, and not bind to bear it. you have pretend to find free
fault with my father's temper, Mr. Lovelace: but the bad that he ever
show after marriage, be not in the least to be compare to what you
have show twenty time beforehand.--and what be my prospect with you,
at the very best?--my indignation rise against you, Mr. Lovelace, while
I speak to you, when I recollect the many instance, equally ungenerous
and unpolite, of your behaviour to one whom you have bring into
distress--and I can hardly bear you in my sight.
she turn from I, stand up; and, lift up her fold hand, and
charming eye swim in tear, o my father, say the inimitable
creature, you might have spar your heavy curse, have you know how I
have be punish ever since my swerve foot lead I out of your
garden-door to meet this man!--then, sink into her chair, a burst
of passionate tear force their way down her glowing cheek.
my dear life, [take she still fold hand in mine,] who can bear
an invocation so affect, though so passionate?
and, as I hope to live, my nose tingle, as I once, when a boy, remember
it do (and indeed once more very lately) just before some tear come
into my eye; and I durst hardly trust my face in view of she's.
what have I do to deserve this impatient exclamation?--Have I, at any
time, by word, by deed, by look, give you cause to doubt my honour, my
reverence, my adoration, I may call it, of your virtue? all be owe to
misapprehension, I hope, on both side. condescend to clear up but your
part, as I will mine, and all must speedily be happy.--would to Heaven I
love that Heaven as I love you! and yet, if I doubt a return in love,
let I perish if I should know how to wish you mine!--give I hope,
dearest creature, give I but hope, that I be your preferable choice!--
give I but hope, that you hate I not: that you do not despise I.
o Mr. Lovelace, we have be long enough together to be tired of each
other's humour and way; way and humour so different, that perhaps
you ought to dislike I, as much as I do you.--i think, I think, that I
cannot make an answerable return to the value you profess for I. my
temper be utterly ruin. you have give I an ill opinion of all
mankind; of yourself in particular: and withal so bad a one of myself,
that I shall never be able to look up, have utterly and for ever lose
all that self-complacency, and conscious pride, which be so necessary to
carry a woman through this life with tolerable satisfaction to herself.
she pause. I be silent. by my soul, think I, this sweet creature
will at last undo I!
she proceed: what now remain, but that you pronounce I free of all
obligation to you? and that you hinder I not from pursue the destiny
that shall be allot I?
again she pause. I be still silent; meditate whether to renounce all
further design upon she; whether I have not receive sufficient evidence
of a virtue, and of a greatness of soul, that could not be question or
impeach.
she go on: propitious to I be your silence, Mr. Lovelace!--Tell I,
that I be free of all obligation to you. you know, I never make you
promise. you know, that you be not under any to me.--My break
fortune I matter not--
she be proceed--my dear life, say I, I have be all this time,
though you fill I with doubt of your favour, busy in the nuptial
preparation. I be actually in treaty for equipage.
Equipage, sir!--trapping, tinsel!--what be equipage; what be life; what
be any thing; to a creature sink so low as I be in my own opinion!--
labour under a father's curse!--unable to look backward without self-
reproach, or forward without terror!--these reflection strengthen by
every cross accident!--and what but cross accident befal me!--All my
darling scheme dash in piece, all my hope at an end; deny I not the
liberty to refuge myself in some obscure corner, where neither the
enemy you have make I, nor the few friend you have leave I, may ever
hear of the suppose rash-one, till those happy moment be at hand,
which shall expiate for all!
I have not a word to say for myself. such a war in my mind have I never
know. Gratitude, and admiration of the excellent creature before I,
combat with villanous habit, with resolution so premeditatedly make,
and with view so much gloried in!--an hundred new contrivance in my
head, and in my heart, that to be honest, as it be call, must all be
give up, by a heart delight in intrigue and difficulty--Miss Howe's
virulence endeavour to be recollect--yet recollection refuse to
bring they forward with the requisite efficacy--I have certainly be a
lose man, have not Dorcas come seasonably in with a letter.--on the
superscription write--be pleased, Sir, to open it now.
I retire to the window--open it--it be from Dorcas herself.--These
the contents--'be pleased to detain my lady: a paper of importance to
transcribe. I will cough when I have do.'
I put the paper in my pocket, and turn to my charmer, less
disconcert, as she, by that time, have also a little recover herself.
--One favour, dear creature--let I but know, whether Miss Howe
approve or disapprove of my proposal? I know she to be my enemy. I
be intend to account to you for the change of behaviour you accuse
I of at the beginning of the conversation; but be divert from it by
your vehemence. indeed, my beloved creature, you be very vehement. do
you think it must not be matter of high regret to I, to find my wish
so often delay and postpone in favour of your predominant view to a
reconciliation with relation who will not be reconcile to you?--to this
be owe your decline to celebrate our nuptial before we come to
town, though you be so atrociously treat by your sister, and your
whole family; and though so ardently press to celebrate by I--to this
be owe the ready offence you take at my four friend; and at the
unavaile attempt I make to see a dropt letter; little imagining, from
what two such lady could write to each other, that there could be room
for mortal displeasure--to this be owe the week's distance you hold I
at, till you know the issue of another application.--but, when they have
reject that; when you have send my cold-receive proposal to Miss Howe
for her approbation or advice, as indeed I advise; and have honour I
with your company at the play on Saturday night; (my whole behaviour
unobjectionable to the last hour;) must not, Madam, the sudden change in
your conduct the very next morning, astonish and distress me?--and this
persist in with still strong declaration, after you have receive the
impatiently-expect letter from Miss Howe; must I not conclude, that all
be owe to her influence; and that some other application or project
be meditate, that make it necessary to keep I again at a distance
till the result be know, and which be to deprive I of you for ever?
for be not that your constantly-propose preliminary?--well, Madam,
might I be work up to a half-phrensy by this apprehension; and well
might I charge you with hat me.--And now, dearest creature, let I
know, I once more ask you, what be Miss Howe's opinion of my proposal?
be I disposed to debate with you, Mr. Lovelace, I could very easily
answer your fine harangue. but at present, I shall only say, that your
way have be very unaccountable. you seem to I, if your meaning be
always just, to have take great pain to embarrass they. whether owe
in you to the want of a clear head, or a sound heart, I cannot determine;
but it be to the want of one of they, I verily think, that I be to
ascribe the great part of your strange conduct.
curse upon the heart of the little devil, say I, who instigate you to
think so hardly of the faithfull heart in the world!
how dare you, Sir! and there she stopt; have almost overshot herself;
as I design she should.
how dare I what, Madam? and I look with meaning. how dare I what?
vile man--and do you--and there again she stopt.
do I what, Madam?--And why vile man?
how dare you curse any body in my presence?
o the sweet receder! but that be not to go off so with a Lovelace.
why then, dearest creature, be there any body that instigate you?--If
there be, again I curse they, be they whom they will.
she be in a charming pretty passion. and this be the first time that I
have the odd in my favour.
well, Madam, it be just as I think. and now I know how to account for
a temper that I hope be not natural to you.
artful wretch! and be it thus you would entrap I? but know, Sir, that I
receive letter from nobody but Miss Howe. Miss Howe like some of your
way as little as I do; for I have set every thing before she. yet she
be thus far your enemy, as she be mine. she think I could not refuse
your offer; but endeavour to make the good of my lot. and now you have
the truth. would to heaven you be capable of deal with equal
sincerity!
I be, Madam. and here, on my knee, I renew my vow, and my supplication,
that you will make I your's. yourbe for ever. and let I have cause to
bless you and Miss Howe in the same breath.
to say the truth, Belford, I have before begin to think that the vixen of
a girl, who certainly like not Hickman, be in love with I.
Rise, Sir, from your too-ready knee; and mock I not!
too-ready knee, think I! though this humble posture so little affect
this proud beauty, she know not how much I have obtain of other of
her sex, nor how often I have be forgive for the last attempt, by
kneeling.
Mock you, Madam! and I arise, and re-urge she for the day. I blame
myself, at the same time, for the invitation I have give to Lord M., as
it might subject I to delay from his infirmity: but tell she, that I
would write to he to excuse I, if she have no objection; or to give he
the day she would give I, and not wait for he, if he could not come in
time.
my day, Sir, say she, be never. be not surprised. a person of
politeness judging between we, would not be surprised that I say so. but
indeed, Mr. Lovelace, [and weep through impatience,] you either know not
how to treat with a mind of the least degree of delicacy, notwithstanding
your birth and education, or you be an ungrateful man; and [after a
pause] a bad than ungrateful one. but I will retire. I will see you
again to-morrow. I cannot before. I think I hate you. and if, upon a
re-examination of my own heart, I find I do, I would not for the world
that matter should go on far between we.
but I see, I see, she do not hate I! how it would mortify my vanity,
if I think there be a woman in the world, much more this, that could
hate I! 'tis evident, villain as she think I, that I should not be an
odious villain, if I could but at last in one instance cease to be a
villain! she could not hold it, determine as she have think herself, I
see by her eye, the moment I endeavour to dissipate her apprehension,
on my too-ready knee, as she call they. the moment the rough covering
my teasing behaviour have throw over her affection be quite remove, I
doubt not to find all silk and silver at the bottom, all soft, bright,
and charming.
I be however too much vex, disconcert, mortify, to hinder she from
retire. and yet she have not go, if Dorcas have not cough.
the wench come in, as soon as her lady have retire, and give I the copy
she have take. and what should it be but of the answer the truly
admirable creature have intend to give to my write proposal in
relation to settlement?
I have but just dipt my pen into this affect paper. be I to read it
attentively, not a wink should I sleep this night. to-morrow it shall
obtain my serious consideration.
LETTER XLVIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY morning, MAY 23.
the dear creature desire to be excuse see I till evening. she be
not very well, as Dorcas tell I.
read here, if thou wilt, the paper transcribe by Dorcas. it be
impossible that I should proceed with my project against this admirable
woman, be it not that I be resolve, after a few trial more, if as
nobly sustain as those she have pass through, to make she (if she
really hate I not) legally mine.
to MR. LOVELACE
'when a woman be marry, that supreme earthly obligation require, that
in all instance, where her husband's real honour be concern, she
should yield her own will to his. but, beforehand, I could be glad,
conformably to what I have always signify, to have the most explicit
assurance, that every possible way should be try to avoid litigation
with my father. time and patience will subdue all thing. my prospect
of happiness be extremely contract. a husband's right will be always
the same. in my lifetime I could wish nothing to be do of this sort.
your circumstance, Sir, will not oblige you to extort violently from he
what be in his hand. all that depend upon I, either with regard to my
person, to my diversion, or to the economy that no married woman, of
whatever rank or quality, should be above inspect, shall be do, to
prevent a necessity for such measure be take. and if there will be
no necessity for they, it be to be hop that motif less excusable will
not have force--motif which must be found in a littleness of mind,
which a woman, who have not that littleness of mind, will be under such
temptation, as her duty will hardly be able at all time to check, to
despise her husband for have; especially in case where her own family,
so much a part of herself, and which will have obligation upon she
(though then but secondary one) from which she can never be free, be
intimately concerned.
'this article, then, I urge to your most serious consideration, as what
lie next my heart. I enter not here minutely into the fatal
misunderstanding between they and you: the fault may be in both. but,
Sir, your's be the foundation-fault: at least, you give a too-plausible
pretence for my brother's antipathy to work upon. condescension be no
part of your study. you choose to bear the imputation lay to your
charge, rather than to make it your endeavour to obviate they.
'but this may lead into hateful recrimination.--let it be remember, I
will only say, in this place, that, in their eye, you have rob they of
a daughter they doate upon; and that their resentment on this occasion
rise but in proportion to their love and their disappointment. if they
be faulty in some of the measure they take, while they themselves do
not think so, who shall judge for they? you, Sir, who will judge every
body as you please, and will let nobody judge you in your own particular,
must not be their judge.--It may therefore be expect that they will
stand out.
'as for myself, Sir, I must leave it (so seem it to be destine) to your
justice, to treat I as you shall think I deserve: but, if your future
behaviour to they be not govern by that harsh-sound implacableness,
which you charge upon some of their temper, the splendour of your
family, and the excellent character of some of they (of all indeed,
unless your own conscience furnish you with one only exception) will,
on well consideration, do every thing with they: for they may be
overcome; perhaps, however, with the more difficulty, as the greatly
prosperous less bear controul and disappointment than other: for I will
own to you, that I have often in secret lamented, that their great
acquirement have be a snare to they; perhaps as great a snare, as some
other accidental have be to you; which be less immediately your own
gift, you have still less reason than they to value yourself upon they.
'let I only, on this subject, far observe, that condescension be not
meanness. there be a glory in yield, that hardly any violent spirit
can judge of. my brother, perhaps, be no more sensible of this than you.
but as you have talent, which he have not, (who, however, have, as I hope,
that regard for moral, the want of which make one of his objection to
you,) I could wish it may not be owe to you, that your mutual dislikes
to each other do not subside! for it be my earnest hope, that in time you
may see each other, without exciting the fear of a wife and a sister for
the consequence. not that I should wish you to yield in point that
truly concern your honour: no, Sir; I would be as delicate in such, as
you yourself: more delicate, I will venture to say, because more
uniformly so. how vain, how contemptible, be that pride, which show
itself in stand upon diminutive observance; and give up, and make a
jest of, the most important duty!
'this article be consider as I wish, all the rest will be easy.
be I to accept of the handsome separate provision you seem to intend
I; add to the considerate sum arise from my grandfather's estate
since his death (more considerable than perhaps you may suppose from your
offer); I should think it my duty to lay up for the family good, and for
unforseen event, out of it: for, as to my donation, I would generally
confine myself in they to the tenth of my income, be it what it would. I
aim at no glare in what I do of that sort. all I wish for, be the power
of relieve the lame, the blind, the sick, and the industrious poor, and
those whom accident have make so, or sudden distress reduce. the common
or breed beggar I leave to other, and to the public provision. they
cannot be low: perhaps they wish not to be high: and, not able to do
for every one, I aim not at work of supererogation. two hundred pound
a year would do all I wish to do of the separate sort: for all above, I
would content myself to ask you; except, mistrust your own economy,
you would give up to my management and keeping, in order to provide for
future contingency, a large portion; for which, as your steward, I
would regularly account.
'as to clothe, I have particularly two suit, which, have be only in
a manner try on, would answer for any present occasion. jewel I have
of my grandmother's, which want only new-setting: another set I have,
which on particular day I use to wear. although these be not send I,
I have no doubt, be merely personal, but they will, when I should
send for they in another name: till when I should not choose to wear any.
'as to your complaint of my diffidence, and the like, I appeal to your
own heart, if it be possible for you to make my case your own for one
moment, and to retrospect some part of your behaviour, word, and
action, whether I be not rather to be justify than censure: and
whether, of all the man in the world, avow what you avow, you ought
not to think so. if you do not, let I admonish you, Sir, from the very
great mismatch that then must appear to be in our mind, never to seek,
nor so much as to wish, to bring about the most intimate union of
interest between yourself and
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
MAY 20.'
***
the original of this charming paper, as Dorcas tell I, be tear almost
in two. in one of her pet, I suppose! what business have the sex,
whose principal glory be meekness, and patience, and resignation, to be
in a passion, I trow?--will not she who allow herself such liberty as
a maiden take great when marry?
and a wife to be in a passion!--let I tell the lady, it be an
impudent thing, beg their pardon, and as imprudent as impudent, for a
wife to be in a passion, if she mean not eternal separation, or wicked
defiance, by it: for be it not reject at once all that expostulatory
meekness, and gentle reasoning, mingle with sigh as gentle, and grace
with bent knee, supplicate hand, and eye lift up to your imperial
countenance, just run over, that you should make a reconciliation
speedy, and as last as speedy? even suppose the husband be in the
wrong, will not this be so give the great force to her
expostulation?
now I think of it, a man should be in the wrong now-and-then, to make his
wife shine. Miss Howe tell my charmer, that adversity be her shining-
time. 'tis a generous thing in a man to make his wife shine at his own
expense: to give she leave to triumph over he by patient reasoning: for
be he to be too imperial to acknowledge his fault on the spot, she will
find the benefit of her duty and submission in future, and in the high
opinion he will conceive of her prudence and obligingness--and so, by
degree, she will become her master's master.
but for a wife to come up with kemboed arm, the other hand throw out,
perhaps with a point finger--look ye here, sir!--take notice!--if you
be wrong, Iwill be wrong!--if you be in a passion, Iwill be in a passion!
--Rebuff, for rebuff, sir!--if you fly, Iwill tear!--if you swear, Iwill
curse!--and the same room, and the same bed, shall not hold we, sir!-
For, remember, I be married, Sir!--I be a wife, sir!--you cannot help
yourself, sir!--your honour, as well as your peace, be in my keeping!
and, if you like not this treatment, you may have bad, Sir!
ah! Jack! Jack! what man, who have observe these thing, either imply
or express, in other family, would wish to be a husband!
Dorcas find this paper in one of the drawer of her lady's dressing-
table. she be reperuse it, as she suppose, when the honest wench
carry my message to desire she to favour I at the tea-table; for she
see her pop a paper into the drawer as she come in; and there, on her
mistressbe go to meet I in the dining-room, she find it; and to be
this.
but I have well not to have have a copy of it, as far as I know: for,
determine as I be before upon my operation, it instantly turn all my
resolution in her favour. yet I would give something to be convince
that she do not pop it into her drawer before the wench, in order for I
to see it; and perhaps (if I be to take notice of it) to discover
whether Dorcas, accord to Miss Howe's advice, be most my friend, or
shebe.
the very suspicion of this will do she no good: for I cannot bear to be
artfully deal with. People love to enjoy their own peculiar talent in
monopoly, as argument against I in her behalf. but I know ever tittle
thou canst say upon it. Spare therefore thy wambling nonsense, I desire
thee; and leave this sweet excellence and I to our fate: that will
determine for we, as it shall please itself: for as Cowley say,
an unseen hand make all our move:
and some be great, and some be small;
some climb to good, some from great fortune fall:
some wise man, and some fool we call:
figure, alas! of speech!--for destiny play we all.
but, after all, I be sorry, almost sorry (for how shall I do to be quite
sorry, when it be not give to I to be so?) that I cannot, until I have
make further trial, resolve upon wedlock.
I have just read over again this intended answer to my proposal: and how
I adore she for it!
but yet; another yet!--She have not give it or send it to me.--It be not
therefore her answer. it be not write for I, though to I.
Nay, she have not intend to send it to I: she have even tear it, perhaps
with indignation, as think it too good for I. by this action she
absolutely retract it. why then do my foolish fondness seek to
establish for she the same merit in my heart, as if she avow it?
Pr'ythee, dear Belford, once more, leave we to our fate; and do not thou
interpose with thy nonsense, to weaken a spirit already too squeamish,
and strengthen a conscience that have declare itself of her party.
then again, remember thy recent discovery, Lovelace! remember she
indifference, attend with all the appearance of contempt and hatred.
view she, even now, wrapt up in reserve and mystery; meditate plot, as
far as thou know, against the sovereignty thou hast, by right of
conquest, obtain over she. remember, in short, all thou hast
threaten to remember against this insolent beauty, who be a rebel to
the power she have list under.
but yet, how dost thou propose to subdue thy sweet enemy!--abhorre be
force, be the necessity of force, if that can be avoid! there be no
triumph in force--no conquest over the will--no prevail by gentle
degree over the gentle passions!--force be the devil!
my cursed character, as I have often say, be against I at set out
--Yet be she not a woman? cannot I find one yield or but half-
yield moment, if she do not absolutely hate I?
but with what can I tempt her?--riches she be bear to, and despise,
know what they be. JEWELS and ornament, to a mind so much a jewel,
and so richly set, her worthy consciousness will not let her value. LOVE
--if she be susceptible of love, it seem to be so much under the
direction of prudence, that one unguarded moment, I fear, cannot be
reasonably hop for: and so much VIGILANCE, so much apprehensiveness,
that her fear be ever aforehand with her danger. then her love or
VIRTUE seem to be principle, native principle, or, if not native, so
deeply rooted, that its fibre have strike into her heart, and, as she
grow up, so blended and twist themselves with the string of life, that
I doubt there be no separating of the one without cut the other
asunder.
what then can be do to make such a matchless creature get over the
first test, in order to put she to the grand proof, whether once
overcome, she will not be always overcome?
our mother and her nymph say, I be a perfect Craven, and no Lovelace:
and so I think. but this be no simpering, smile charmer, as I have
find other to be, when I have touch upon affect subject at a
distance; as once or twice I have try to she, the mother introduce
they (to make sex palliate the freedom to sex) when only we three
together. she be above the affectation of not seem to understand you.
she show by her displeasure, and a fierceness not natural to her eye,
that she judge of an impure heart by an impure mouth, and dart dead at
once even the embryo hope of an encroaching lover, however distantly
insinuate, before the meaning hint can dawn into double entendre.
by my faith, Jack, as I sit gaze upon she, my whole soul in my eye,
contemplate her perfection, and thinking, when I have see her easy
and serene, what would be her thought, do she know my heart as well as
I know it; when I behold her disturbed and jealous, and think of the
justness of her apprehension, and that she cannot fear so much as there
be room for she to fear; my heart often misgive I.
and must, think I, o creature so divinely excellent, and so beloved of my
soul, those arm, those encircle arm, that would make a monarch happy,
be use to repel brutal force; all their strength, unavailingly perhaps,
exert to repel it, and to defend a person so delicately frame? can
violence enter into the heart of a wretch, who might entitle himself to
all her willing yet virtuous love, and make the blessing he aspireth
after, her duty to confer?--begone, villain-purpose! sink ye all to the
hell that could only inspire ye! and I be then ready to throw myself at
her foot, to confess my villainous design, to avow my repentance, and
put it out of my power to act unworthily by such an excellence.
how then come it, that all these compassionate, and, as some would call
they, honest sensibility go off!--why, Miss Howe will tell thee: she
say, I be the devil.--by my conscience, I think he have at present a
great share in I.
there's ingenuousness!--how I lie myself open to thee!--but seest thou not,
that the more I say against myself, the less room there be for thee
to take I to task?--o Belford, Belford! I cannot, cannot (at least at
present) I cannot marry.
then her family, my bitter enemy--to supple to they, or if I do not, to
make she as unhappy as she can be from my attempts----
then do she not love they too much, I too little?
she now seem to despise I: Miss Howe declare, that she really do
despise I. to be despise by a WIFE--what a thought be that!--To be
excel by a wife too, in every part of praise-worthy knowledge!--to
take lesson, to take instruction, from a wife!--more than despise I,
she herself have take time to consider whether she do not hate me:--
I hate you, Lovelace, with my whole heart, say she to I but yesterday!
my soul be above thee, man!--urge I not to tell thee how sincerely I
think my soul above thee!--How poor indeed be I then, even in my own
heart!--so visible a superiority, to so proud a spirit as mine!--and here
from below, from below indeed! from these woman! I be so goad on----
yet 'tis poor too, to think myself a machine in the hand of such
wretches.--I be no machine.--lovelace, thou art base to thyself, but to
suppose thyself a machine.
but have go thus far, I should be unhappy, if after marriage, in the
petulance of ill humour, I have it to reproach myself, that I do not try
she to the utmost. and yet I donot know how it be, but this lady, the
moment I come into her presence, half-assimilate I to her own virtue.--
once or twice (to say nothing of her triumph over I on Sunday night) I
be prevail upon to fluster myself, with an intention to make some
advance, which, if oblige to recede, I might lay upon raise spirit:
but the instant I behold she, I be soberize into awe and reverence: and
the majesty of her even visible purity first damp, and then extinguish,
my double flame.
what a surprisingly powerful effect, so much and so long in my power she!
so instigate by some of her own sex, and so stimulate by passion I!--
how can this be account for in a Lovelace!
but what a heap of stuff have I written!--How have I be run away with!
--By what?--canst thou say by what?--O thou lurk varletess CONSCIENCE!
--is it thou that hast thus make I of party against myself?--How cam
thou in?--In what disguise, thou egregious haunter of my more agreeable
hours?--stand thou, with fate, but neuter in this controversy; and, if I
cannot do credit to human nature, and to the female sex, by bring down
such an angel as this to class with and adorn it, (for adorn it she do
in her very foible,) then I be all your's, and never will resist you
more.
here I arise. I shake myself. the window be open. always the
troublesome bosom-visiter, the intruder, be flown.--i see it yet!--and
now it lessen to my ache eye!--and now the cleft air be close after it,
and it be out of sight!--and once more I be
ROBERT LOVELACE.
LETTER XLIX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, MAY 23.
well do I, and but just in time to conclude to have do with Mrs.
Fretchville and the house: for here Mennell have declare, that he cannot
in conscience and honour go any farther.--He would not for the world be
accessory to the deceiving of such a lady!--i be a fool to let either
you or he see she; for ever since ye have both have scruple, which
neither would have have, be a woman to have be in the question.
well, I cannot help it!
Mennell have, however, though with some reluctance, consent to write I
a letter, provide I will allow it to be the last step he shall take in
this affair.
I presume, I tell he, that if I could cause Mrs. Fretchville's woman to
supply his place, he would have no objection to that.
none, he say--but be it not pity--
a pitiful fellow! such a ridiculous kind of pity his, as those silly
soul have, who would not kill an innocent chicken for the world; but
when kill to their hand, be always the most greedy devourer of it.
now this letter give the servant the small-pox: and she have give it to
her unhappy vapourish lady. vapourish people be perpetual subject for
disease to work upon. name but the malady, and it be theirs in a
moment. ever fit for inoculation.--the physical tribe's milch-cow.
--a vapourish or splenetic patient be a fiddle for the doctor; and they
be eternally play upon it. sweet music do it make they. all their
difficulty, except a case extraordinary happen, (as poor Mrs.
Fretchville's, who have realize her apprehension,) be but to hold their
countenance, while their patient be draw up a bill of indictment
against himself;--and when they have hear it, proceed to punish--the
right word for prescribe. why should they not, when the criminal have
confess his guilt?--And punish they generally do with a vengeance.
yet, silly toad too, now I think of it. for why, when they know they
cannot do good, may they not as well endeavour to gratify, as to
nauseate, the patient's palate?
be I a physician, Iwould get all the trade to myself: for Malmsey, and
Cyprus, and the generous product of the Cape, a little disguised, should
be my principal dos: as these would create new spirit, how would the
revive patient covet the physic, and adore the doctor!
give all the parader of the faculty whom thou know this hint.--there
could but one inconvenience arise from it. the apothecary would find
their medicine cost they something: but the demand for quantity would
answer that: since the honest NURSE would be the patient's taster;
perpetually require repetition of the last cordial julap.
well, but to the letter--yet what need of further explanation after the
hint in my former? the widow cannot be remove; and thatbe enough: and
Mennell's work be over; and his conscience leave to plague he for his own
sin, and not another man's: and, very possibly, plague enough will give
he for those.
this letter be direct, to Robert Lovelace, Esq. or, in his absence, to
his Lady. she have refuse dining with I, or see I: and I be out
when it come. she open it: so be my lady by her own consent, proud and
saucy as she be.
I be glad at my heart that it come before we entirely make up. she would
else perhaps have conclude it to be contrive for a delay: and now,
moreover, we can accommodate our old and new quarrel together; and
thatbe contrivance, you know. but how be her dear haughty heart humble
to what it be when I know she first, that she can apprehend any delay
from I; and have nothing to do but to vex at they!
I come in to dinner. she send I down the letter, desire my excuse for
opening it.--Did it before she be aware. Lady-pride, Belford!
recollection, then retrogradation!
I request to see she upon it that moment.--but she desire to suspend
our interview till morning. I will bring she to own, before I have do
with she, that she cannot see I too often.
my impatience be so great, on an occasion so unexpected, that I could
not help write to tell she, 'how much vex I be at the accident: but
that it need not delay my happy day, as that do not depend upon the
house. [she know that before, shewill think; and so do I.] and as Mrs.
Fretchville, by Mr. Mennell, so handsomely express her concern upon it,
and her wish that it could suit we to bear with the unavoidable delay,
I hop, that go down to the Lawn for two or three of the summer-
month, when I be make the happy of man, would be favourable to all
round.'
the dear creature take this incident to heart, I believe: she have send
word to my repeat request to see she notwithstanding her denial, that
she cannot till the morning: it shall be then at six o'clock, if I
please!
to be sure I do please!
can see she but once a day now, Jack!
do I tell thee, that I write a letter to my cousin Montague, wonder
that I hear not from Lord M. as the subject be so very interesting! in
it I acquaint she with the house I be about taking; and with Mrs.
Fretchville's vapourish delay.
I be very loth to engage my own family, either man or woman, in this
affair; but I must take my measure securely: and already they all think
as bad of I as they well can. you observe by my Lord M.'s letter to
yourself, that the well-manner'd peer be afraid I should play this
admirable creature one of my usual dog's trick.
I have receive just now an answer from Charlotte.
charlot i'n't well. a stomach disorder!
no wonder a girl's stomach should plague she. a single woman; thatbe it.
when she have a man to plague, it will have something besides itself to
prey upon. know thou not moreover, that man be the woman's sun; woman
be the man's earth?--how dreary, how desolate, the earth, that the sun
shin not upon!
Poor Charlotte! but I hear she be not well: that encourage I to
write to she; and to express myself a little concerned, that she have not,
of her own accord, think of a visit in town to my charmer.
here follow a copy of her letter. thou wilt see by it that every little
monkey be to catechise I. they all depend upon my good-nature.
M. HALL, MAY 22.
DEAR COUSIN,
we have be in daily hope for a long time, I must call it, of hear
that the happy knot be tie. my Lord have be very much out of order:
and yet nothing would serve he, but he would himself write an answer to
your letter. it be the only opportunity he should ever have, perhaps,
to throw in a little good advice to you, with the hope of its being of
any signification; and he have be several hour in a day, as his gout
would let he, busy in it. it want now only his last revisal. he
hop it will have the great weight with you, as it appear all in his
own hand-writing.
indeed, Mr. Lovelace, his worthy heart be wrapt up in you. I wish you
love yourself but half as well. but I believe too, that if all the
family love you less, you would love yourself more.
his Lordship have be very busy, at the time he could not write, in
consult Pritchard about those estate which he propose to transfer to
you on the happy occasion, that he may answer your letter in the most
acceptable manner; and show, by effect, how kindly he take your
invitation. I assure you he be mighty proud of it.
as for myself, I be not at all well, and have not be for some week
past, with my old stomach-disorder. I have certainly else before now have
do myself the honour you wonder I have not do myself. Lady Betty,
who would have accompany I, (for we have lay it all out,) have be
exceedingly busy in her law-affair; her antagonist, who be actually on
the spot, have be make proposal for an accommodation. but you may
assure yourself, that when our dear relation-elect shall be enter upon
the new habitation you tell I of, we will do ourselves the honour of
visit she; and if any delay arise from the dear lady's want of
courage, (which consider her man, let I tell you, may very well be,)
we will endeavour to inspire she with it, and be sponsor for you;--for,
cousin, I believe you have nee to be christen over again before you
be entitle to so great a blessing. what think you?
just now, my Lord tell I, he will dispatch a man on purpose with his
letter to-morrow: so I need not to have write. but now I have, let
it go; and by Empson, who set out directly on his return to town.
my good compliment, and sister's, to the most deserving lady in the
world [you will need no other direction to the person mean] conclude I
your affectionate cousin and servant,
charl. MONTAGUE.
***
Thou se how seasonably this letter come. I hope my Lord will write
nothing but what I may show to my beloved. I have actually send she up
this letter of Charlotte's, and hope for happy effect from it.
R.L.
***
[the Lady, in her next letter, give Miss Howe an account of what pass
between Mr. Lovelace and herself. she resent his behaviour with her
usual dignity. but when she come to mention Mr. Mennell's letter,
she re-urge Miss Howe to perfect her scheme for her deliverance;
be resolve to leave he. but, date again, on his send up to
her Miss Montague's letter, she alter her mind, and desire she to
suspend for the present her application to Mrs. Townsend.]
I have begin, say she, to suspect all he have say of Mrs. Fretchville and
her house; and even Mr. Mennell himself, though so well-appear a man.
but now that I find Mr. Lovelace have apprize his relation of his intent
to take it, and have engage some of the lady to visit I there, I could
hardly forbear blame myself for censure he as capable of so vile an
imposture. but may he not thank himself for act so very
unaccountably, and take such needlessly-awry step, as he have do,
embarrassing, as I tell he, his own meaning, if they be good?
LETTER L
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY, MAY 24.
[he give his friend an account of their interview that morning; and of
the happy effect of his cousin Montague's letter in his favour. her
reserve, however, he tell he, be not absolutely banish. but
this he impute to form.]
it be not in the power of woman, say he, to be altogether sincere on
these occasion. but why?--do they think it so great a disgrace to be
find out to be really what they be?
I regret the illness of Mrs. Fretchville; as the intention I have to
fix her dear self in the house before the happy knot be tie, would have
set she in that independence in appearance, as well as fact, which be
necessary to show to all the world that her choice be free; and as the
lady of my family would have be proud to make their court to she
there, while the settlement and our equipage be prepare. but, on
any other account, there be no great matter in it; since when my happy
day be over, we could, with so much convenience, go down to the Lawn, to
my Lord M.'s, and to Lady Sarah's or Lady Betty's, in turn; which would
give full time to provide ourselves with servant and other
accommodation.
how sweetly the charmer listen!
I ask she, if she have have the small-pox?
ten thousand pound the bad in my estimation, think I, if she have
not; for no one of her charming grace can I dispense with.
'twas always a doubtful point with her mother and Mrs. Norton, she own.
but although she be not afraid of it, she choose not unnecessarily to
rush into place where it be.
right, think I--else, I say, it would not have be amiss for she to
see the house before she go into the country; for if she like it not,
I be not oblige to have it.
she ask, if she might take a copy of Miss Montague's letter?
I say, she might keep the letter itself, and send it to Miss Howe, if
she please; for that, I suppose, be her intention.
she bow her head to I.
there, Jack! I shall have she courtesy to I by-and-by, I question not.
what a-devil have I to do, to terrify the sweet creature by my termagant
projects!--yet it be not amiss, I believe, to make she afraid of I.
she say, I be an unpolite man. and every polite instance from such a
one be deem a favour.
talk of the settlement, I tell she I have rather that Pritchard
(mention by my cousin Charlotte) have not be consult on this
occasion. Pritchard, indeed, be a very honest man; and have be for a
generation in the family; and know of the estate, and the condition of
they, well than either my Lord or myself: but Pritchard, like other old
man, be diffident and slow; and value himself upon his skill as a
draught-man; and, for the sake of the paltry reputation, must have all
his form preserve, be an imperial crown to depend upon his dispatch.
I kiss her unrepulsing hand no less than five time during this
conversation. Lord, Jack, how my generous heart run over!--she be quite
oblige at parting.--She in a manner ask I leave to retire; to
reperuse Charlotte's letter.--i think she bend her knee to I; but I
willnot be sure.--how happy might we both have be long ago, have the dear
creature be always as complaisant to I! for I do love respect, and,
whether I deserve it or not, always have it, till I know this proud
beauty.
and now, Belford, be we in a train, or the deuce be in it. every
fortified town have its strong and its weak place. I have carry on my
attack against the impregnable part. I have not doubt but I shall
either shine or smuggle she out of her cloke, since she and Miss Howe
have intend to employ a smuggler against me.--all we wait for now be
my Lord's letter.
but I have like to have forget to tell thee, that we have be not a
little alarm, by some inquiry that have be make after I and my
beloved by a man of good appearance; who yesterday procure a tradesman
in the neighbourhood to send for Dorcas: of whom he ask several
question relate to we; particularly (as we board and lodge in one
house) whether we be marry?
this have give my beloved great uneasiness. and I could not help
observe upon it, to she, how right a thing it be that we have give out
below that we be marry. the inquiry, most probably, I say, be from
her brother's quarter; and now perhaps that our marriage be own, we
should hear no more of his machination. the person, it seem, be
curious to know the day that the ceremony be perform. but Dorcas
refuse to give he any other particular than that we be marry; and
she be the more reserved, as he decline to tell she the motif of his
inquiry.
LETTER LI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MAY 24.
the devil take this uncle of mine! he have at last send I a letter which
I cannot show, without expose the head of our family for a fool. a
confound parcel of pop-gun have he let off upon I. I be in hope he
have exhaust his whole stock of this sort in his letter to you.--To keep
it back, to delay send it, till he have recollect all this farrago of
nonsense--confound his wisdom of nation, if so much of it be to be
scrap together, in disgrace of itself, to make one egregious simpleton!
--But I be glad I be fortify with this piece of flagrant folly,
however; since, in all human affair, the convenient be so mingled, that
there be no have the one without the other.
I have already offer the bill enclose in it to my beloved; and read to
her part of the letter. but she refuse the bill: and, as I be in cash
myself, I shall return it. she seem very desirous to peruse the whole
letter. and when I tell she, that, be it not for expose the writer,
I would oblige she, she say, it would not be expose his Lordship to
show it to she; and that she always prefer the heart to the head. I
know her meaning; but do not thank she for it.
all that make for I in it I will transcribe for she--yet, hang it, she
shall have the letter, and my soul with it, for one consent kiss.
***
she have get the letter from I without the reward. deuce take I, if I
have the courage to propose the condition. a new character this of
bashfulness in thy friend. I see, that a truly modest woman may make
even a confident man keep his distance. by my soul, Belford, I believe,
that nine woman in ten, who fall, fall either from their own vanity or
levity, or for want of circumspection and proper reserve.
***
I do intend to take my reward on she return a letter so favourable
to we both. but she send it to I, seal up, by Dorcas. I might have
think that there be two or three hint in it, that she would be too
nice immediately to appear to. I send it to thee; and here will stop,
to give thee time to read it. return it as soon as thou hast peruse it.
LETTER LII
LORD M. TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUESDAY, MAY 23.
it be a long lane that have no turning.--do not despise I for my proverb
--you know I be always fond of they; and if you have be so too, it
would have be the well for you, let I tell you. I dare swear, the
fine lady you be so likely to be soon happy with, will be far from
despise they; for I be tell, that she write well, and that all her
letter be full of sentence. God convert you! for nobody but he and
this lady can.
I have no manner of doubt but that you will marry, as your father, and
all your ancestor, do before you: else you would have have no title to
be my heir; nor can your descendant have any title to be your's, unless
they be legitimate; thatbe worth your remembrance, Sir!--No man be
always a fool, every man be sometimes.--But your folly, I hope, be now
at an end.
I know, you have vow revenge against this fine lady's family: but no
more of that, now. you must look upon they all as your relation; and
forgive and forget. and when they see you make a good husband and a good
father, [which God send, for all our sake!] they will wonder at their
nonsensical antipathy, and beg your pardon: but while they think you a
vile fellow, and a rake, how can they either love you, or excuse their
daughter?
and methink I could wish to give a word of comfort to the lady, who,
doubtless, must be under great fear, how she shall be able to hold in
such a wild creature as you have hitherto be. I would hint to she,
that by strong argument, and gentle word, she may do any thing with
you; for though you be apt to be hot, gentle word will cool you, and
bring you into the temper that be necessary for your cure.
would to God, my poor lady, your aunt, who be dead and go, have be a
proper patient for the same remedy! God rest her soul! no reflection
upon her memory! worth be well know by want! I know shebe now; and if
I have go first, she would by this time have know mine.
there be great wisdom in that saying, God send I a friend, that may tell
I of my fault: if not, an enemy, and he will. not that I be your
enemy; and that you well know. the more noble any one be, the more
humble; so bear with I, if you would be think noble.--am I not your
uncle? and do I not design to be well to you than your father could be?
Nay, I will be your father too, when the happy day come; since you
desire it: and pray make my compliment to my dear niece; and tell she, I
wonder much that she have so long defer your happiness.
pray let she know as that I will present she (not you) either my
Lancashire seat or the Lawn in Hertfordshire, and settle upon she a
thousand pound a year penny-rent; to show she, that we be not a family
to take base advantage: and you may have writing draw, and settle as
you will.--hon Pritchard have the rent-roll of both these estate; and
as he have be a good old servant, I recommend he to your lady's favour.
I have already consult he: he will tell you what be good for you, and
most pleasing to I.
I be still very bad with my gout, but will come in a litter, as soon as
the day be fix; it would be the joy of my heart to join your hand.
and, let I tell you, if you do not make the good of husband to so good
a young lady, and one who have have so much courage for your sake, I will
renounce you; and settle all I can upon she and shebe by you, and leave
you out of the question.
if any thing be want for your further security, I be ready to give it;
though you know, that my word have always be look upon as my bond.
and when the Harlowes know all this, let we see whether they be able to
blush, and take shame to themselves.
Lady Sarah and Lady Betty want only to know the day, to make all the
country round they blaze, and all their tenant mad. and, if any one of
mine be sober upon the occasion, Pritchard shall eject he. and, on the
birth of the first child, if a son, I will do something more for you, and
repeat all our rejoicing.
I ought indeed to have write soon. but I know, that if you think
I long, and be in haste as to your nuptial, you would write and tell
I so. but my gout be very troublesome: and I be but a slow writer, you
know, at good: for composing be a thing that, though formerly I be very
ready at it, (as my Lord Lexington use to say,) yet have leave it off a
great while, I be not so now. and I choose, on this occasion, to write
all out of my own hand and memory; and to give you my good advice; for I
may never have such an opportunity again. you have have [God mend you!] a
strange way of turn your back upon all I have say: this once, I hope,
you will be more attentive to the advice I give you for your own good.
I have still another end; nay, two other end.
the one be, that now you be upon the border of wedlock, as I may say,
and all your wild oats will be sow, I would give you some instruction
as to your public as well as private behaviour in life; which, intend
you so much good as I do, you ought to hear; and perhaps would never have
listen to, on any less extraordinary occasion.
the second be, that your dear lady-elect (who be it seem herself so fine
and so sententious a writer) will see by this, that it be not our fault,
nor for want of the good advice, that you be not a well man than you
have hitherto be.
and now, in a few word, for the conduct I would wish you to follow in
public, as well as in private, if you would think I worthy of advise.
--It shall be short; so be not uneasy.
as to the private life: love your lady as she deserve. let your action
praise you. be a good husband; and so give the lie to all your enemy;
and make they ashamed of their scandal. and let we have pride in
say, that Miss Harlowe have not do either herself or family any
discredit by come among we. do this; and I, and Lady Sarah, and Lady
Betty, will love you for ever.
as to your public conduct: this as follow be what I could wish: but I
reckon your lady's wisdom will put we both right--no disparagement, Sir;
since, with all your wit, you have not hitherto show much wisdom, you
know.
get into parliament as soon as you can: for you have talon to make a
great figure there. who so proper to assist in make new hold law,
as those whom no law in be could hold?
then, for so long as you will give attendance in St. Stephen's chapel--
its be call a chapel, I hope, will not disgust you: I be sure I have
know many a riot there--a speaker have a hard time of it! but we peer
have more decorum--but what be I go to say?--I must go back.
for so long as you will give your attendance in parliament, for so long
will you be out of mischief; out of private mischief, at least: and may
St. Stephen's fate be your's, if you wilfully do public mischief!
when a new election come, you will have two or three borough, you know,
to choose out of:--but if you stay till then, I have rather you be for
the shire.
you will have interest enough, I be sure; and be so handsome a man,
the woman will make their husband vote for you.
I shall long to read your speech. I expect you will speak, if occasion
offer, the very first day. you want no courage, and think highly enough
of yourself, and lowly enough of every body else, to speak on all
occasion.
as to the method of the house, you have spirit enough, I fear, to be too
much above they: take care of that.--I donot so much fear your want of
good-manner. to man, you want no decency, if they donot provoke you: as
to that, I wish you would only learn to be as patient of contradiction
from other, as you would have other people be to you.
although I would not have you to be a courtier; neither would I have you
to be a malcontent. I remember (for I have it down) what my old friend
Archibald Hutcheson say; and it be a very good saying--(to Mr.
Secretary Craggs, I think it was)--'I look upon an administration, as
entitle to every vote I can with good conscience give it; for a house of
common should not needlessly put drag upon the wheel of government:
and when I have not give it my vote, it be with regret: and, for my
country's sake, I wish with all my heart the measure have be such as I
could have approve.'
and another say he have, which be this: 'neither can an opposition,
neither can a ministry, be always wrong. to be a plumb man therefore
with either, be an infallible mark, that that man must mean more and
bad than he will own he do mean.'
be these saying bad, Sir? be they to be despised?--well, then, why
should I be despise for remember they, and quote they, as I love to
do? let I tell you, if you love my company more than you do, you would
not be the bad for it. I may say so without any vanity; since it be
other man's wisdom, and not my own, that I be so fond of.
but to add a word or two more on this occasion; and I may never have such
another; for you must read this through--love honest man, and herd with
they, in the house and out of the house; by whatever name they be
dignified or distinguish: keep good man company, and you shall be out
of their number. but do I, or do I not, write this before?--writing,
at so many different time, and such a quantity, one may forget.
you may come in for the title when I be dead and go--God help me!--So I
would have you keep an equilibrium. if once you get the name of be a
fine speaker, you may have any thing: and, to be sure, you have naturally
a great deal of elocution; a tongue that would delude an angel, as the
woman say--to their sorrow, some of they, poor creatures!--a lead man
in the house of commons be a very important character; because that house
have the giving of money: and money make the mare to go; ay, and queen
and king too, sometimes, to go in a manner very different from what they
might otherwise choose to go, let I tell you.
however, methink, I would not have you take a place neither--it will
double your value, and your interest, if it be believe, that you will
not: for, as you will then stand in no man's way, you will have no envy;
but pure sterling respect; and both side will court you.
for your part, you will not want a place, as some other do, to piece up
their break fortune. if you can now live reputably upon two thousand
pound a year, it will be hard if you cannot hereafter live upon seven or
eight--less you will not have, if you oblige I; as now, by marry so
fine a lady, very much you will--and all this, and above Lady Betty's and
Lady Sarah's favour! what, in the name of wonder, could possibly
possess the proud harlowes!--that son, that son of theirs!--But, for his
dear sister's sake, I will say no more of he.
I never be offer a place myself: and the only one I would have take,
have I be offer it, be master of the buckhound; for I love hunting
when I be young; and it carry a good sound with it for we who live in
the country. often have I think of that excellent old adage; he that
eat the king's goose, shall be choke with his feather. I wish to the
Lord, this be thoroughly consider by place-hunter! it would be well
for they, and for their poor family.
I could say a great deal more, and all equally to the purpose. but
really I be tired; and so I doubt be you. and besides, I would reserve
something for conversation.
my niece Montague, and Lady Sarah and Lady Betty, join in compliment to
my niece that be to be. if she would choose to have the knot tie among
we, pray tell she that we shall all see it securely do: and we will
make all the country ring and blaze for a week together. but so I
believe I say before.
if any thing far may be needful toward promote your reciprocal
felicity, let I know it; and how you order about the day; and all that.
the enclose bill be very much at your service. 'tis payable at sight,
as whatever else you may have occasion for shall be.
so God bless you both; and make thing as convenient to my gout as you
can; though, be it whenever it will, I will hobble to you; for I long to
see you; and still more to see my niece; and be (in expectation of that
happy opportunity)
your most affectionate Uncle
M.
LETTER LIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
THURSDAY, MAY 25.
Thou seest, Belford, how we now drive before the wind.--the dear creature
now come almost at the first word, whenever I desire the honour of her
company. I tell she last night, that apprehend delay from Pritchard's
slowness, I be determined to leave it to my Lord to make his compliment
in his own way; and have actually that afternoon put my writing into the
hand of a very eminent lawyer, Counsellor Willians, with direction for
he to draw up settlement from my own estate, and conformably to those
of my mother! which I put into his hand at the same time. it have be,
I assure she, no small part of my concern, that her frequent
displeasure, and our mutual misapprehension, have hinder I from
advise with she before on this subject. indeed, indeed, my dearest
life, say I, you have hitherto afford I but a very thorny courtship.
she be silent. kindly silent. for well know I, that she could have
recriminate upon I with a vengeance. but I be willing to see if she
be not loth to disoblige I now. I comfort myself, I say, with the
hope that all my difficulty be now over; and that every past
disobligation would be bury in oblivion.
now, Belford, I have actually deposit these writing with Counsellor
Williams; and I expect the draught in a week at farth. so shall be
doubly armed. for if I attempt, and fail, these shall be ready to throw
in, to make she have patience with I till I can try again.
I have more contrivance still in embryo. I could tell thee of an
hundred, and yet hold another hundred in petto, to pop in as I go along,
to excite thy surprize, and to keep up thy attention. nor rave thou at
I; but, if thou art my friend, think of Miss Howe's letter, and of her
smuggling scheme. all owe to my fair captive's information
incitement. be I not a villain, a fool, a Beelzebub, with they already?
--yet no harm do by I, nor so much as attempt?
every thing of this nature, the dear creature answer, (with a downcast
eye, and a blushing cheek,) she leave to I.
I propose my Lord's chapel for the celebration, where we might have the
presence of Lady Betty, Lady Sarah, and my two cousin Montague.
she seem not to favour a public celebration! and wave this subject for
the present. I doubt not but she would be as willing as I to decline a
public wedding; so I press not this matter far just then.
but pattern I actually produce; and a jeweller be to bring as this day
several set of jewel for her choice. but the pattern she would not
open. she sigh at the mention of they: the second pattern, she say,
that have be offer to she:* and very peremptorily forbid the
jeweller's come; as well as decline my offer of cause my mother's to
be new-set, at least for the present.
* see Vol. I. Letter XLI.
I do assure thee, Belford, I be in earnest in all this. my whole estate
be nothing to I, put in competition with her hop-for favour.
she then tell I, that she have put into write her opinion of my general
proposal; and there have express her mind as to clothe and jewel: but
on my strange behaviour to she (for no cause that she know of) on Sunday
night, she have tear the paper in two.
I earnestly press she to let I be favour with a sight of this paper,
tear as it be. and, after some hesitation, she withdraw, and send it to
I by Dorcas.
I peruse it again. it be in a manner new to I, though I have read it
so lately: and, by my soul, I could hardly stand it. an hundred
admirable creature I call she to myself. but I charge thee, write not
a word to I in her favour, if thou mean her well; for, if I spare
she, it must be all ex mero motu.
you may easily suppose, when I be re-admit to her presence, that I
run over in her praise, and in vow of gratitude, and everlaste love.
but herebe the devil; she still receive all I say with reserve; or if
it be not with reserve, she receive it so much as her due, that she be
not at all raise by it. some woman be undo by praise, by flattery.
I myself, a man, be proud of praise. perhaps thou wilt say, that those
be most proud of it who least deserve it; as those be of rich and
grandeur who be not bear to either. I own, that to be superior to these
foible, it require a soul. have I not then a soul?--surely, I have.--
let I then be consider as an exception to the rule.
now have I foundation to go upon in my term. my Lord, in the exuberance
of his generosity, mention a thousand pound a year penny-rent. this I
know, that be I to marry this lady, he would rather settle upon she all
he have a mind to settle, than upon I. he have event threaten, that if
I prove not a good husband to she, he will leave all he can at his death
from I to she. yet consider not that a woman so perfect can never be
displeased with her husband but to his disgrace: for who will blame she?
--another reason why a LOVELACE should not wish to marry a CLARISSA.
but what a pretty fellow of an uncle be this foolish peer, to think of
make a wife independent of her emperor, and a rebel of course; yet
smart himself for an error of this kind!
my beloved, in her tear paper, mention but two hundred pound a year,
for her separate use. I insist upon her name a large sum. she say
it might be three; and I, for fear she should suspect very large offer,
name only five; but add the entire disposal of all arrear in her
father's hand for the benefit of Mrs. Norton, or whom she please.
she say, that the good woman would be uneasy if any thing more than a
competency be do for she. she be more for suit all her
disposition of this kind, she say, to the usual way of life of the
person. to go beyond it, be but to put the benefit upon project,
or to make they awkward in a new state; when they might shine in that to
which they be accustom. and to put it into so good a mother's power
to give her son a beginning in his business at a proper time; yet to
leave she something for herself, to set she above want, or above the
necessity of take back from her child what she have be enable to
bestow upon he; would be the height of such a worthy parent's ambition.
here's prudence! here's judgment in so young a creature! how do I hate
the Harlowes for produce such an angel!--o why, why, do she refuse my
sincere address to tie the knot before we come to this house!
but yet, what mortify my pride be, that this exalt creature, if I
be to marry she, would not be govern in her behaviour to I by love,
but by generosity merely, or by blind duty; and have rather live single,
than be mine.
I cannot bear this. I would have the woman whom I honour with my name,
if ever I confer this honour upon any, forego even her superior duty
for I. I would have she look after I when I go out as far as she can
see I, as my Rosebud after her Johnny; and meet I at my return with
rapture. I would be the subject of her dream, as well as of her wake
thought. I would have she think every moment lose that be not pass
with I: sing to I, read to I, play to I when I please: no joy so
great as in obey I. when I should be incline to love, overwhelm I
with it; when to be serious or solitary, if apprehensive of intrusion,
retire at a nod; approach I only if I smile encouragement: steal
into my presence with silence; out of it, if not notice, on tiptoe. be
a lady easy to all my pleasure, and value those most who most
contribute to they; only sigh in private, that it be not herself at
the time. thus of old do the contend wife of the honest patriarch;
each recommend she handmaid to her lord, as she think it would
oblige he, and look upon the genial product as her own.
the gentle Waller say, woman be bear to be controule. gentle as he
be, he know that. a tyrant husband make a dutiful wife. and why do
the sex love rake, but because they know how to direct their uncertain
will, and manage they?
***
another agreeable conversation. the day of day the subject. as to
fix a particular one, that need not be do, my charmer say, till the
settlement be complete. as to marry at my Lord's chapel, the
Ladies of my family present, that would be make a public affair of it;
and the dear creature observe, with regret, that it seem to be my
Lord's intention to make it so.
it could not be imagine, I say, but that his Lordship's set out in
a litter, and come to town, as well as his taste for glare, and the joy
he would take to see I married at last, and to her dear self, would give
it as much the air of a public marriage as if the ceremony be perform
at his own chapel, all the lady present.
I cannot, say she, endure the thought of a public day. it will carry
with it an air of insult upon my whole family. and for my part, if my
Lord will not take it amiss, [and perhaps he will not, as the motion come
not from himself, but from you, Mr. Lovelace,] I will very willingly
dispense with his Lordship's presence; the rather, as dress and
appearance will then be unnecessary; for I cannot bear to think of
deck my person while my parent be in tear.
how excellent this! yet do not her parent richly deserve to be in
tear?
see, Belford, with so charming a niceness, we might have be a long time
ago upon the verge of the state, and yet find a great deal to do before
we enter into it.
all obedience, all resignation--no will but she's. I withdraw, and write
directly to my Lord; and she not disapprove of it, I send it away. the
purport as follow; for I take no copy.
'that I be much oblige to his Lordship for his intended goodness to I
on an occasion the most solemn of my life. that the admirable Lady, whom
he so justly praise, think his Lordship's proposal in her favour too
high. that she choose not to make a public appearance, if, without
disoblige my friend, she could avoid it, till a reconciliation with
her own could be effect. that although she express a grateful sense
of his Lordship's consent to give she to I with his own hand; yet,
presume that the motive to this kind intention be rather to do she
honour, than it otherwise would have be his own choice, (especially as
travelling would be at this time so inconvenient to he,) she think it
advisable to save his Lordship trouble on this occasion; and hop he
would take as mean she decline the favour.
'that the Lawn will be most acceptable to we both to retire to; and the
rather, as it be so to his Lordship.
'but, if he please, the jointure may be make from my own estate; leave
to his Lordship's goodness the alternative.'
I conclude with tell he, 'that I have offer to present the Lady his
Lordship's bill; but on her decline to accept of it (have myself no
present occasion for it) I return it enclose, with my thank, &c.'
and be not this go a plaguy length? what a figure should I make in
rakish annal, if at last I should be catch in my own gin?
the sex may say what they will, but a poor innocent fellow have nee to
take great care of himself, when he dance upon the edge of the
matrimonial precipice. many a faint-hearted man, when he begin to jest,
or only design to ape gallantry, have be force into earnest, by be
over-prompt, and take at his word, not know how to own that he mean
less than the lady suppose he mean. I be the well enable to judge
that this must have be the case of many a sneak varlet; because I,
who know the female world as well as any man in it of my standing, be so
frequently in doubt of myself, and know not what to make of the matter.
then these little sly rogue, how they lie couchant, ready to spring upon
we harmless fellow the moment we be in their reach!--when the ice be
once break for they, how swiftly can they make to port!--mean time, the
subject they can least speak to, they most think of. nor can you talk of
the ceremony, before they have lay out in their mind how it be all to
be. little saucy-face designer! how first they draw themselves in,
then we!
but be all these thing as they will, Lord M. never in his life receive
so handsome a letter as this from his nephew
LOVELACE.
***
[the Lady, after have give to Miss Howe on the particular contain
in Mr. Lovelace's last letter, thus express herself:]
a principal consolation arise from these favourable appearance, be,
that I, who have now but one only friend, shall most probably, and if it
be not my own fault, have as many new one as there be person in Mr.
Lovelace's family; and this whether Mr. Lovelace treat I kindly or not.
and who know, but that, by degree, those new friend, by their rank and
merit, may have weight enough to get I restore to the favour of my
relation? till which can be effect, I shall not be tolerably easy.
Happy I never expect to be. Mr. Lovelace's mind and mine be vastly
different; different in essential.
but as matter be at present circumstance, I pray you, my dear friend,
to keep to yourself every thing that might bring discredit to he, if
revealed.--better any body expose a man than a wife, if I be to be his;
and what be say by you will be think to come from I.
it shall be my constant prayer, that all the felicity which this world
can afford may be your's: and that the Almighty will never suffer you nor
your's, to the remotest posterity, to want such a friend as my Anna Howe
have be to
her
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER LIV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
and now, that my beloved seem secure in my net, for my project upon the
vixen Miss Howe, and upon her mother: in which the officious prancer
Hickman be to come in for a dash.
but why upon her mother, methink thou askest, who, unknown to herself,
have only act, by the impulse, through thy agent Joseph Leman, upon the
folly of old Tony the uncle?
no matter for that: she believe she act upon her own judgment: and
deserve to be punish for pretend to judgment, when she have none.--
every live soul, but myself, I can tell thee, shall be punish, that
treat either cruelly or disrespectfully so adore a lady.--what a
plague! be it not enough that she be tease and torment in person by
I?
I have already break the matter to our three confederate; as a
suppose, not a resolve-on case indeed. and yet they know, that with
I, in a piece of mischief, execution, with its swift feel, be seldom
three pace behind projection, which hardly ever limp neither.
MOWBRAY be not against it. it be a scheme, he say, worthy of we: and we
have not do any thing for a good while that have make a noise.
BELTON, indeed, hesitate a little, because matter go wrong between he
and his Thomasine; and the poor fellow have not the courage to have his
sore place probe to the bottom.
TOURVILLE have start a fresh game, and shrug his shoulder, and should
not choose to go abroad at present, if I please. for I apprehend that
(from the nature of the project) there will be a kind of necessity to
travel, till all be blow over.
to I, one country be as good as another; and I shall soon, I suppose,
choose to quit this paltry island; except the mistress of my fate will
consent to cohabit at home; and so lie I under no necessity of
surprise she into foreign part. TRAVELLING, thou knowest, give the
sex charming opportunity of be familiar with one another. a very
few day and night must now decide all matter betwixt I and my fair
inimitable.
DOLEMAN, who can act in these cause only as chamber-counsel, will inform
we by pen and ink [his right hand and right side have not yet be
strike, and the other side begin to be sensible] of all that shall
occur in our absence.
as for THEE, we have rather have thy company than not; for, although thou
art a wretched fellow at contrivance, yet art thou intrepid at execution.
but as thy present engagement make thy attendance uncertain, I be not
for make thy part necessary to our scheme; but for leave thee to come
after we when abroad. I know thou canst not long live without we.
the project, in short, be this:--mrs. Howe have an eld sister in the
Isle of Wight, who be lately a widow; and I be well informed, that the
mother and daughter have engage, before the latter be marry, to pay a
visit to this lady, who be rich, and intend Miss for her heiress; and in
the interim will make she some valuable present on her approach
nuptial; which, as Mrs. Howe, who love money more than any thing but
herself, tell one of my acquaintance, would be worth fetch.
now, Jack, nothing more need be do, than to hire a little trim vessel,
which shall sail a pleasuring backward and forward to Portsmouth, Spithead,
and the Isle of Wight, for a week or fortnight before we enter
upon our part of the plot. and as Mrs. Howe will be for make the good
bargain she can for her passage, the master of the vessel may have order
(as a perquisite allow he by his owner) to take what she will give:
and the master's name, be it what it will, shall be Ganmore on the
occasion; for I know a rogue of that name, who be not oblige to be of
any country, any more than we.
well, then, we will imagine they on board. I will be there in disguise.
they know not any of ye four--suppose (the scheme so invite) that
thou canst be one.
'tis plaguy hard, if we cannot find, or make a storm.
perhaps they will be sea-sick: but whether they be or not, no doubt they
will keep their cabin.
here will be Mrs. Howe, Miss Howe, Mr. Hickman, a maid, and a footman, I
suppose: and thus we will order it.
I know it will be hard weather: I know it will: and, before there can be
the least suspicion of the matter, we shall be in sight of Guernsey,
Jersey, Dieppe, Cherbourg, or any where on the french coast that it shall
please we to agree with the wind to blow we: and then, secure the
footman, and the woman be separate, one of we, accord to lot that
may be cast, shall overcome, either by persuasion or force, the maid
servant: that will be no hard task; and she be a likely wench, [I have
see she often:] one, Mrs. Howe; nor can there be much difficulty there;
for she be full of health and life, and have be long a widow: another,
[that, say the princely lion, must be I!] the saucy daughter; who will
be much too frightened to make great resistance, [violent spirit, in
that sex, be seldom true spirits--'tis but where they can:] and after
beat about the coast for three or four day for recreation's sake, and
to make sure work, till we see our sullen bird begin to eat and sip, we
will set they all ashore where it will be most convenient; sell the
vessel, [to Mrs. Townsend's agent, with all my heart, or to some other
smuggler,] or give it to Ganmore; and pursue our travel, and tarry
abroad till all be hush up.
now I know thou wilt make difficulty, as it be thy way; while it be
mine to conquer they. my other vassal make theirs; and I condescend
to obviate they: as thus I will thine, first state they for thee
accord to what I know of thy phlegm.
what, in the first place, wilt thou ask, shall be do with Hickman? who
will be in full parade of dress and primness, in order to show the old
aunt what a devilish clever fellow of a nephew she be to have.
What!--I'll tell thee--Hickman, in good manner, will leave the woman in
their cabin--and, to show his courage with his breeding, be upon deck--
Well, and suppose he is!--why then I hope it be easy for Ganmore, or any
body else, myself suppose in my pea-jacket and great watch coat, (if any
other make scruple to do it), while he stand in the way, gap and
star like a novice, to stumble against he, and push he overboard!
--a rich thought--be it not, Belford?--He be certainly plaguy officious
in the lady' correspondence; and I be inform, play double between
mother and daughter, in fear of both.--dost not see he, Jack?--I do--
pop up and down, his wig and hat float by he; and paddle,
pawing, and dashing, like a fright mongrel--I be afraid he never
venture to learn to swim.
but thou wilt not drown the poor fellow; wilt thou?
no, no!--that be not necessary to the project--I hate to do mischief
supererogatory. the skiff shall be ready to save he, while the vessel
keep its course: he shall be set on shore with the loss of wig and hat
only, and of half his little wit, at the place where he embark, or any
where else.
well, but shall we not be in danger of be hang for three such
enormous rape, although Hickman should escape with only a bellyful of
sea-water?
yes, to be sure, when catch--but be there any likelihood of that?--
besides, have we not be in danger before now for bad fact? and what
be there in be only in danger?--if we actually be to appear in open
day in England before matter be make up, there will be great
likelihood that these woman will not prosecute that they will.--For my
own part, I should wish they may. would not a brave fellow choose to
appear in court to such an arraignment, confront woman who would do
credit to his attempt? the country be more merciful in these case, than
in any other: I should therefore like to put myself upon my country.
let I indulge in a few reflection upon what thou mayest think the bad
that can happen. I will suppose that thou art one of we; and that all
five be actually bring to trial on this occasion: how bravely shall we
enter a court, I at the head of you, dress out each man, as if to his
wedding appearance!--you be sure of all the woman, old and young, of
your side.--what brave fellows!--what fine gentlemen!--there go a
charming handsome man!--meane I, to be sure!--who could find in their
heart to hang such a gentleman as that? whisper one lady, sit
perhaps on the right hand of the recorder: [I suppose the scene to be in
London:] while another disbelieve that any woman could fairly swear
against I. all will crowd after I: it will be each man's happiness (if
ye shall chance to be bashful) to be neglect: I shall be find to be
the great criminal; and my safety, for which the general voice will be
engage, will be your.
but then come the triumph of triumph, that will make the accuse look
up, while the accuser be cover with confusion.
make room there!--stand by!--give back!--one receive a rap, another an
elbow, half a score a push a piece!--
enter the slow-move, hood-face, down-look plaintiffs.--
and first the widow, with a sorrowful countenance, though half-veil,
pity her daughter more than herself. the people, the woman
especially, who on this occasion will be five-sixth of the spectator,
reproach she--You'd have the conscience, would you, to have five such
brave gentleman as these hang for you know not what?
next come the poor maid--who, perhaps, have be ravish twenty time
before; and have not appear now, but for company-sake; mincing,
simpering, weeping, by turn; not know whether she should be sorry
or glad.
but every eye dwell upon miss!--see, see, the handsome gentleman bow to
she!
to the very ground, to be sure, I shall bow; and kiss my hand.
see her confusion! see! she turn from him!--ay! thatbe because it be in
open court, cry an arch one!--while other admire she--ay! thatbe a
girl worth venture one's neck for!
then we shall be praise--even the judge, and the whole crowded bench,
will acquit we in their heart! and every single man wish he have be I!
--the woman, all the time, disclaim prosecution, be the case to be
their own. to be sure, Belford, the sufferer cannot put half so good a
face upon the matter as we.
then what a noise will this matter make!--Is it not enough, suppose we
move from the prison to the sessions-house,* to make a noble heart
thump it away most gloriously, when such an one find himself attend to
his trial by a parade of guard and officer, of mien and aspect
warlike and unwarlike; himself of their whole care, and their business!
weapon in their hand, some bright, some rusty, equally venerable for
their antiquity and inoffensiveness! other of more authoritative
demeanour, strut before with fine paint stave! shoal of people
follow, with a which be he whom the young lady appear against?--
then, let we look down, look up, look round, which way we will, we shall
see all the door, the shop, the window, the sign-iron, and balcony,
(garret, gutter, and chimney-top include,) all white-capt, black-
hood, and periwigg'd, or crop-ear'd up by the immobile vulgus: while
the float street-swarmer, who have see we pass by at one place, run
with stretch-out neck, and strained eye-ball, a roundabout way, and
elbow and shoulder themselves into place by which we have not pass, in
order to obtain another sight of we; every street continue to pour out
its swarm of late-comer, to add to the gathering snowball; who be
content to take description of our person, behaviour, and countenance,
from those who have the good fortune to have be in time to see we.
* within these few year past, a passage have be make from the prison to
the sessions-house, whereby malefactor be carry into court without
go through the street. Lovelace's triumph on their suppose march
show the wisdom of this alteration.
let I tell thee, Jack, I see not why (to judge accord to our
principle and practice) we should not be as much elated in our march,
be this to happen to we, as other may be upon any other the most mob-
attract occasion--suppose a lord-mayor on his gawdy--suppose a
victorious general, or ambassador, on his public entry--suppose (as I
begin with the low) the grand parade that can be suppose, a
coronation--for, in all these, do not the royal guard, the heroic
train-band, the pendent, cling throng of spectator, with their
wave head roll to-and-fro from house-top to house-bottom and
street-way, as I have above describe, make the principal part of the
raree-show?
and let I ask thee, if thou dost not think, that either the mayor, the
ambassador, or the general would not make very pitiful figure on their
gala, do not the trumpet and tabret call together the canaille to
gaze at them?--nor perhaps should we be the most guilty hero neither:
for who know how the magistrate may have obtain his gold chain? while
the general probably return from cut of throat, and from murder,
sanctify by custom only.--Caesar, we be tell,* have win, at the age of
fifty-six, when he be assassinate, fifty pitch battle, have take by
assault above a thousand town, and slay near 1,200,000 man; I suppose
exclusive of those who fall on his own side in slay they. be not you
and I, Jack, innocent man, and babe in swaddling-clothe, compare to
Caesar, and to his predecessor in heroism, Alexander, dub, for murder
and depredation, Magnus?
* Pliny give this account, put the number of man slay at 1,100,092.
see also Lipsius de Constandia.
the principal difference that strike I in the comparison between we and
the mayor, the ambassador, the general, on their gawdie, be, that the
mob make a great noise, a loud huzzaing, in the one case than the
other, which be call acclamation, and end frequently in high taste,
by throw dead animal at one another, before they disperse; in which
they have as much joy, as in the former part of the triumph: while they
will attend we with all the mark of an awful or silent (at most only a
whispering) respect; their mouth distend, as if set open with gag,
and their voice generally lose in goggle-ey'd admiration.
well, but suppose, after all, we be convict; what have we to do, but
in time make over our estate, that the sheriff may not revel in our
spoils?--there be no fear of be hang for such a crime as this, while
we have money or friends.--and suppose even the bad, that two or three
be to die, have we not a chance, each man of we, to escape? the
devil's in they, if theywill hang five for ravish three!
I know I shall get off for one--be it but for family sake: and be a
handsome fellow, I shall have a dozen or two young maiden, all dress
in white, go to court to beg my life--and what a pretty show they will
make, with their white hood, white gown, white petticoat, white
scarf, white glove, kneel for I, with their white handkerchief
at their eye, in two pretty row, as his Majesty walk through they and
nod my pardon for their sakes!--and, if once pardon, all be over: for,
Jack, in a crime of this nature there lie no appeal, as in a murder.
so thou seest the bad that can happen, should we not make the grand
tour upon this occasion, but stay and take our trial. but it be most
likely, that they will not prosecute at all. if not, no risque on our
side will be run; only take our pleasure abroad, at the bad; leave
friend tired of we, in order, after a time, to return to the same
friend endear to we, as we to they, by absence.
this, Jack, be my scheme, at the first running. I know it be capable of
improvement--for example: I can land these lady in France; whip over
before they can get a passage back, or before Hickman can have recover
his fright; and so find mean to entrap my beloved on board--and then all
will be right; and I need not care if I be never to return to England.
Memorandum, to be consider of--whether, in order to complete my
vengeance, I cannot contrive to kidnap away either James Harlowe or
solme? or both? a man, Jack, would not go into exile for nothing.
LETTER LV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
if, Belford, thou like not my plot upon Miss Howe, I have three or four
more as good in my own opinion; well, perhaps, they will be in thine:
and so 'tis but get loose from thy present engagement, and thou shalt
pick and choose. but as for thy three brother, they must do as I would
have they: and so, indeed, must thou--else why be I your general? but I
will refer this subject to its proper season. Thou know, that I never
absolutely conclude upon a project, till 'tis time for execution; and
then lightning strike not quick than I.
and now to the subject next my heart.
Wilt thou believe I, when I tell thee, that I have so many contrivance
rise up and crowd upon I for preference, with regard to my
Gloriana, that I hardly know which to choose?--i could tell thee of no
less than six princely one, any of which must do. but as the dear
creature have not grudge give I trouble, I think I ought not, in
gratitude, to spare combustible for she; but, on the contrary, to make
her stare and stand aghast, by spring three or four mine at once.
Thou remembrest what Shakespeare, in his Troilus and Cressida, make
Hector, who, however, be not use to boast, say to Achilles in an
interview between they; and which, apply to this watchful lady, and to
the vexation she have give I, and to the certainty I now think I have of
subdue she, will run thus: suppose the charmer before I; and I
meditate her sweet person from head to foot:
Henceforth, o watchful fair-one, guard thee well:
for Iwill not kill thee there! nor there! nor there!
but, by the zone that circle Venus' waist,
Iwill kill thee ev'ry where; yea, o'er and o'er.--
Thou, wise Belford, pardon I this brag:
her watchfulness draw folly from my lip;
but Iwill endeavour deed to match the word,
or I may never----
then I imagine thee interpose to qualify my impatience, as Ajax do to
Achilles:
----do not chafe thee, cousin:
----and let these threat alone,
till accident or purpose bring thee to it.
all that vex I, in the midst of my glory-in device, be, that there
be a sorry fellow in the world, who have presume to question, whether the
prize, when obtain, be worthy of the pain it cost I: yet know, with
what patience and trouble a bird-man will spread an acre of ground with
gin and snare; set up his stalk horse, his glass; plant his decoy-
bird, and invite the feather throng by his whistle; and all his prize
at last (the reward of early hour, and of a whole morning's pain) only
a simple linnet.
to be serious, Belford, I must acknowledge, that all our pursuit, from
childhood to manhood, be only trifle of different sort and size,
proportion to our year and view: but then be not a fine woman the
noblest trifle, that ever be or could be obtain by man?--And to what
purpose do we say obtain, if it be not in the way we wish for?--if a man
be rather to be her prize, than she his?
***
and now, Belford, what dost think?
that thou art a cursed fellow, if--
if--no if's--but I shall be very sick to-morrow. I shall, 'faith.
sick!--why sick? what a-devil shouldst thou be sick for?
for more good reason than one, Jack.
I should be glad to hear but one.--sick, quotha! of all thy roguish
invention I should not have think of this.
perhaps thou think my view to be, to draw the lady to my bedside.
thatbe a trick of three or four thousand year old; and I should find it
much more to my purpose, if I could get to she's. however, Iwill
condescend to make thee as wise as myself.
I be excessively disturb about this smuggling scheme of Miss Howe. I
have no doubt, that my fair-one, be I to make an attempt, and miscarry,
will fly from I, if she can. I once believe she love I: but now I
doubt whether she do or not: at least, that it be with such an ardour,
as Miss Howe call it, as will make she overlook a premeditated fault,
should I be guilty of one.
and what will be sick do for thee?
have patience. I donot intend to be so very bad as Dorcas shall
represent I to be. but yet I know I shall reach confoundedly, and bring
up some clot blood. to be sure, I shall break a vessel: therebe no
doubt of that: and a bottle of Eaton's styptic shall be send for; but no
doctor. if she have humanity, she will be concern. but if she have
love, let it have be push ever so far back, it will, on this
occasion, come forward, and show itself; not only in her eye, but in
every line of her sweet face.
I will be very intrepid. I will not fear death, or any thing else. I
will be sure of be well in an hour or two, have formerly find great
benefit by this astringent medicine, on occasion of an inward bruise by a
fall from my horse in hunting, of which perhaps this malady may be the
remain. and this will show she, that though those about I may make the
most of it, I do not; and so can have no design in it.
well, methink thou sayest, I begin to think tolerably of this device.
I know thou wouldst, when I explain myself. another time prepare to
wonder; and banish doubt.
now, Belford, I shall expect, that she will show some concern at the
break vessel, as it may be attend with fatal effect, especially to
one so fiery in his temper as I have the reputation to be think to be:
and the rather, as I shall calmly attribute the accident to the harasse
and doubt under which I have labour for some time past. and this will
be a further proof of my love, and will demand a grateful return--
and what then, thou egregious contriver?
why then I shall have the less remorse, if I be to use a little violence:
for can she deserve compassion, who show none?
and what if she show a great deal of concern?
then shall I be in hope of build on a good foundation. love hide a
multitude of fault, and diminish those it cannot hide. love, when
acknowledge, authorize freedom; and freedom beget freedom; and I shall
then see how far I can go.
well but, Lovelace, how the deuce wilt thou, with that full health and
vigour of constitution, and with that bloom in thy face, make any body
believe thou art sick?
how!--why, take a few grain of ipecacuanha; enough to make I reach like
a fury.
good!--but how wilt thou manage to bring up blood, and not hurt thyself?
foolish fellow! be there no pigeon and chicken in every poulterer's
shop?
cry thy mercy.
but then I will be persuade by Mrs. Sinclair, that I have of late
confine myself too much; and so will have a chair call, and be carry
to the Park; where I will try to walk half the length of the Mall, or so;
and in my return, amuse myself at White's or the Cocoa.
and what will this do?
question again!--i be afraid thou'rt an infidel, Belford--why then
shall I not know if my beloved offer to go out in my absence?--And shall
I not see whether she receive I with tenderness at my return? but this
be not all: I have a foreboding that something affect will happen
while I be out. but of this more in its place.
and now, Belford, wilt thou, or wilt thou not, allow, that it be a right
thing to be sick?--Lord, Jack, so much delight do I take in my
contrivance, that I shall be half sorry when the occasion for they be
over; for never, never, shall I again have such charming exercise for my
invention.
mean time these plaguy woman be so impertinent, so full of reproach,
that I know not how to do any thing but curse they. and then, truly,
they be for help I out with some of their trite and vulgar
artifice. Sally, particularly, who pretend to be a mighty contriver,
have just now, in an insolent manner, tell I, on my reject her
proffer aid, that I have no mind to conquer; and that I be so wicked
as to intend to marry, though I would not own it to she.
because this little devil make her first sacrifice at my altar, she
think she may take any liberty with I: and what make she outrageous at
time be, that I have, for a long time, studiously, as she say, slight
her too-readily-offer favour: but be it not very impudent in she to
think, that I will be any man's successor? it be not come to that
neither. this, thou knowest, be always my rule--once any other man's,
and I know it, and never more mine. it be for such as thou, and thy
brother, to take up with harlot. I have be always aim at the
merit of a first discoverer.
the more devil I, perhaps thou wilt say, to endeavour to corrupt the
uncorrupted.
but I say, not; since, hence, I have but very few adultery to answer
for.
one affair, indeed, at Paris, with a married lady [I believe I never tell
thee of it] touch my conscience a little: yet bring on by the spirit
of intrigue, more than by sheer wickedness. Iwill give it thee in brief:
'a french marquis, somewhat in year, employ by his court in a public
function at that of Madrid, have put his charming young new-married wife
under the controul and wardship, as I may say, of his insolent sister, an
old prude.
'I see the lady at the opera. I like she at first sight, and well at
second, when I know the situation she be in. so, pretend to make my
address to the prude, get admittance to both.
'the first thing I have to do, be to compliment the prude into shyness by
complaint of shyness: next, to take advantage of the marquise's
situation, between her husband's jealousy and his sister's arrogance; and
to inspire she with resentment; and, as I hop, with a regard to my
person. the french lady have no dislike to intrigue.
'the sister begin to suspect I: the lady have no mind to part with the
company of the only man who have be permit to visit she; and tell I
of her sister's suspicion. I put she upon conceal the prude, as if
unknown to I, in a closet in one of her own apartment, lock she in,
and put the key in her own pocket: and she be to question I on the
sincerity of my profession to her sister, in her sister's hearing.
'she comply. my mistress be lock up. the lady and I take our
seat. I own fervent love, and make high profession: for the marquise
put it home to I. the prude be delighted with what she hear.
'and how dost thou think it ended?--i take my advantage of the lady
herself, who durst not for her life cry out; and draw she after I to the
next apartment, on pretence of go to seek her sister, who all the time
be lock up in the closet.'
no woman ever give I a private meeting for nothing; my dear Miss
Harlowe except.
'my ingenuity obtain my pardon: the lady be unable to forbear
laugh throughout the whole affair, to find both so uncommonly trick;
her gaoleress her prisoner, safe lock up, and as much pleased as either
of we.'
the English, Jack, do not often out-wit the French.
'we have contrivance afterwards equally ingenious, in which the lady, the
ice once break [once subdue, always subdue] co-operate. but a more
tender tell-tale reveal the secret--reveal it, before the marquise
could cover the disgrace. the sister be inveterate; the husband
irreconcilable; in every respect unfit for a husband, even for a french
one--make, perhaps, more delicate to these particular by the custom of
a people among whom he be then resident, so contrary to those of his own
countryman. she be oblige to throw herself into my protection--nor
think herself unhappy in it, till childbe pang seize she: then
penitence, and death, overtake she the same hour!'
Excuse a tear, Belford!--She deserve a well fate! what hath such a
vile inexorable husband to answer for!--The sister be punish
effectually--that please I on reflection--the sister effectually
punished!--but perhaps I have tell thee this story before.
END of VOL.4
Volume V.
content of volume V
LETTER I. Lovelace to Belford.--
an agreeable airing with the lady. delightfully easy she. obsequiously
respectful he. Miss Howe's plot now no long his terror. give the
particular of their agreeable conversation while abroad.
LETTER II. from the same.--
an account of his ipecacuanha plot. instruct dorca how to act surprise
and terror. monosyllable and trisyllable to what liken. politeness
live not in a storm. Proclamation crier. the lady now see she love
he. her generous tenderness for he. he have now credit for a new
score. defy Mrs. Townsend.
LETTER III. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
acknowledge tenderness for Lovelace. love for a man of error
punishable.
LETTER IV. Lovelace to Belford.--
suspicious inquiry after he and the lady by a servant in livery from one
Captain Tomlinson. her terror on the occasion. his alarming
management. she resolve not to stir abroad. he exult upon she not
be willing to leave he.
LETTER V. VI. from the same.--
Arrival of Captain Tomlinson, with a pretended commission from Mr. John
Harlowe to set on food a general reconciliation, provide he can be
convince that they be actually married. different conversation on this
occasion.--the lady insist that the truth be tell to Tomlinson. she
carry her point through to the disappointment of one of his private
view. he form great hope of success from the effect of his
ipecacuanha contrivance.
LETTER VII. Lovelace to Belford.--
he make such a fair representation to Tomlinson of the situation between
he and the lady, behave so plausibly, and make an overture so
generous, that she be all kindness and unreserve to he. her affect
exultation on her amend prospect. his unusual sensibility upon it.
reflection on the good effect of education. pride an excellent
substitute to virtue.
LETTER viii. from the same.--
who Tomlinson be. again make Belford object, in order to explain his
design by answer the objection. John Harlowe a sly sinner. hard-
hearted reason for give the lady a gleam of joy. illustrate by a
story of two sovereign at war.
extract from Clarissa's letter to Miss Howe. she rejoice in her
present agreeable prospect. attribute much to Mr. Hickman. describe
Captain Tomlinson. give a character of Lovelace, [which be necessary to
be attend to: especially by those who have think favourably of he
for some of his liberal action, and hardly of she for the distance she
at first keep he at.]
letter IX. Lovelace to Belford.--
Letter from Lord M. his further art and precaution. his happy day
promise to be soon. his opinion of the clergy, and of go to church.
she pity every body who want pity. love every body. he own he
should be the happy of man, could he get over his prejudice against
matrimony. draught of settlement. ludicrously account for the reason
why she refuse to hear they read to she. law and gospel two different
thing. Sally fling her handkerchief in his face.
LETTER x. from the same.--
have make the lady more than once look about she. she own that he be
more than indifferent to she. check he with sweetness of temper for
his encroach freedom. her proof of true love. he ridicule marriage
purity. severely reflect upon public freedom between man and their
wife. advantage he once make upon such an occasion. have be after a
license. difficulty in procure one. great fault and great virtue
often in the same person. he be willing to believe that woman have no
soul. his whimsical reason.
LETTER XI. Lovelace to belford.--
almost despair of succeed (as he have hop) by love and gentleness.
praise her modesty. his encroach freedom resent by she. the
woman, he observe, who resent not initiatory freedom, must be lose.
he reason, in his free way, upon her delicacy. art of the eastern
monarchs.
LETTER XII. from the same.--
a letter from Captain Tomlinson make all up. her uncle Harlowe's
pretend proposal big with art and plausible delusion. she acquiesce
in it. he write to the pretended Tomlinson, on an affecting hint of
shebe, request that her uncle Harlowe would, in person, give his niece
to he; or permit Tomlinson to be his proxy on the occasion.--and now for
a little of mine, he say, which he have ready to spring.
LETTER XIII. Belford to Lovelace.--
again earnestly expostulate with he in the lady's favour. remember
and applaud the part she bear in the conversation at his collation. the
frothy wit of libertine how despicable. Censures the folly, the
weakness, the grossness, the unpermanency of sensual love. call some of
his contrivance trite, stale, and poor. beseech he to remove she
from the vile house. how many dreadful story could the horrid Sinclair
tell the sex! serious reflection on the die state of his uncle.
LETTER XIV. Lovelace to belford.--
cannot yet procure a license. have secure a retreat, if not victory.
defend in anger the simplicity of his inventive contrivance. enter
upon his general defence, compare with the principle and practice of
other libertine. hero and warlike king bad man than he. epitome
of his and the lady's story after ten year' cohabitation. caution to
those who would censure he. have the sex make virtue a recommendation to
their favour, he say, he should have have a great regard to his moral
than he have have.
LETTER XV. from the same.--
preparative to his little mine, as he call it. love to write to the
moment. Alarm begin. affectedly terrified.
LETTER XVI. from the same.--
the lady fright out of her bed by dreadful cry of fire. she awe he
into decency. on an extort promise of forgiveness, he leave she.
Repenting, he return; but find her door fasten. what a triumph have
her sex obtain by her virtue! but how will she see he next morning,
as he have give she.
LETTER XVII. Lovelace to Belford.--
Dialogue with Clarissa, the door between they. her letter to he. she
will not see he for a week.
LETTER xviii. from the same.--
copy of letter that pass between they. go to the common to try to
get the license. she shall see he, he declare, on his return. love
and compassion hard to be separate. her fluctuate reason on their
present situation. be jealous of her superior quality. do justice
to her immovable virtue.
LETTER XIX. from the same.--
the lady escape. his rage. make a solemn vow of revenge, if once more
he get she into his power. his man will. be go in search of she. his
hop; on what ground. he will advertise she. describe her dress.
Letter leave behind she. accuse she (that be to say, LOVELACE accuse
she,) of niceness, prudery, affectation.
LETTER XX. from the same.--
a letter from Miss Howe to Clarissa fall into his hand; which, have it
come to she's, would have lay open and detect all his design. in it
she acquit Clarissa of prudery, coquetry, and undue reserve. admire,
applaud, bless she for the example she have set for her sex, and for
the credit she have do it, by her conduct in the most difficult
situation.
[this letter may be consider as a kind of summary of Clarissa's trial,
her persecution, and exemplary conduct hitherto; and of Mr. Lovelace's
intrigue, plot, and view, so far as Miss Howe could be suppose to
know they, or to guess at they.]
a letter from Lovelace, which far show the fertility of his
contrive genius.
LETTER XXI. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
inform she of Lovelace's villany, and of her escape. her only concern,
what. the course she intend to pursue.
LETTER XXII. Lovelace to Belford.--
exult on hearing, from his man Will., that the lady have refuge herself
at Hampstead. observation in a style of levity on some passage in the
letter she leave behind she. intimate that Tomlinson be arrive to aid
his purpose. the chariot be come; and now, dress like a bridegroom,
attend by a footman she never see, he be already, he say, at
Hampstead.
LETTER XXIII. XXIV. Lovelace to Belford.--
exult on his contrivances.--by what mean he get into the lady's
presence at Mrs. Moore's. her terror, fit, exclamation. his
plausible tale to Mrs. Moore and Miss Rawlins. his intrepid behaviour
to the lady. copy of letter from Tomlinson, and of pretended one
from his own relation, calculate to pacify and delude she.
LETTER XXV. XXVI. from the same.--
his farth art, invention, and intrepidity. she put home question
to he. 'ungenerous and ungrateful she call he. he know not the
value of the heart he have insult. he have a plain path before he,
after he have trick she out of her father's house! but that now her
mind be raise above fortune, and above he.' his precautionary
contrivance.
LETTER XXVII. XXVIII. XXX. XXXI. XXXII. from the same.--
Character of widow Bevis. prepossess the woman against Miss Howe.
lead they to think she be in love with he. apt himself to think so;
and why. woman like not novice; and why. their vulgar aphorism
animadvert on. Tomlinson arrive. artful conversation between they.
Miss Rawlins's prudery. his forged letter in imitation of Miss Howe's,
no. IV. other contrivance to delude the lady, and attach the woman to
his party.
LETTER XXXIII. XXXIV. XXXV. xxxvi. from the same.--
Particulars of several interesting conversation between himself,
Tomlinson, and the lady. artful management of the two former. her noble
spirit. he tell Tomlinson before she that he never have any proof of
affection from she. she frankly own the regard she once have for he.
'he have bring she,' she tell Tomlinson and he, 'more than once to own
it to he. nor do his own vanity, she be sure, permit he to doubt of
it. he have keep her soul in suspense an hundred time.' both man
affect in turn by her noble behaviour, and great sentiment. their
plea, prayer, prostration, to move she to relent. her distress.
the history
of
CLARISSA HARLOWE
LETTER I
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY evening.
just return from an airing with my charmer, comply with after great
importunity. she be attend by the two nymph. they both topt their
part; keep their eye within bound; make moral reflection now-and-
then. o Jack! what devil be woman, when all test be get over, and we
have completely ruin they!
the coach carry we to Hampstead, to Highgate, to Muswell-hill; back to
Hampstead to the Upper-Flask: there, in compliment to the nymph, my
beloved consent to alight, and take a little repast. then home early
by kentish-town.
delightfully easy she, and so respectful and oblige I, all the way, and
as we walk out upon the heath, to view the variegate prospect which
that agreeable elevation afford, that she promise to take now-and-then
a little excursion with I. I think, Miss Howe, I think, say I to
myself, every now-and-then as we walk, that thy wicked device be
supercede.
but let I give thee a few particular of our conversation in the
circumrotation we take, while in the coach--she have receive a letter
from Miss Howe yesterday, I presume?
she make no answer. how happy should I think myself to be admit into
their correspondence? I would joyfully make an exchange of
communication.
so, though I hop not to succeed by her consent, [and little do she
think I have so happily in part succeed without it,] I think it not
amiss to urge for it, for several reason: among other, that I might
account to she for my constant employment at my pen; in order to take off
her jealousy, that she be the subject of thy correspondence and mine:
and that I might justify my secrecy and uncommunicativeness by her own.
I proceed therefore--that I love familiar-letter-writing, as I have
more than once tell she, above all the specie of writing: it be write
from the heart, (without the fetter prescribe by method or study,) as
the very word cor-respondence imply. not the heart only; the soul be
in it. nothing of body, when friend write to friend; the mind impel
sovereignly the vassal-finger. it be, in short, friendship record;
friendship give under hand and seal; demonstrate that the party be
under no apprehension of change from time or accident, when they so
liberally give testimony, which would always be ready, on failure or
infidelity, to be turn against them.--For my own part, it be the
principal diversion I have in her absence; but for this innocent
amusement, the distance she so frequently keep I at would have be
intolerable.
Sally know my drift; and say, she have have the honour to see two or three
of my letter, and of Mr. Belford's; and she think they the most
entertaining that she have ever read.
my friend Belford, I say, have a happy talent in the letter-write way;
and upon all subject.
I expect my beloved would have be inquisitive after our subject: but
(lie perdue, as I see) not a word say she. so I touch upon this
article myself.
our topic be various and diffuse: sometimes upon literary article
[she be very attentive upon this]; sometimes upon the public
entertainment; sometimes amuse each other with the fruit of the
different correspondencie we hold with person abroad, with whom we
have contract friendship; sometimes upon the foible and perfection
of our particular friend; sometimes upon our own present and future
hope; sometimes aim at humour and raillery upon each other.--It might
indeed appear to savour of vanity, to suppose my letter would entertain
a lady of her delicacy and judgment: but yet I could not but say, that
perhaps she would be far from think so hardly of I as sometimes she
have seem to do, if she be to see the letter which generally pass
between Mr. Belford and I [I hope, Jack, thou hast more manner, than to
give I the lie, though but in thy heart].
she then speak: after decline my compliment in such a manner, as only a
person can do, who deserve it, she say, for her part, she have always
think I a man of sense [a man of sense, Jack! what a niggardly
praise!],--and should therefore hope, that, when I write, it exceed
even my speech: for that it be impossible, be the letter write in as
easy and familiar a style as they would, but that they must have that
advantage from sit down to write they which prompt speech could not
always have. she should think it very strange therefore, if my letter
be barren of sentiment; and as strange, if I give myself liberty upon
premeditation, which could have no excuse at all, but from a
thoughtlessness, which itself want excuse.--but if Mr. Belford's
letter and mine be upon subject so general, and some of they equally
(she presume) instructive and entertaining, she could not but say, that
she should be glad to see any of they; and particularly those which Miss
Martin have see and praise.
this be put close.
I look at she, to see if I could discover any tincture of jealousy in
this hint; that Miss Martin have see what I have not show to she. but
she do not look it: so I only say, I should be very proud to show she
not only those, but all that pass between Mr. Belford and I; but I
must remind she, that she know the condition.
no, indeed! with a sweet lip pout out, as saucy as pretty; imply a
lovely scorn, that yet can only be lovely in youth so bloom, and
beauty so divinely distinguish.
how I long to see such a motion again! her mouth only can give it.
but I be mad with love--yet eternal will be the distance, at the rate I
go on: now fire, now ice, my soul be continually upon the hiss, as I may
say. in vain, however, be the trial to quench--what, after all, be
unquenchable.
Pr'ythee, Belford, forgive my nonsense, and my Vulcan-like metaphor--do
I not tell thee, not that I be sick of love, but that I be mad with it?
why bring I such an angel into such a house? into such company?--And
why do I not stop my ear to the siren, who, know my aversion to
wedlock, be perpetually touch that string?
I be not willing to be answer so easily: I be sure, that what pass
between two such young lady (friend so dear) might be see by every
body: I have more reason than any body to wish to see the letter that
pass between she and Miss Howe; because I be sure they must be full of
admirable instruction, and one of the dear correspondent have deign to
wish my entire reformation.
she look at I as if she would look I through: I think I feel eye-
beam, after eye-beam, penetrate my shivering reins.--but she be silent.
nor need her eye the assistance of speech.
nevertheless, a little recover myself, I hop that nothing unhappy
have befall either Miss Howe or her mother. the letter of yesterday
send by a particular hand: she open it with great emotion--seem to
have expect it soon--be the reason for my apprehension.
we be then at Muswell-hill: a pretty country within the eye, to polly,
be the remark, instead of reply to I.
but I be not so to be answer--I should expect some charming subject
and character from two such pen: I hop every thing go on well
between Mr. Hickman and Miss Howe. her mother's heart, I say, be set
upon that match: Mr. Hickman be not without his merit: he be what the
lady call a SOBER man: but I must need say, that I think Miss Howe
deserve a husband of a very different cast!
this, I suppose, would have engage she into a subject from which I
could have wiredrawn something:--for Hickman be one of her favourites--
why, I cannot divine, except for the sake of opposition of character to
that of thy honest friend.
but she cut I short by a look of disapprobation, and another cool remark
upon a distant view; and, how far off, Miss Horton, do you think that
clump of tree may be? point out of the coach.--So I have do.
here endeth all I have to write concern our conversation on this our
agreeable airing.
we have both be write ever since we come home. I be to be favour
with her company for an hour, before she retire to rest.
all that obsequious love can suggest, in order to engage her tender
sentiment for I against tomorrow's sickness, will I aim at when we
meet. but at parting will complain of a disorder in my stomach.
***
we have meet. all be love and unexceptionable respect on my part. ease
and complaisance on she's. she be concerned for my disorder. so
sudden!--just as we part! but it be nothing. I should be quite well
by the morning.
Faith, Jack, I think I be sick already. be it possible for such a giddy
fellow as I to persuade myself to be ill! I be a well mimic at this
rate than I wish to be. but every nerve and fibre of I be always ready
to contribute its aid, whether by health or by ailment, to carry a
resolve-on roguery into execution.
Dorcas have transcribe for I the whole letter of Miss Howe, date
Sunday, May 14,* of which before I have only extract. she find no other
letter add to that parcel: but this, and that which I copy myself in
character last Sunday whilst she be at church, relate to the smuggling
scheme,** be enough for I.
* see Vol. IV. Letter XXIX.
** ibid. letter XLII.
***
Dorcas tell I, that her lady have be remove her paper from the
mahogany chest into a wainscot box, which hold her linen, and which she
put into her dark closet. we have no key of that at present. no doubt
but all her letter, previous to those I have come at, be in that box.
Dorcas be uneasy upon it: yet hop that her lady do not suspect she;
for she be sure that she lay in every thing as she find it.
LETTER II
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
cocoa-tree, SATURDAY, MAY 27.
this ipecacuanha be a most disagreeable medicine. that these curse
physical folk can find out nothing to do we good, but what would poison
the devil! in the other world, be they only to take physic, it would
be punishable enough of itself for a mis-spend life. a doctor at one
elbow, and an apothecary at the other, and the poor soul labour under
their prescribed operation, he need no bad tormentor.
but now this be to take down my countenance. it have do it: for, with
violent reaching, have take enough to make I sick, and not enough
water to carry it off, I presently look as if I have keep my bed a
fortnight. Ill jesting, as I think in the midst of the exercise, with
edge tool, and bad with physical one.
two hour it hold I. I have forbid Dorcas to let her lady know any thing
of the matter; out of tenderness to she; be willing, when she know my
prohibition, to let she see that I expect she to be concern for me.--
Well, but Dorcas be nevertheless a woman, and she can whisper to her
lady the secret she be enjoin to keep!
come hither, toad, [sick as the devil at the instant]; let I see what a
mixture of grief and surprize may be beat up together in thy puden-face.
that willnot do. that dropt jaw, and mouth distend into the long oval,
be more upon the horrible than the grievous.
nor that pink and wink with thy odious eye, as my charmer once
call they.
a little well that; yet not quite right: but keep your mouth close.
you have a muscle or two which you have no command of, between your
cheek-bone and your lip, that should carry one corner of your mouth
up towards your crow'-foot, and that down to meet it.
there! begone! be in a plaguy hurry run up stair and down, to fetch
from the dining-room what you carry up on purpose to fetch, till motion
extraordinary put you out of breath, and give you the sigh natural.
whatbe the matter, Dorcas?
nothing, Madam.
my beloved wonder she have not see I this morning, no doubt; but be too
shy to say she wonder. repeat whatbe the matter, however, as Dorcas
run up and down stair by her door, bring on, o Madam! my master! my
poor master!
what! how! when!--and all the monosyllable of surprize.
[within parenthesis let I tell thee, that I have often think, that the
little word in the republic of letter, like the little folk in a nation,
be the most significant. the trisyllable, and the rumbler of syllable
more than three, be but the good-for-little magnate.]
I must not tell you, Madam--my master order I not to tell you--but he
be in a bad way than he think for!--But he would not have you
fright.
high concern take possession of every sweet feature. she pity me!--by
my soul, she pity I!
where be he?
too much in a hurry for good manner, [another parenthesis, Jack! good
manner be so little natural, that we ought to be compose to observe
they: politeness will not live in a storm]. I cannot stay to answer
question, cry the wench--though desirous to answer [a third
parenthesis--like the people cry proclamation, run away from the
customer they want to sell to]. this hurry put the lady in a hurry to
ask, [a fourth, by way of establish the third!] as the other do the
people in a hurry to buy. and I have in my eye now a whole street
raise, and run after a proclamation or express-crier, as if the
first be a thief, the other his pursuer.
at last, o Lord! let Mrs. Lovelace know!--there be danger, to be sure!
whisper from one nymph to another; but at the door, and so loud, that
my listen fair-one might hear.
out she dart--as how! as how, Dorcas!
o Madam--a vomiting of blood! a vessel break, to be sure!
down she hasten; find every one as busy over my blood in the entry,
as if it be that of the Neapolitan saint.
in step my charmer, with a face of sweet concern.
how do you, Mr. Lovelace?
o my good love!--very well!--very well!--nothe at all! nothing of
consequence!--i shall be well in an instant!--straining again! for I be
indeed plaguy sick, though no more blood come.
in short, Belford, I have gain my end. I see the dear soul love I.
I see she forgive I all thatbe past. I see I have credit for a new
score.
Miss Howe, I defy thee, my dear--Mrs. townsend!--who the devil be you?--
Troop away with your contraband. no smuggling! nor smuggler, but
myself! nor will the choicest of my fair-one's favour be long
prohibit good to I!
***
every one be now sure that she love I. tear be in her eye more
than once for I. she suffer I to take her hand, and kiss it as often
as I please. on Mrs. Sinclair's mentioning, that I too much confine
myself, she press I to take an airing; but obligingly desire I to be
careful of myself. wished I would advise with a physician. God make
physician, she say.
I do not think that, Jack. God indeed make we all. but I fancy she
mean physic instead of physician; and then the phrase might mean what
the vulgar phrase means;--God send meat, the devil cook.
I be well already, on take the styptic from her dear hand.
on she require I to take the air, I ask, if I might have the honour
of her company in a coach; and this, that I might observe if she have an
intention of go out in my absence.
if she think a chair be not a more proper vehicle for my case, she
would with all her heart!
therebe a precious!
I kiss her hand again! she be all goodness!--would to Heaven I well
deserve it, I said!--But all be golden day before us!--her presence
and generous concern have do every thing. I be well! nothing ail
I. but since my beloved will have it so, Iwill take a little airing!--
let a chair be called!--O my charmer! be I to have own this
indisposition to my late harasse, and to the uneasiness I have have for
disoblige you; all be infinitely compensate by your goodness.--all the
art of healing be in your smiles!--your late displeasure be the only
malady!
while Mrs. Sinclair, and Dorcas, and Polly, and even poor silly Mabell
[for Sally go out, as my angel come in] with uplifted hand and eye,
stand thank Heaven that I be well, in audible whisper: see the
power of love, cry one!--what a charming husband, another!--happy
couple, all!
o how the dear creature's cheek mantled!--how her eye sparkled!--how
sweetly acceptable be praise to conscious merit, while it but reproach
when apply to the undeserving!--what a new, what a gay creation it
make all at once in a diffident or dispirited heart!
and now, Belford, be it not worth while to be sick? and yet I must tell
thee, that too many pleasanter expedient offer themselves, to make trial
any more of this confound ipecacuanha.
LETTER III
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SATURDAY, MAY 27.
Mr. Lovelace, my dear, have be very ill. suddenly take. with a
vomiting of blood in great quantity. some vessel break. he
complain of a disorder in his stomach over night. I be the
affect with it, as I be afraid it be occasion by the violent
contention between us.--But be I in fault?
how lately do I think I hat him!--but hatred and anger, I see, be but
temporary passion with I. one cannot, my dear, hate people in danger
of death, or who be in distress or affliction. my heart, I find, be not
proof against kindness, and acknowledgement of error commit.
he take great care to have his illness conceal from I as long as he
could. so tender in the violence of his disorder!--so desirous to make
the good of it!--I wish he have not be ill in my sight. I be too much
affect--every body alarm I with his danger. the poor man, from
such high health, so suddenly taken!--and so unprepared!--
he be go out in a chair. I advise he to do so. I fear that my
advice be wrong; since quiet in such a disorder must need be good. we
be apt to be so ready, in case of emergency, to give our advice,
without judgment, or wait for it!--I propose a physician indeed; but
he would not hear of one. I have great honour for the faculty; and the
great, as I have always observe that those who treat the professor of
the art of heal contemptuously, too generally treat high
institution in the same manner.
I be really very uneasy. for I have, I doubt, expose myself to he, and
to the woman below. they indeed will excuse I, as they think we
marry. but if he be not generous, I shall have cause to regret this
surprise; which (as I have reason to think myself unaccountably treat by
he) have teach I more than I know of myself.
'tis true, I have own more than once, that I could have like Mr.
Lovelace above all man. I remember the debate you and I use to have on
this subject, when I be your happy guest. you use to say, and once you
write,* that man of his cast be the man that our sex do not naturally
dislike: while I hold, that such be not (however that might be) the man
we ought to like. but what with my relation precipitating of I, on one
hand, and what with his unhappy character, and embarrassing way, on the
other, I have no more leisure than inclination to examine my own heart in
this particular. and this remind I of a transcribe, though it be
write in raillery. 'may it not be,' say you,** 'that you have have such
person to deal with, as have not allow you to attend to the throb; or
if you have they a little now-and-then, whether, have have two account
to place they to, you have not by mistake put they to the wrong one?' a
passage, which, although it come into my mind when Mr. Lovelace be least
exceptionable, yet that I have deny any efficacy to, when he have tease
and vex I, and give I cause of suspicion. for, after all, my dear,
Mr. Lovelace be not wise in all his way. and should we not endeavour,
as much as be possible, (where we be not attach by natural tie,) to
like and dislike as reason bid we, and accord to the merit or demerit
of the object? if love, as it be call, be allow to be an excuse for
our most unreasonable folly, and to lay level all the fence that a
careful education have surround we by, what be mean by the doctrine of
subdue our passions?--but, o my dear friend, be I not guilty of a
punishable fault, be I to love this man of error? and have not my own
heart deceive I, when I think I do not? and what must be that love,
that have not some degree of purity for its object? I be afraid of
recollect some passage in my cousin Morden's letter.***--and yet why
fly I from subject that, duly consider, might tend to correct and
purify my heart? I have carry, I doubt, my notion on this head too
high, not for practice, but for my practice. yet think I not guilty of
prudery neither; for have I find out as much of myself before; or,
rather, have he give I heart's ease enough before to find it out, you
should have have my confession soon.
* see Vol. IV. Letter XXXIV.
** see Vol. I. Letter XII.
*** see Vol. IV. Letter XIX, & seq.
nevertheless, let I tell you (what I hope I may justly tell you,) that
if again he give I cause to resume distance and reserve, I hope my
reason will gather strength enough from his imperfection to enable I to
keep my passion under.--what can we do more than govern ourselves by the
temporary light lend we?
you will not wonder that I be grave on this detection--detection, must I
call it? what can I call it?--
Dissatisfied with myself, I be afraid to look back upon what I have
write: yet know not how to have do writing. I never be in such an
odd frame of mind.--I know not how to describe it.--was you ever so?--
Afraid of the censure of she you love--yet not conscious that you deserve
it?
of this, however, I be convince, that I should indeed deserve censure,
if I keep any secret of my heart from you.
but I will not add another word, after I have assure you, that I will
look still more narrowly into myself: and that I be
your equally sincere and affectionate
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER IV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SAT. evening.
I have a charming airing. no return of my malady. my heart be perfectly
easy, how could my stomach be otherwise?
but when I come home, I find that my sweet soul have be alarm by a
new incident--the inquiry after we both, in a very suspicious manner, and
that by description of our person, and not by name, by a servant in a
blue livery turn'd up and trimm'd with yellow.
Dorcas be call to he, as the upper servant; and she refuse to
answer any of the fellow's question, unless he tell his business, and
from whom he come, the fellow (as short as she) say, that if she would
not answer he, perhaps she might answer somebody else; and go away out
of humour.
Dorcas hurry up to her Lady, and alarm she, not only with the fact,
but with her own conjecture; add, that he be an ill-look fellow,
and she be sure could come for no good.
the livery and the feature of the servant be particularly inquire
after, and as particularly describe--Lord bless she! no end of her
alarm, she think! and then do her apprehension anticipate every
evil that could happen.
she wish Mr. Lovelace would come in.
Mr. Lovelace come in soon after; all lively, grateful, full of hope, of
duty, of love, to thank his charmer, and to congratulate with she upon
the cure she have perform. and then she tell the story, with all its
circumstance; and Dorcas, to point her lady's fear, tell we, that the
servant be a sun-burn fellow, and look as if he have be at sea.
he be then, no doubt, Captain Singleton's servant, and the next news she
should hear, be, that the house be surround by a whole ship's crew;
the vessel lie no far off, as she understand, than Rotherhithe.
impossible, I say. such an attempt would not be usher in by such a
manner of inquiry. and why may it not rather be a servant of your cousin
Morden, with notice of his arrival, and of his design to attend you?
this surmise delight she. her apprehension go off, and she be at
leisure to congratulate I upon my sudden recovery; which she do in the
most obliging manner.
but we have not sit long together, when Dorcas again come flutter up to
tell we, that the footman, the very footman, be again at the door, and
inquire, whether Mr. Lovelace and his lady, by name, have not lodging in
this house? he ask, he tell Dorcas, for no harm. but his disavowing
of harm, be a demonstration with my apprehensive fair-one, that harm be
intend. and as the fellow have not be answer by Dorcas, I propose
to go down to the street-parlour, and hear what he have to say.
I see your causeless terror, my dear life, say I, and your impatience
--Will you be pleased to walk down--and, without be observe, (for he
shall come no far than the parlour-door,) you may hear all that
pass?
she consent. we go down. Dorcas bid the man come forward. well,
friend, what be your business with Mr. and Mrs. Lovelace?
bow, scrap, I be sure you be the gentleman, Sir. why, Sir, my
business be only to know if your honour be here, and to be speak with;
or if you shall be here for any time?
whom come you from?
from a gentleman who order I to say, if I be make to tell, but not
else, it be from a friend of Mr. John Harlowe, Mrs. Lovelace's eld
uncle.
the dear creature be ready to sink upon this. it be but of late that
she have provide herself with salt. she pull they out.
do you know anything of Colonel Morden, friend? say I.
No; I never hear of his name.
of Captain Singleton?
no, Sir. but the gentleman, my master, be a Captain too.
what be his name?
I donot know if I should tell.
there can be no harm in tell the gentleman's name, if you come upon
a good account.
that I do; for my master tell I so; and there be not an honester
gentleman on the face of God's yearth.--His name be Captain Tomlinson,
Sir.
I donot know such a one.
I believe not, Sir. he be pleased to say, he donot know your honor,
Sir; but I hear he say as how he should not be an unwelcome visiter to
you for all that.
do you know such a man as Captain Tomlinson, my dear life, [aside,]
your uncle's friend?
no; but my uncle may have acquaintance, no doubt, that I donot know.--
but I hope [tremble] this be not a trick.
well, friend, if your master have anything to say to Mr. Lovelace, you may
tell he, that Mr. Lovelace be here; and will see he whenever he
please.
the dear creature look as if afraid that my engagement be too prompt
for my own safety; and away go the fellow--I wonder, that she might
not wonder, that this Captain Tomlinson, whoever he be, come not
himself, or send not a letter the second time, when he have reason to
suppose that I might be here.
mean time, for fear that this should be a contrivance of James Harlowe,
who, I say, love plotting, though he have not a head turn for it, I
give some precautionary direction to the servant, and the woman, whom,
for the great parade, I assemble before we, and my belove be
resolve not to stir abroad till she see the issue of this odd affair.
and here must I close, though in so great a puzzle.
only let I add, that poor Belton want thee; for I dare not stir for my
life.
Mowbray and Tourville skulk about like vagabond, without head, without
hand, without soul; have neither you nor I to conduct they. they
tell I, they shall rust beyond the power of oil or action to brighten
they up, or give they motion.
how go it with thy uncle?
LETTER V
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY, MAY 28.
this story of Captain Tomlinson employ we not only for the time we be
together last night, but all the while we sit at breakfast this morning.
she would still have it that it be the prelude to some mischief from
Singleton. I insist (accord to my former hint) that it might much
more probably be a method take by Colonel Morden to alarm she, previous
to a personal visit. travel gentleman affect to surprise in this
manner. and why, dear creature, say I, must every thing that
happen, which we cannot immediately account for, be what we least wish?
she have have so many disagreeable thing befall she of late, that her
fear be too often strong than her hope.
and this, Madam, make I apprehensive, that you will get into so low-
spirit a way, that you will not be able to enjoy the happiness that
seem to await we.
her duty and her gratitude, she gravely say, to the Dispenser of all
good, would secure she, she hop, against unthankfulness. and a
thankful spirit be the same as a joyful one.
so, Belford, for all her future joy she depend entirely upon the
invisible Good. she be certainly right; since those who fix least upon
second cause be the least likely to be disappoint--and be not this
gravity for her gravity?
she have hardly do speaking, when Dorcas come run up in a hurry--
she set even my heart into a palpitation--thump, thump, thump, like a
precipitate pendulum in a clock-case--flutter, flutter, flutter, my
charmer's, as by her sweet bosom rise to her chin I see.
this low class of people, my beloved herself observe, be for ever
aim at the stupid wonderful, and for make even common incident
matter of surprise.
why the devil, say I to the wench, this alarm hurry?--and with your
spread finger, and your o Madams, and o sirs!--and be curse to you!
would there have be a second of time difference, have you come up
slowly?
Captain Tomlinson, Sir!
Captain Devilson, what care I?--Do you see how you have disorder your
lady?
Good Mr. Lovelace, say my charmer, tremble [see, Jack, when she have an
end to serve, I be good Mr. Lovelace,] if--if my brother,--if Captain
Singleton should appear--pray now--I beseech you--let I beg of you--to
govern your temper--my brother be my brother--Captain Singleton be but an
agent.
my dear life, fold my arm about she, [when she ask favour,
think I, the devilbe in it, if she will not allow such an innocent
freedom as this, from good Mr. Lovelace too,] you shall be witness of all
pass between us.--Dorcas, desire the gentleman to walk up.
let I retire to my chamber first!--Let I not be know to be in the
house!
Charming dear!--Thou seest, Belford, she be afraid of leave me!--O the
little witchcraft! be it not for surprise now-and-then, how would an
honest man know where to have they?
she withdraw to listen.--And though this incident have not turn out to
answer all I wish from it, yet be it not necessary, if I would acquaint
thee with my whole circulation, to be very particular in what pass
between Captain Tomlinson and I.
Enter Captain Tomlinson, in a riding-dress, whip in hand.
your servant, sir,--mr. Lovelace, I presume?
my name be Lovelace, Sir.
Excuse the day, Sir.--Be please to excuse my garb. I be oblige to go
out of town directly, that I may return at night.
the day be a good day. your garb need no apology.
when I send my servant, I do not know that I should find time to do
myself this honour. all that I think I could do to oblige my friend
this journey, be only to assure myself of your abode; and whether there
be a probability of be admit to the speech of either you, or your
lady.
Sir, you well know your own motif. what your time will permit you to do,
you also well know. and here I be, attend your pleasure.
my charmer own afterwards her concern on my be so short. whatever
I shall mingle of her emotion, thou wilt easily guess I have afterwards.
Sir, I hope no offence. I intend none.
none--none at all, Sir.
Sir, I have no interest in the affair I come about. I may appear
officious; and if I think I should, I would decline any concern in it,
after I have just hint what it be.
and pray, Sir, what be it?
may I ask you, Sir, without offence, whether you wish to be reconcile,
and to co-operate upon honourable term, with one gentleman of the name
of Harlowe; preparative, as it may be hop, to a general reconciliation?
o how my heart flutter! cry my charmer.
I cannot tell, sir--[and then it flutter still more, no doubt:] the
whole family have use I extremely ill. they have take great
liberty with my character than be justifiable; and with my family too;
which I can less forgive.
Sir, Sir, I have do. I beg pardon for this intrusion.
my beloved be then ready to sink, and think very hardly of I.
but, pray, Sir, to the immediate purpose of your present commission;
since a commission it seem to be?
it be a commission, Sir; and such a one, as I think would be agreeable
to all party, or I should not have give myself concern about it.
perhaps it may, Sir, when know. but let I ask you one previous
question--do you know Colonel Morden, Sir?
no, Sir. if you mean personally, I do not. but I have hear my good
friend Mr. John Harlowe talk of he with great respect; and such a
co-trustee with he in a certain trust.
Lovel. I think it probable, Sir, that the Colonel might be arrive;
that you might be a gentleman of his acquaintance; and that something of
an agreeable surprise might be intend.
Capt. have Colonel Morden be in England, Mr. John Harlowe would have
know it; and then I should not have be a stranger to it.
Lovel. well but, Sir, have you then any commission to I from Mr. John
Harlowe?
Capt. Sir, I will tell you, as briefly as I can, the whole of what I
have to say; but youwill excuse I also in a previous question, for what
curiosity be not my motive; but it be necessary to be answer before I
can proceed; as you will judge when you hear it.
Lovel. what, pray, Sir, be your question?
Capt. Briefly, whether you be actually, and bona fide, marry to Miss
Clarissa Harlowe?
I start, and, in a haughty tone, be this, Sir, a question that must be
answer before you can proceed in the business you have undertake?
I mean no offence, Mr. Lovelace. Mr. Harlowe seek to I to undertake
this office. I have daughter and niece of my own. I think it a good
office, or I, who have many considerable affair upon my hand, have not
accept of it. I know the world; and will take the liberty to say, that
if the young lady--
Captain Tomlinson, I think you be call?
my name be Tomlinson.
why then, Tomlinson, no liberty, as you call it, will be take well, that
be not extremely delicate, when that lady be mention.
when you have hear I out, Mr. Lovelace, and have find I have so behave,
as to make the caution necessary, it would have be just to have give
it.--allow I to say, I know what be due to the character of a woman of
virtue, as well as any man alive.
why, Sir! why, Captain Tomlinson, you seem warm. if you intend any
thing by this, [o how I tremble! say the lady, when she take notice of
this part of our conversation afterwards,] I will only say, that this be
a privileged place. it be at present my home, and an asylum for any
gentleman who think it worth his while to inquire after I, be the
manner or end of his inquiry what it will.
I know not, Sir, that I have give occasion for this. I make no scruple
to attend you elsewhere, if I be troublesome here. I be tell, I have a
warm young gentleman to deal with: but as I know my intention, and that
my commission be an amicable one, I be the less concerned about that.
I be twice your age, Mr. Lovelace, I dare say: but I do assure you, that
if either my message or my manner give you offence, I can suspend the
one or the other for a day, or for ever, as you like. and so, Sir, any
time before eight tomorrow morning, you will let I know your further
commands.--And be go to tell I where he might be find.
Captain Tomlinson, say I, you answer well. I love a man of spirit.
have you not be in the army?
I have, Sir; but have turn my sword into a ploughshare, as the
scripture have it,--[there be a clever fellow, Jack!--he be a good man
with somebody, I warrant! o what a fine coat and cloke for an hypocrite
will a text of scripture, properly apply, make at any time in the eye
of the pious!--how easily be the good folk take in!]--and all my
delight, add he, for some year past, have be in cultivate my
paternal estate. I love a brave man, Mr. Lovelace, as well as ever I do
in my life. but let I tell you, Sir, that when you come to my time of
life, you will be of opinion, that there be not so much true bravery in
youthful choler, as you may now think there be.
a clever fellow again, belford!--ear and heart, both at once, he take in
my charmer!--'tis well, she say, there be some man who have wisdom in
their anger.
well, Captain, that be reproof for reproof. so we be upon a footing.
and now give I the pleasure of hear the import of your commission.
Sir, you must first allow I to repeat my question: be you really, and
bona fide, married to Miss Clarissa Harlowe? or be you not yet marry?
bluntly put, Captain. but if I answer that I be, what then?
why then, Sir, I shall say, that you be a man of honour.
that I hope I be, whether you say it or not, Captain Tomlinson.
Sir, I will be very frank in all I have to say on this subject--Mr. John
Harlowe have lately find out, that you and his niece be both in the same
lodging; that you have be long so; and that the lady be at the play
with you yesterday be se'nnight; and he hop that you be actually
married. he have indeed hear that you be; but as he know your
enterprise temper, and that you have declare, that you disdain a
relation to their family, he be willing by I to have your marriage
confirm from your own mouth, before he take the step he be inclined to
take in his niece's favour. you will allow I to say, Mr. Lovelace, that
he will not be satisfied with an answer that admit of the least doubt.
let I tell you, Captain Tomlinson, that it be a high degree of vileness
for any man to suppose--
Sir--Mr. Lovelace--don't put yourself into a passion. the lady's
relation be jealous of the honour of their family. they have
prejudice to overcome as well as you--advantage may have be take--and
the lady, at the time, not to blame.
this lady, Sir, could give no such advantage: and if she have, what must
the man be, Captain Tomlinson, who could have take them?--Do you know
the lady, Sir?
I never have the honour to see she but once; and that be at a church; and
should not know she again.
not know she again, Sir!--I think there be not a man live who have
once see she, and would not know she among a thousand.
I remember, Sir, that I think I never see a fine woman in my life.
but, Mr. Lovelace, I believe, you will allow, that it be well that her
relation should have wrong you, than you the lady, I hope, Sir, you
will permit I to repeat my question.
Enter Dorcas, in a hurry.
a gentleman, this minute, Sir, desire to speak with your honour--[my
lady, Sir!--Aside.]
could the dear creature put Dorcas upon tell this fib, yet want to
save I one?
Desire the gentleman to walk into one of the parlour. I will wait upon
he presently.
[exit Dorcas.
the dear creature, I doubt not, want to instruct I how to answer
the Captain's home put. I know how I intend to answer it--plumb, thou
may'st be sure--but Dorcas's message stagger I. and yet I be upon
one of my master-stroke--which be, to take advantage of the captain's
inquiry, and to make she own her marriage before he, as she have do
to the people below; and if she have be bring to that, to induce she,
for her uncle's satisfaction, to write he a letter of gratitude; which
of course must have be sign Clarissa Lovelace. I be loth,
therefore, thou may'st believe, to attend her sudden command: and yet,
afraid of push matter beyond recovery with she, I think proper to
lead he from the question, to account for himself and for Mr. Harlowe's
come to the knowledge of where we be; and for other particular which
I know would engage her attention; and which might possibly convince she
of the necessity there be for she to acquiesce in the affirmative I be
disposed to give. and this for her own sake; for what, as I ask she
afterwards, be it to I, whether I be ever reconcile to her family?--a
family, Jack, which I must for ever despise.
you think, Captain, that I have answer doubtfully to the question you
put. you may think so. and you must know, that I have a good deal of
pride; and, only that you be a gentleman, and seem in this affair to be
govern by generous motif, or I should ill brook be interrogate as
to my honour to a lady so dear to me.--but before I answer more directly
to the point, pray satisfy I in a question or two that I shall put to
you.
with all my heart, Sir. ask I what question you please, I will answer
they with sincerity and candour.
you say, Mr. Harlowe have find out that we be at a play together: and
that we be both in the same lodging--how, pray, come he at his
knowledge?--for, let I tell you, that I have, for certain
consideration, (not respect myself, I will assure you,) condescend
that our abode should be keep secret. and this have be so strictly
observe, that even Miss Howe, though she and my beloved correspond, know
not directly where to send to we.
why, Sir, the person who see you at the play, be a tenant of Mr. John
Harlowe. he watch all your motion. when the play be do, he
follow your coach to your lodging. and early the next day, Sunday,
he take horse, and acquaint his landlord with what he have observe.
Lovel. how oddly thing come about!--but do any other of the Harlowes
know where we be?
Capt. it be an absolute secret to every other person of the family; and
so it be intend to be keep: as also that Mr. John Harlowe be willing to
enter into treaty with you, by I, if his niece be actually marry; for
perhaps he be aware, that he shall have difficulty enough with some
people to bring about the desirable reconciliation, although he could
give they this assurance.
I doubt it not, Captain--to James Harlowe be all the family folly owe.
fine fool! [heroically stalk about] to be govern by one to whom
malice and not genius, give the busy liveliness that distinguish he
from a natural!--but how long, pray, Sir, have Mr. John Harlowe be in
this pacific disposition?
I will tell you, Mr. Lovelace, and the occasion; and be very explicit
upon it, and upon all that concern you to know of I, and of the
commission I have undertake to execute; and this the rather, as when
you have hear I out, you will be satisfied, that I be not an officious
man in this my present address to you.
I be all attention, Captain Tomlinson.
and so I doubt not be my beloved.
Capt. 'you must know, Sir, that I have not be many month in Mr. John
Harlwe's neighbourhood. I remove from Northamptonshire, partly for the
sake of well manage one of two executorship, which I could not avoid
engage in, (the affair of which frequently call I to town, and be
part of my present business;) and partly for the sake of occupy a
neglect farm, which have lately fall into my hand. but though an
acquaintance of no long stand, and that commence on the bowling-
green, [uncle John be a great bowler, Belford,] (upon my decision of a
point to every one's satisfaction, which be appeal to I by all the
gentleman, and which might have be attend with bad consequence,) no
two brother have a more cordial esteem for each other. you know, Mr.
Lovelace, that there be a consent, as I may call it, in some mind, which
will unite they strong together in a few hour, than year can do with
other, whom yet we see not with disgust.'
Lovel. very true, Captain.
Capt. 'it be on the foot of this avow friendship on both side, that
on Monday the 15th, as I very well remember, Mr. Harlowe invite himself
home with I. and when there, he acquaint I with the whole of the
unhappy affair that have make they all so uneasy. till then I know it
only by report; for, intimate as we be, I forbear to speak of what be
so near his heart, till he begin first. and then he tell I, that he have
have an application make to he, two or three day before, by a gentleman
whom he name,* to induce he not only to be reconcile himself to his
niece, but to forward for she a general reconciliation.
* see Vol. IV. letter XXIII and XXIX.
'a like application, he tell I, have be make to his sister Harlowe, by
a good woman, whom every body respect; who have intimate, that his
niece, if encourage, would again put herself into the protection of her
friend, and leave you: but if not, that she must unavoidably be your's.'
I hope, Mr. Lovelace, I make no mischief.--you look concern--you sigh,
Sir.
Proceed, Captain Tomlinson. pray proceed.--and I sigh still more
profoundly.
Capt. 'they all think it extremely particular, that a lady should
decline marriage with a man she have so lately go away with.'
Pray, Captain--pray, Mr. Tomlinson--no more of this subject. my beloved
be an angel. in every thing unblamable. whatever fault there have
be, have be theirs and mine. what you would far say, be, that
the unforgive family reject her application. they do. she and I
have a misunderstanding. the fall out of lover--you know, Captain.
--We have be happy ever since.
Capt. 'well, Sir; but Mr. John Harlowe could not but well consider
the matter afterwards. and he desire my advice how to act in it. he
tell I that no father ever love a daughter as he love this niece of
his; whom, indeed, he use to call his daughter-niece. he say, she have
really be unkindly treat by her brother and sister: and as your
alliance, Sir, be far from be a discredit to their family, he would
do his endeavour to reconcile all party, if he could be sure that ye
be actually man and wife.'
Lovel. and what, pray, Captain, be your advice?
Capt. 'I give it as my opinion, that if his niece be unworthily
treat, and in distress, (as he apprehend from the application to
he,) he would soon hear of she again: but that it be likely, that this
application be make without expect it would succeed; and as a salvo
only, to herself, for marry without their consent. and the rather
think I so, as he have tell I, that it come from a young lady her
friend, and not in a direct way from herself; which young lady be no
favourite of the family; and therefore would hardly have be employ,
have success be expect.'
Lovel. very well, Captain Tomlinson--pray proceed.
Capt. 'here the matter rest till last Sunday evening, when Mr. John
Harlowe come to I with the man who have see you and your lady (as I
presume she be) at the play; and who have assure he, that you both
lodge in the same house.--and then the application have be so lately
make, which imply that you be not then marry, he be so uneasy for
his niece's honour, that I advise he to dispatch to town some one in
whom he could confide, to make proper inquiry.'
Lovel. very well, Captain--and be such a person employ on such an
errand by her uncle?
Capt. 'a trusty and discreet person be accordingly send; and last
Tuesday, I think it be, (for he return to we on the Wednesday,) he
make the inquiry among the neighbour first.' [the very inquiry, Jack,
that give we all so much uneasiness.*] 'but find that none of they
could give any satisfactory account, the lady's woman be come at, who
declare, that you be actually marry. but the inquirist keep
himself on the reserve as to his employer, the girl refuse to tell the
day, or to give he other particular.'
* see Vol. IV. Letter L.
Lovel. you give a very clear account of every thing, Captain Tomlinson.
pray proceed.
Capt. 'the gentleman return; and, on his report, Mr. Harlowe, have
still doubt, and be willing to proceed on some ground in so
important a point, besought I (as my affair call I frequently to
town) to undertake this matter. "you, Mr. Tomlinson, he be pleased to
say, have child of your own: you know the world: you know what I drive
at: you will proceed, I be sure, with understanding and spirit: and
whatever you be satisfied with shall satisfy I."'
Enter Dorcas again in a hurry.
Sir, the gentleman be impatient.
I will attend he presently.
the Captain then account for his not call in person, when he have
reason to think we here.
he say he have business of consequence a few mile out of town, whither
he think he must have go yesterday, and have be oblige to put
off his little journey till this day, and understanding that we be
within, not know whether he should have such another opportunity, he
be willing to try his good fortune before he set out; and this make he
come boot and spur, as I see he.
he drop a hint in commendation of the people of the house; but it be
in such a way, as to give no room to suspect that he think it necessary
to inquire after the character of person, who make so genteel an
appearance, as he observe they do.
and here let I remark, that my beloved might collect another
circumstance in favour of the people below, have she doubt their
character, from the silence of her uncle's inquirist on Tuesday among
the neighbour.
Capt. 'and now, Sir, that I believe I have satisfy you in every thing
relate to my commission, I hope you will permit I to repeat my
question--which is--'
Enter Dorcas again, out of breath.
Sir, the gentleman will step up to you. [my lady be impatient. she
wonder at your honour's delay. aside.]
excuse I, Captain, for one moment.
I have staid my full time, Mr. Lovelace. what may result from my
question and your answer, whatever it shall be, may take we up time.--
and you be engage. will you permit I to attend you in the morning,
before I set out on my return?
you will then breakfast with I, Captain?
it must be early if I do. I must reach my own house to-morrow night, or
I shall make the good of wife unhappy. and I have two or three place
to call at in my way.
it shall be by seven o'clock, if you please, Captain. we be early
folk. and this I will tell you, that if ever I be reconcile to a
family so implacable as I have always find the Harlowes to be, it must
be by the mediation of so cool and so moderate a gentleman as yourself.
and so, with the high civility on both side, we part. but for
the private satisfaction of so good a man, I leave he out of doubt that
we be man and wife, though I do not directly aver it.
LETTER VI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY NIGHT.
this Captain Tomlinson be one of the happy as well as one of the good
man in the world. what would I give to stand as high in my beloved's
opinion as he do! but yet I be as good a man as he, be I to tell my
own story, and have equal credit give to it. but the devil should have
have he before I have see he on the account he come upon, have I think
I should not have answer my principal end in it. I hint to thee in
my last what that be.
but to the particular of the conference between my fair-one and I, on
her hasty message; which I be loth to come to, because she have have an
half triumph over I in it.
after I have attend the Captain down to the very passage, I return to
the dining-room, and put on a joyful air, on my beloved's entrance into
it--o my dearest creature, say I, let I congratulate you on a prospect
so agreeable to your wish! and I snatch her hand, and smother it
with kiss.
I be go on; when interrupt I, you see, Mr. Lovelace, say she,
how you have embarrass yourself by your obliquity! you see, that you
have not be able to return a direct answer to a plain and honest
question, though upon it depend all the happiness, on the prospect of
which you congratulate I!
you know, my good love, what my prudent, and I will say, my kind motif
be, for give out that we be marry. you see that I have take no
advantage of it; and that no inconvenience have follow it. you see that
your uncle want only to be assure from ourselves that it be so--
not another word on this subject, Mr. Lovelace. I will not only risk,
but I will forfeit, the reconciliation so near my heart, rather than I
will go on to countenance a story so untrue!
my dear soul--would you have I appear--
I would have you appear, Sir, as you be! I be resolve that I will
appear to my uncle's friend, and to my uncle, as I be.
for one week, my dear life! cannot you for one week--only till the
settlements--
not for one hour, with my own consent. you donot know, Sir, how much I
have be afflict, that I have appear to the people below what I be
not. but my uncle, Sir, shall never have it to upbraid I, nor will I to
upbraid myself, that I have wilfully pass upon he in false light.
what, my dear, would you have I say to the Captain to-morrow morning? I
have give he room to think--
then put he right, Mr. Lovelace. tell the truth. tell he what you
please of the favour of your relation to I: tell he what you will
about the settlement: and if, when draw, you will submit they to his
perusal and approbation, it will show he how much you be in earnest.
my dearest life!--do you think that he would disapprove of the term I
have offer?
no.
then may I be accurse, if I willingly submit to be trample under foot
by my enemy!
and may I, Mr. Lovelace, never be unhappy in this life, if I submit to
the passing upon my uncle Harlowe a wilful and premeditate falshood for
truth! I have too long labour under the affliction which the rejection
of all my friend have give I, to purchase my reconciliation with they
now at so dear a price as this of my veracity.
the woman below, my dear--
what be the woman below to me?--i want not to establish myself with
they. need they know all that pass between my relation and you and
I?
neither be they any thing to I, Madam. only, that when, for the sake
of prevent the fatal mischief which might have attend your
brother's project, I have make they think we marry, I would not appear
to they in a light which you yourself think so shocking. by my soul,
Madam, I have rather die, than contradict myself so flagrantly, after I
have relate to they so many circumstance of our marriage.
well, Sir, the woman may believe what they please. that I have give
countenance to what you tell they be my error. the many circumstance
which you own one untruth have draw you in to relate, be a justification
of my refusal in the present case.
donot you see, Madam, that your uncle wish to find that we be marry?
may not the ceremony be privately over, before his mediation can take
place?
urge this point no far, Mr. Lovelace. if you will not tell the
truth, I will to-morrow morning (if I see Captain Tomlinson) tell it
myself. indeed I will.
will you, Madam, consent that thing pass as before with the people
below? this mediation of Tomlinson may come to nothing. your brother's
scheme may be pursue; the rather, that now he will know (perhaps from
your uncle) that you be not under a legal protection.--You will, at
least, consent that thing pass here as before?--
to permit this, be to go on in an error, Mr. Lovelace. but as the
occasion for so do (if there can be in your opinion an occasion that
will warrant an untruth) will, as I presume, soon be over, I shall the
less dispute that point with you. but a new error I will not be guilty
of, if I can avoid it.
can I, do you think, Madam, have any dishonourable view in the step I
suppose you would not scruple to take towards a reconciliation with your
own family? not for my own sake, you know, do I wish you to take it;
for what be it to I, if I be never reconcile to your family? I want no
favour from they.
I hope, Mr. Lovelace, there be no occasion, in our present not
disagreeable situation, to answer such a question. and let I say, that
I shall think my prospect still more agreeable, if, to-morrow morning
you will not only own the very truth, but give my uncle's friend such an
account of the step you have take, and be take, as may keep up my
uncle's favourable intention towards I. this you may do under what
restriction of secrecy you please. Captain Tomlinson be a prudent man;
a promoter of family-peace, you find; and, I dare say, may be make a
friend.
I see there be no help. I see that the inflexible Harlowe spirit be
all up in her.--A little witch!--a little--forgive I, Love, for call
her name! and so I say, with an air, we have have too many
misunderstanding, Madam, for I to wish for new one: I will obey you
without reserve. have I not think I should have oblige you by the
other method, (especially as the ceremony might have be over before any
thing could have operate from your uncle's intention, and of
consequence no untruth persist in,) I would not have propose it. but
think not, my beloved creature, that you shall enjoy, without condition,
this triumph over my judgment.
and then, clasp my arm about she, I give she avert cheek (her
charming lip design) a fervent kiss.--And your forgiveness of this
sweet freedom [bow] be that condition.
she be not mortally offended. and now must I make out the rest as well
as I can. but this I will tell thee, that although her triumph have not
diminish my love for she, yet it have stimulate I more than ever to
revenge, as thou wilt be apt to call it. but victory, or conquest, be
the more proper word.
there be a pleasure, 'tis true, in subdue one of these watchful
beauty. but by my soul, Belford, man of our cast take twenty time the
pain to be rogue than it would cost they to be honest; and dearly, with
the sweat of our brow, and to the puzzlement of our brain, (to say
nothing of the hazard he run,) do we earn our purchase; and ought not
therefore to be grudge our success when we meet with it--especially as,
when we have obtain our end, satiety soon follow; and leave we little
or nothing to show for it. but this, indeed, may be say of all worldly
delights.--And be not that a grave reflection from I?
I be willing to write up to the time. although I have not carry my
principal point, I shall make something turn out if my favour from
Captain Tomlinson's errand. but let I give thee this caution; that thou
do not pretend to judge of my device by part; but have patience till
thou se the whole. but once more I swear, that I will not be
out-Norris'd by a pair of novice. and yet I be very apprehensive, at
time, of the consequence of Miss Howe's smuggling scheme.
my conscience, I should think, ought not to reproach I for a
contrivance, which be justify by the contrivance of two such girl as
these: one of whom (the more excellent of the two) I have always, with
her own approbation, as I imagine, propose for my imitation.
but here, Jack, be the thing that conclude I, and case my heart with
adamant: I find, by Miss Howe's letter, that it be owe to she, that I
have make no great progress with my bloom fair-one. she love I.
the ipecacuanha contrivance convince I that she love I. where there
be love there must be confidence, or a desire of have reason to
confide. generosity, found on my suppose generosity, have take hold
of her heart. shall I not now see (since I must forever be unhappy, if I
marry she, and leave any trial unessaye) what I can make of her love,
and her newly-raise confidence?--will it not be to my glory to succeed?
and to shebe and to the honour of her sex, if I cannot?--where then will
be the hurt to either, to make the trial? and cannot I, as I have often
say,
reward she when I will by marriage?
'tis late, or rather early; for the day begin to dawn upon I. I be
plaguy heavy. perhaps I need not to have tell thee that. but will only
indulge a doze in my chair for an hour; then shake myself, wash and
refresh. at my time of life, with such a constitution as I be bless
with, thatbe all thatbe want.
good night to me!--it cannot be broad day till I be
awake.--Aw-w-w-whaugh--pox of this yawning!
be not thy uncle dead yet?
whatbe come to mine, that he write not to my last?--hunting after more
wisdom of nation, I suppose!--yaw-yaw-yawn again!--Pen, begone!
LETTER VII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY, MAY 29.
now have I establish myself for ever in my charmer's heart.
the Captain come at seven, as promise, and ready equip for his
journey. my beloved choose not to give we her company till our first
conversation be over--ashamed, I suppose, to be present at that part of
it which be to restore she to her virgin state by my confession, after
her wifehood have be report to her uncle. but she take her cue,
nevertheless, and listen to all that pass.
the modest woman, Jack, must think, and think deeply sometimes. I
wonder whether they ever blush at those thing by themselves, at which
they have so charming a knack of blushing in company. if not; and if
blushing be a sign of grace or modesty; have not the sex as great a
command over their blush as they be say to have over their tear?
this reflection would lead I a great way into female mind, be I
disposed to pursue it.
I tell the Captain, that I would prevent his question; and accordingly
(after I have enjoin the strict secrecy, that no advantage might be
give to James Harlowe, and which he have answer for as well on Mr.
Harlowe's part as his own) I acknowledge nakedly and fairly the whole
truth--to wit, 'that we be not yet married. I give he hint of the
cause of procrastination. some of they owe to unhappy
misunderstanding: but chiefly to the Lady's desire of previous
reconciliation with her friend; and to a delicacy that have no example.'
less nice lady than this, Jack, love to have delay, wilful and studied
delay, impute to they in these case--yet be indelicate in their
affected delicacy: for do they not thereby tacitly confess, that they
expect to be the great estgainer in wedlock; and that there be
self-denial in the pride they take in delaying?
'I tell he the reason of our pass to the people below as marry--yet
as under a vow of restriction, as to consummation, which have keep we both
to the height, one of forbearing, the other of vigilant punctilio; even
to the denial of those innocent freedom, which betroth lover never
scruple to allow and to take.
'I then communicate to he a copy of my proposal of settlement; the
substance of her write answer; the content of my letter of invitation
to Lord M. to be her nuptial-father; and of my Lord's generous reply.
but say, that have apprehension of delay from his infirmity, and my
beloved choosing by all mean (and that from principle of unrequited
duty) a private solemnization, I have write to excuse his Lordship's
presence; and expect an answer every hour.
'the settlement, I tell he, be actually draw by Counsellor
Williams, of whose eminence he must have heard--'
he have.
'and of the truth of this he might satisfy himself before he go out of
town.
'when these be draw, approve, and engross, nothing, I say, but
signing, and the nomination of my happy day, would be want. I have a
pride, I declare, in do the high justice to so belove a creature,
of my own voluntary motion, and without the intervention of a family from
whom I have receive the great insult. and this be our present
situation, I be content that Mr. John Harlowe should suspend his
reconciliatory purpose till our marriage be actually solemnize.'
the Captain be highly delighted with all I say: yet own, that as his
dear friend Mr. Harlowe have express himself greatly pleased to hear
that we be actually marry, he could have wish it have be so. but,
nevertheless, he doubt not that all would be well.
he see my reason, he say, and approve of they, for make the
gentlewoman below [whom again he understand to be good sort of people]
believe that the ceremony have pass; which so well account for what
the lady's maid have tell Mr. Harlowe's friend. Mr. James Harlowe, he
say, have certainly end to answer in keep open the breach; and as
certainly have form a design to get his sister out of my hand.
wherefore it as much import his worthy friend to keep this treaty as
secret, as it do I; at least till he have form his party, and take
his measure. Ill will and passion be dreadful misrepresenter. it
be amazing to he, that animosity could be carry so high against a man
capable of view so pacific and so honourable, and who have show such a
command of his temper, in this whole transaction, as I have do.
Generosity, indeed, in every case, where love of stratagem and intrigue
(I would excuse he) be not concern, be a part of my character.
he be proceed, when, breakfast be ready, in come the empress of my
heart, irradiate all around she, as with a glory--a benignity and
graciousness in her aspect, that, though natural to it, have be long
banish from it.
next to prostration lowly bow the Captain. o how the sweet creature
smile her approbation of he! reverence from one beget reverence from
another. man be more of monkey in imitation than they think
themselves.--involuntarily, in a manner, I bent my knee--my dearest
life--and make a very fine speech on present the Captain to she. no
title myself, to her lip or cheek, 'tis well he attempt not either. he
be indeed ready to worship her;--could only touch her charming hand.
I have tell the Captain, my dear creature--and then I briefly repeat
(as if I have suppose she have not hear it) all I have tell he.
he be astonish, that any body could be displease one moment with such
an angel. he undertake her cause as the high degree of merit to
himself.
never, I must need say, do an angel so much look the angel. all placid,
serene, smile, self-assure: a more lovely flush than usual heighten
her natural grace, and add charm, even to radiance, to her charming
complexion.
after we have seat ourselves, the agreeable subject be renew, as we
take our chocolate. how happy should she be in her uncle's restore
favour!
the Captain engage for it--no more delay, he hop, on her part! let
the happy day be but once over, all would then be right. but be it
improper to ask for copy of my proposal, and of her answer, in order
to show they to his dear friend, her uncle?
as Mr. Lovelace pleased.--O that the dear creature would always say so!
it must be in strict confidence then, I say. but would it not be well
to show her uncle the draught of the settlement, when draw?
and will you be so good as to allow of this, Mr. Lovelace?
there, Belford! we be once the quarrelsome, but now we be the polite,
lover.
indeed, my dear creature, I will, if you desire it, and if Captain
Tomlinson will engage that Mr. Harlowe shall keep they absolutely a
secret; that I may not be subject to the cavil and controul of any
other of a family that have use I so very ill.
now, indeed, Sir, you be very obliging.
dost think, Jack, that my face do not now also shine?
I hold out my hand, (first consecrate it with a kiss,) for she's. she
condescend to give it I. I press it to my lip: you know not
Captain Tomlinson, (with an air,) all storm overblown, what a happy
man--
Charming couple! [his hand lift up,] how will my good friend rejoice!
o that he be present! you know not, Madam, how dear you still be to
your uncle Harlowe!
I be still unhappy ever to have disoblige he!
not too much of that, however, fairest, think I!
the Captain repeat his resolution of service, and that in so acceptable
a manner, that the dear creature wish that neither he, nor any of his,
might ever want a friend of equal benevolence.
nor any of this, she say; for the Captain bring it in, that he have
five child live, by one of the good wife and mother, whose
excellent management make he as happy as if his eight hundred pound a
year (which be all he have to boast of) be two thousand.
without economy, the oracular lady say, no estate be large enough.
with it, the least be not too small.
lie still, tease villain! lie still.--I be only speak to my
conscience, Jack.
and let I ask you, Mr. Lovelace, say the Captain; yet not so much from
doubt, as that I may proceed upon sure ground--you be willing to
co-operate with my dear friend in a general reconciliation?
let I tell you, Mr. Tomlinson, that if it can be distinguish, that my
readiness to make up with a family, of whose generosity I have not have
reason to think highly, be entirely owe to the value I have for this
angel of a woman, I will not only co-operate with Mr. John Harlowe, as
you ask; but I will meet with Mr. James Harlowe senior, and his lady, all
the way. and furthermore, to make the son James and his sister arabella
quite easy, I will absolutely disclaim any further interest, whether
live or die, in any of the three brother' estate; content myself
with what my beloved's grandfather have bequeath to she: for I have
reason to be abundantly satisfied with my own circumstance and
prospect--enough rewarded, be she not to bring a shilling in dowry, in
a woman who have a merit superior to all the good of fortune.--true as
the Gospel, belford!--why have not this scene a real foundation?
the dear creature, by her eye, express her gratitude, before her lip
could utter it. o Mr. Lovelace, say she--you have infinitely--and there
she stopt.
the Captain run over in my praise. he be really affect.
o that I have not such a mixture of revenge and pride in my love, think
i!--but, (my old plea,) cannot I make her amend at any time? and be not
her virtue now in the height of its probation?--would she lie aside, like
the friend of my uncontending Rosebud, all thought of defiance--would
she throw herself upon my mercy, and try I but one fortnight in the life
of honour--what then?--i cannot say, what then--
do not despise I, Jack, for my inconsistency--in no two letter perhaps
agree with myself--who expect consistency in man of our
character?--but I be mad with love--fire by revenge--puzzle with my own
device--my invention be my curse--my pride my punishment--draw five or
six way at once, can she possibly be so unhappy as I?--O why, why, be
this woman so divinely excellent!--yet how know I that she be? what have
be her trial? have I have the courage to make a single one upon her
person, though a thousand upon she temper?--enow, I hope, to make she
afraid of ever more disoblige I more!--
***
I must banish reflection, or I be a lost man. for these two hour past
have I hat myself for my own contrivance. and this not only from what
I have relate to thee; but for what I have far to relate. but I
have now once more steel my heart. my vengeance be uppermost; for I
have be reperuse some of Miss Howe's virulence. the contempt they
have both hold I in I cannot bear.
the happy breakfast-time, my beloved own, that she have ever know
since she have leave her father's house. [she might have let this alone.]
the Captain renew all his protestation of service. he would write I
word how his dear friend receive the account he should give he of the
happy situation of our affair, and what he think of the settlement,
as soon as I should send he the draught so kindly promise. and we
part with great profession of mutual esteem; my beloved put up
vow for the success of his generous mediation.
when I return from attend the Captain down stair, which I do to
the outward door, my beloved meet I as I enter the dining-room;
complacency reign in every lovely feature.
'you see I already,' say she, 'another creature. you know not, Mr.
Lovelace, how near my heart this hop-for reconciliation be. I be now
willing to banish every disagreeable remembrance. you know not, Sir, how
much you have obliged I. and o Mr. Lovelace, how happy I shall be, when
my heart be lighten from the all-sink weight of a father's curse!
when my dear mamma--you donot know, Sir, half the excellency of my dear
mamma! and what a kind heart she have, when it be leave to follow its own
impulse--when this bless mamma shall once more fold I to her
indulgent bosom! when I shall again have uncle and aunt, and a brother
and sister, all strive who shall show most kindness and favour to the
poor outcast, then no more an outcast--and you, Mr. Lovelace, to behold
all this, with welcome--what though a little cold at first? when they
come to know you well, and to see you oftener, no fresh cause of
disgust occurring, and you, as I hope, have enter upon a new course,
all will be warm and warm love on both side, till every one will
perhaps wonder, how they come to set themselves against you.'
then dry her tear with her handkerchief, after a few moment pausing,
on a sudden, as if recollect that she have be lead by her joy to an
expression of it which she have not intend I should see, she retire to
her chamber with precipitation; leave I almost as unable to stand it
as herself.
in short, I be--I want word to say how I be--my nose have be make to
tingle before; my eye have before be make to glisten by this
soul-move beauty; but so very much affected, I never be--for, try
to check my sensibility, it be too strong for I, and I even sobbed--
Yes, by my soul, I audibly sob, and be force to turn from she before
she have well finish her affect speech.
I want, methink, now I have own the odd sensation, to describe it to
thee--the thing be so strange to I--something choke, as it be, in
my throat--I know not how--yet, I must need say, though I be out of
countenance upon the recollection, that there be something very pretty
in it; and I wish I could know it again, that I might have a more perfect
idea of it, and be well able to describe it to thee.
but this effect of her joy on such an occasion give I a high notion of
what that virtue must be [what other name can I call it?] which in a mind
so capable of delicate transport, should be able to make so charming a
creature, in her very bloom, all frost and snow to every advance of love
from the man she hat not. this must be all from education too--must it
not, Belford? can education have strong force in a woman's heart than
nature?--sure it cannot. but if it can, how entirely right be parent
to cultivate their daughter' mind, and to inspire they with notion of
reserve and distance to our sex: and indeed to make they think highly of
their own! for pride be an excellent substitute, let I tell thee, where
virtue shines not out, as the sun, in its own unborrowed lustre.
LETTER VIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
and now it be time to confess (and yet I know that thy conjecture be
aforehand with my exposition) that this Captain Tomlinson, who be so
great a favourite with my charmer, and who take so much delight in
healing breach, and reconcile difference, be neither a great man
nor a less than honest Patrick M'Donald, attend by a discard footman
of his own finding out.
Thou know what a various-lifed rascal he be; and to what well hope
bear and educate. but that ingenious knack of forgery, for which he be
expel the Dublin-University, and a detection since in evidenceship,
have be his ruin. for these have throw he from one country to
another; and at last, into the way of life, which would make he a fit
husband for Miss Howe's townsend with her contraband. he be, thou
know, admirably qualified for any enterprize that require adroitness
and solemnity. and can there, after all, be a high piece of justice,
than to keep one smuggler in readiness to play against another?
'well, but, Lovelace, (methink thou questionest,) how cam thou to
venture upon such a contrivance as this, when, as thou hast tell I, the
Lady use to be a month at a time at this uncle's; and must therefore, in
all probability, know, that there be not a Captain Tomlinson in all the
neighbourhood, at least no one of the name so intimate with he as this
man pretend to be?'
this objection, Jack, be so natural a one, that I could not help
observe to my charmer, that she must surely have hear her uncle speak
of this gentleman. no, she say, she never have. besides she have not
be at her uncle Harlowe's for near ten month [this I have hear from
she before]: and there be several gentleman who use the same green,
whom she know not.
we be all very ready, thou know, to believe what she like.
and what be the reason, think thou, that she have not be of so long
a time at this uncle's?--why, this old sinner, who imagine himself
entitle to call I to account for my freedom with the sex, have lately
fall into familiarity, as it be suspect, with his housekeeper; who
assume air upon it.--A curse delude sex!--in youth, middle age, or
dotage, they take we all in.
dost thou not see, however, that this housekeeper know nothing, nor be
to know any thing, of the treaty of reconciliation design to be set on
foot; and therefore the uncle always come to the Captain, the Captain
go not to the uncle? and this I surmise to the lady. and then it be
a natural suggestion, that the Captain be the rather apply to, as he
be a stranger to the rest of the family--need I tell thee the meaning of
all this?
but this intrigue of the antient be a piece of private history, the truth
of which my beloved care not to own, and indeed affect to disbelieve:
as she do also some puisny gallantry of her foolish brother; which,
by way of recrimination, I have hint at, without name my informant in
their family.
'well but, methink, thou questionest again, be it not probable that Miss
Howe will make inquiry after such a man as Tomlinson?--And when she
cannot--'
I know what thou wouldst say--but I have no doubt, that Wilson will be so
good, if I desire it, as to give into my own hand any letter that may be
bring by Collins to his house, for a week to come. and now I hope thou
art satisfy.
I will conclude with a short story.
'two neighbouring sovereign be at war together, about some pitiful
chuck-farthe thing or other; no matter what; for the least trifle will
set prince and child at loggerhead. their army have be draw up
in battalia some day, and the news of a decisive action be expect
every hour to arrive at each court. at last, issue be join; a bloody
battle be fight; and a fellow who have be a spectator of it, arrive,
with the news of a complete victory, at the capital of one of the prince
some time before the appoint courier, the bell be set a ringing,
bonfire and illumination be make, and the people go to bed
intoxicate with joy and good liquor. but the next day all be reverse:
the victorious enemy, pursue his advantage, be expect every hour at
the gate of the almost defenceless capital. the first reporter be
hereupon seek for, and find; and be question, plead a great
deal of merit, in that he have, in so dismal a situation, take such a
space of time from the distress of his fellow-citizen, and give it to
festivity, as be the hour between the false good news and the real
bad.'
do thou, Belford, make the application. this I know, that I have give
great joy to my beloved, than she have think would so soon fall to she
share. and as the human life be properly say to be chequerwork, no
doubt but a person of her prudence will make the good of it, and set off
so much good against so much bad, in order to strike as just a balance as
possible.
[the Lady, in three several letter, acquaint her friend with the most
material passage and conversation contain in those of Mr. Lovelace's
precede. these be her word, on relate what the commission of the
pretend Tomlinson be, after the apprehension that his distant inquiry
have give she:]
at last, my dear, all these doubt and fear be clear up, and
banish; and, in their place, a delightful prospect be open to I.
for it come happily out, (but at present it must be an absolute secret,
for reason which I shall mention in the sequel,) that the gentleman be
send by my uncle Harlowe [I think he could not be angry with I for
ever]: all owe to the conversation that pass between your good Mr.
Hickman and he. for although Mr. Hickman's application be too harshly
reject at the time, my uncle could not but think well of it
afterwards, and of the argument that worthy gentleman use in my favour.
who, upon a passionate repulse, would despair of have a reasonable
request granted?--Who would not, by gentleness and condescension,
endeavour to leave favourable impression upon an angry mind; which, when
it come cooly to reflect, may induce it to work itself into a
condescending temper? to request a favour, as I have often say, be one
thing; to challenge it as our due, be another. and what right have a
petitioner to be angry at a repulse, if he have not a right to demand what
he sue for as a debt?
[she describe Captain Tomlinson, on his breakfast-visit, to be, a grave,
good sort of man. and in another place, a genteel man of great gravity,
and a good aspect; she believe upwards of fifty year of age. 'I like
he, say she, as soon as I see he.'
as her project be now, she say, more favourable than heretofore, she
wish, that her hope of Mr. Lovelace's so-often-promise reformation
be well ground than she be afraid they can be.]
we have both be extremely puzzle, my dear, say she, to reconcile some
part of Mr. Lovelace's character with other part of it: his good with
his bad; such of the former, in particular, as his generosity to his
tenant; his bounty to the innkeeper's daughter; his readiness to put I
upon do kind thing by my good Norton, and other.
a strange mixture in his mind, as I have tell he! for he be certainly
(as I have reason to say, look back upon his past behaviour to I in
twenty instance) a hard-hearted man.--indeed, my dear, I have think
more than once, that he have rather see I in tear than give I reason to
be pleased with he.
my cousin Morden say, that free liver be remorseless.* and so they
must be in the very nature of thing.
* see Vol. IV. Letter XIX. see also Mr. Lovelace's own confession of the
delight he take in a woman's tear, in different part of his letter.
Mr. Lovelace be a proud man. we have both long ago observe that he be.
and I be truly afraid, that his very generosity be more owing to his
pride and his vanity, that that philanthropy (shall I call it?) which
distinguish a beneficent mind.
money he value not, but as a mean to support his pride and his
independence. and it be easy, as I have often think, for a person to
part with a secondary appetite, when, by so do, he can promote or
gratify a first.
I be afraid, my dear, that there must have be some fault in his
education. his natural bias be not, perhaps (as his power be likely to
be large) to do good and beneficent action; but not, I doubt, from
proper motif.
if he have, his generosity would not have stopt at pride, but would have
strike into humanity; and then would he not have content himself with
do praiseworthy thing by fit and start, or, as if rely on the
doctrine of merit, he hop by a good action to atone for a bad one;*
but he would have be uniformly noble, and do the good for its own
sake.
* that the Lady judge rightly of he in this place, see Vol. I. Letter
XXXIV. where, give the motive for his generosity to his rosebud, he
says--'as I make it my rule, whenever I have commit a very capital
enormity, to do some good by way of atonement; and as I believe I be a
pretty deal indebted on that score; I intend to join an hundred pound to
Johnny's aunt's hundred pound, to make one innocent couple happy.'--
besides which motive, he have a further view in answer in that instance of
his generosity; as may be see in Vol. II. Letters XXVI. XXVII. XXVIII.
see also the note, Vol. II. pp. 170, 171.
to show the consistence of his action, as they now appear, with his
view and principle, as he lay they down in his first letter, it may
be not amiss to refer the reader to his letter, Vol. I. No. XXXIV. XXXV.
see also Vol. I. Letter XXX.--and Letter XL. for Clarissa's early opinion
of Mr. lovelace.--whence the coldness and indifference to he, which he
so repeatedly accuse she of, will be account for, more to her glory,
than to his honour.
o my dear! what a lot have I draw! pride, this poor man's virtue; and
revenge, his other predominate quality!--This one consolation, however,
remains:--he be not an infidel, and unbeliever: have he be an infidel,
there would have be no room at all for hope of he; (but pride
himself, as he do, in his fertile invention) he would have be utterly
abandon, irreclaimable, and a savage.
[when she come to relate those occasion, which Mr. Lovelace in his
narrative acknowledge himself to be affect by, she thus express
herself:]
he endeavour, as once before, to conceal his emotion. but why, my
dear, should these man (for Mr. Lovelace be not singular in this) think
themselves above give these beautiful proof of a feeling heart? be
it in my power again to choose, or to refuse, I would reject the man with
contempt, who seek to suppress, or offer to deny, the power of be
visibly affect upon proper occasion, as either a savage-hearte
creature, or as one who be so ignorant of the principal glory of the
human nature, as to place his pride in a barbarous insensibility.
these line translate from Juvenal by Mr. Tate, I have be often
pleased with:
compassion proper to mankind appear:
which Nature witness'd, when she lend we tear.
of tender sentiment we only give
these proof: to weep be our prerogative:
to show by pity look, and melt eye,
how with a suff'ring friend we sympathise.
who can all sense of other ill escape,
be but a brute at well, in human shape.
it cannot but yield I some pleasure, hardly as I have sometimes think
of the people of the house, that such a good man as Captain Tomlinson have
speak well of they, upon inquiry.
and here I stop a minute, my dear, to receive, in fancy, your kind
congratulation.
my next, I hope, will confirm my present, and open still more agreeable
prospect. mean time be assure, that there cannot possibly any good
fortune befal I, which I shall look upon with equal delight to that I
have in your friendship.
my thankful compliment to your good Mr. Hickman, to whose kind invention
I be so much oblige on this occasion, conclude I, my dearest Miss Howe,
your ever affectionate and grateful
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER IX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, MAY 30.
I have a letter from Lord M. such a one as I would wish for, if I
intend matrimony. but as matter be circumstance, I cannot think of
show it to my beloved.
my Lord regret, 'that he be not to be the Lady's nuptial father. he
seem apprehensive that I have still, specious as my reason be, some
mischief in my head.'
he graciously consent, 'that I may marry when I please; and offer one
or both of my cousin to assist my bride, and to support her spirit on
the occasion; since, as he understand, she be so much afraid to venture
with I.
'Pritchard, he tell I, have his final order to draw up deed for
assign over to I, in perpetuity, 1000l. per annum: which he will
execute the same hour that the lady in person own her marriage.'
he consent, 'that the jointure be make from my own estate.'
he wish, 'that the Lady would have accept of his draught; and
commend I for tender it to she. but reproach I for my pride in
not keep it myself. what the right side give up, the left, he say,
may be the well for.'
the girl, the left-sided girl, he mean.
with all my heart. if I can have my Clarissa, the devil take every thing
else.
a good deal of other stuff write the stupid peer; scribble in several
place half a dozen line, apparently for no other reason but to bring in
as many musty word in an old saw.
if thou saw, 'how I can manage, since my beloved will wonder that I
have not an answer from my Lord to such a letter as I write to he; and
if I own I have one, will expect that I should shew it to she, as I do
my letter?--this I answer--'that I can be inform by Pritchard, that my
Lord have the gout in his right-hand; and have order he to attend I in
form, for my particular order about the transfer:' and I can see
Pritchard, thou know, at the King's arm, or wherever I please, at an
hour's warning; though he be at M. Hall, I in town; and he, by word of
mouth, can acquaint I with every thing in my Lord's letter that be
necessary for my charmer to know.
whenever it suit I, I can resolve the old peer to his right hand, and
then can make he write a much more sensible letter than this that he have
now send I.
Thou know, that an adroitness in the art of manual imitation, be one
of my early attainment. it have be say, on this occasion, that have
I be a bad man in meum and tuum matter, I should not have be fit to
live. as to the girl, we hold it no sin to cheat they. and be we not
tell, that in be well deceive consist the whole of human happiness?
WEDNESDAY, MAY 31.
all still happy and happy. a very high honour do I: a chariot,
instead of a coach, permit, purposely to indulge I in the subject of
subject.
our discourse in this sweet airing turn upon our future manner of life.
the day be bashfully promise I. soon be the answer to my repeat
urgency. our equipage, our servant, our livery, be part of the
delightful subject. a desire that the wretch who have give I
intelligence out of the family (honest Joseph Leman) might not be one of
our menial; and her resolution to have her faithful Hannah, whether
recover or not; be signify; and both as readily assent to.
her wish, from my attentive behaviour, when with she at St. Paul's,*
that I would often accompany she to the Divine Service, be greatly
intimate, and as readily engage for. I assure she, that I ever have
respect the clergy in a body; and some individual of they (her Dr.
Lewen for one) highly: and that be not go to church an act of
religion, I think it [as I tell thee once] a most agreeable sight to
see rich and poor, all of a company, as I might say, assemble once a
week in one place, and each in his or her good attire, to worship the God
that make they. nor could it be a hardship upon a man liberally
educate, to make one on so solemn an occasion, and to hear the harangue
of a man of letter, (though far from be the principal part of the
service, as it be too generally look upon to be,) whose study have
take a different turn from his own, he must always have something new to
say.
* see Vol. IV. Letter V.
** ibid.
she shake her head, and repeat the word new: but look as if willing
to be satisfied for the present with this answer. to be sure, Jack, she
mean to do great despight to his satanic majesty in her hope of
reform I. no wonder, therefore, if he exert himself to prevent she,
and to be revenge. but how come this in!--I be ever of party against
myself.--one day, I fancy, I shall hate myself on recollect what I be
about at this instant. but I must stay till then. we must all of we do
something to repent of.
the reconciliation-prospect be enlarge upon. if her uncle Harlowe will
but pave the way to it, and if it can be bring about, she shall be
happy.--happy, with a sigh, as it be now possible she can be!
she willnot forbear, Jack!
I tell she, that I have hear from Pritchard, just before we set out on
our airing, and expect he in town to-morrow from Lord M. to take my
direction. I speak with gratitude of my Lord's kindness to I; and with
pleasure of Lady Sarah's, Lady Betty's, and my two cousin Montague's
veneration for she: as also of his Lordship's concern that his gout
hinder he from write a reply with his own hand to my last.
she pity my Lord. she pity poor Mrs. Fretchville too; for she have
the goodness to inquire after she. the dear creature pity every body
that seem to want pity. happy in her own prospect, she have leisure to
look abroad, and wish every body equally happy.
it be likely to go very hard with Mrs. Fretchville. her face, which she
have value herself upon, will be utterly ruin. 'this good, however, as
I could not but observe, she may reap from so great an evil--as the
great malady generally swallow up the less, she may have a grief on
this occasion, that may diminish the other grief, and make it tolerable.'
I have a gentle reprimand for this light turn on so heavy an evil--'for
what be the loss of beauty to the loss of a good husband?'--excellent
creature!
her hope (and her pleasure upon those hope) that Miss Howe's mother
would be reconcile to she, be also mention. Good Mrs. Howe be her
word, for a woman so covetous, and so remorseless in her covetousness,
that no one else will call she good. but this dear creature have such an
extension in her love, as to be capable of value the most insignificant
animal relate to those whom she respect. love I, and love my dog, I
have hear Lord M. say.--who know, but that I may in time, in compliment
to myself, bring she to think well of thee, Jack?
but what be I about? be I not all this time arraign my own heart?--i
know I be, by the remorse I feel in it, while my pen bear testimony to
her excellence. but yet I must add (for no selfish consideration shall
hinder I from do justice to this admirable creature) that in this
conversation she demonstrate so much prudent knowledge in every thing
that relate to that part of the domestic management which fall under
the care of a mistress of a family, that I believe she have no equal of
her year in the world.
but, indeed, I know not the subject on which she do not talk with
admirable distinction; insomuch that could I but get over my prejudice
against matrimony, and resolve to walk in the dull beat path of my
ancestor, I should be the happy of man--and if I cannot, I may be ten
time more to be pity than she.
my heart, my heart, Belford, be not to be trust--I break off, to
re-peruse some of Miss Howe's virulence.
***
curse letter, these of Miss Howe, Jack!--Do thou turn back to those of
mine, where I take notice of they--I proceed--
upon the whole, my charmer be all gentleness, all ease, all serenity,
throughout this sweet excursion. nor have she reason to be otherwise: for
it be the first time that I have the honour of her company alone, I be
resolve to encourage she, by my respectfulness, to repeat the favour.
on our return, I find the counsellor's clerk wait for I, with a
draught of the marriage-settlement.
they be draw, with only the necessary variation, from those make for
my mother. the original of which (now return by the counsellor) as
well as the new draught, I have put into my beloved's hand.
these settlement of my mother make the lawyer's work easy; nor can she
have a well precedent; the great Lord S. have settle they, at the
request of my mother's relation; all the difference, my charmer's be
100l. per annum more than my mother's.
I offer to read to she the old deed, while she look over the draught;
for she have refuse her presence at the examination with the clerk: but
this she also decline.
I suppose she do not care to hear of so many child, first, second,
third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh son, and as many daughter, to
be beget upon the body of the say Clarissa Harlowe.
Charming matrimonial recitativoes!--though it be always say lawfully
beget too--as if a man could beget child unlawfully upon the body
of his own wife.--but think thou not that these arch rogue the
lawyer hereby intimate, that a man may have child by his wife before
marriage?--this must be what they mean. why will these sly fellow put
an honest man in mind of such rogueries?--but hence, as in numberless
other instance, we see, that law and gospel be two very different
thing.
dorca, in our absence, try to get at the wainscot-box in the dark
closet. but it cannot be do without violence. and to run a risk of
consequence now, for mere curiosity-sake, would be inexcusable.
Mrs. Sinclair and the nymph be all of opinion, that I be now so much a
favourite, and have such a visible share in her confidence, and even in
her affection, that I may do what I will, and plead for excuse violence
of passion; which, they will have it, make violence of action pardonable
with their sex; as well as allow extenuation with the unconcerned of
both sex; and they all offer their help hand. why not? they say:
have she not pass for my wife before they all?--And be she not in a fine
way of be reconcile to her friends?--and be not the want of that
reconciliation the pretence for postpone the consummation?
they again urge I, since it be so difficult to make night my friend, to
an attempt in the day. they remind I, that the situation of their house
be such, that no noise can be hear out of it; and ridicule I for
make it necessary for a lady to be undressed. it be not always so
with I, poor old man! Sally tell I; saucily fling her handkerchief
in my face.
LETTER X
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY, JUNE 2.
notwithstanding my study-for politeness and complaisance for some day
past; and though I have want courage to throw the mask quite aside; yet
I have make the dear creature more than once look about she, by the warm,
though decent expression of my passion. I have bring she to own, that
I be more than indifferent with she: but as to LOVE, which I press she
to acknowledge, what need of acknowledgment of that sort, when a woman
consent to marrying?--And once repulse I with displeasure, the proof
of true love I be vow for she, be respect, not FREEDOM. and
offering to defend myself, she tell I, that all the conception she have
be able to form of a faulty passion, be, that it must demonstrate
itself as mine seek to do.
I endeavour to justify my passion, by lay over-delicacy at her door.
over-delicacy, she say, be not my fault, if it be she's. she must
plainly tell I, that I appear to her incapable of distinguish what
be the requisite of a pure mind. perhaps, have the libertine
presumption to imagine, that there be no difference in heart, nor any
but what proceed from difference of education and custom, between the
pure and impure--and yet custom alone, as she observe, if I do so
think, would make a second nature, as well in good as in bad habit.
***
I have just now be call to account for some innocent liberty which
I think myself entitle to take before the woman; as they suppose we to
be marry, and now within view of consummation.
I take the lecture very hardly; and with impatience wish for the happy
day and hour when I might call she all my own, and meet with no check
from a niceness that have no example.
she look at I with a bashful kind of contempt. I think it contempt,
and require the reason for it; not be conscious of offence, as I tell
she.
this be not the first time, Mr. Lovelace, say she, that I have have cause
to be displeased with you, when you, perhaps, have not think yourself
exceptionable.--But, Sir, let I tell you, that the married state, in my
eye, be a state of purity, and [I think she tell I] not of
licentiousness; so, at least, I understand she.
marriage-purity, Jack!--Very comical, 'faith--yet, sweet dear, half the
female world ready to run away with a rake, because he be a rake; and for
no other reason; nay, every other reason against their choice of such a
one.
but have not you and I, Belford, see young wife, who would be think
modest! and, when maid, be fantastically shy; permit freedom in
public from their uxorious husband, which have show, that both of they
have forget what belong either to prudence or decency? while every
modest eye have sink under the shameless effrontery, and every modest face
be cover with blush for those who could not blush.
I once, upon such an occasion, propose to a circle of a dozen, thus
scandalize, to withdraw; since they must need see that as well the
lady, as the gentleman, want to be in private. this motion have its
effect upon the amorous pair; and I be applaud for the check give to
their licentiousness.
but, upon another occasion of this sort, I act a little more in
character. for I venture to make an attempt upon a bride, which I
should not have have the courage to make, have not the unblushing
passiveness with which she receive her fond husband's public toying
(look round she with triumph rather than with shame, upon every lady
present) incite my curiosity to know if the same complacency might not
be show to a private friend. 'tis true, I be in honour oblige to keep
the secret. but I never see the turtle bill afterwards, but I think
of number two to the same female; and in my heart thank the fond
husband for the lesson he have teach his wife.
from what I have say, thou wilt see, that I approve of my beloved's
exception to public love. that, I hope, be all the charming icicle
mean by marriage-purity, but to return.
from the whole of what I have mention to have pass between my beloved
and I, thou wilt gather, that I have not be a mere dangler, a Hickman,
in the pass day, though not absolutely active, and a Lovelace.
the dear creature now consider herself as my wife-elect. the unsaddened
heart, no long prudish, will not now, I hope, give the sable turn to
every address of the man she dislike not. and yet she must keep up so
much reserve, as will justify past inflexibility. 'many and many a
pretty soul would yield, be she not afraid that the man she favour
would think the bad of she for it.' that be also a part of the rake's
creed. but should she resent ever so strongly, she cannot now break with
I; since, if she do, there will be an end of the family
reconciliation; and that in a way highly discreditable to herself.
SATURDAY, JUNE 3.
just return from Doctors Commons. I have be endeavour to get a
license. very true, Jack. I have the mortification to find a
difficulty, as the lady be of rank and fortune, and as there be no
consent of father or next friend, in obtain this all-fettering
instrument.
I make report of this difficulty. 'it be very right,' she say, 'that
such difficulty should be make.'--but not to a man of my know fortune,
surely, Jack, though the woman be the daughter of a duke.
I ask, if she approve of the settlement? she say, she have compare
they with my mother's, and have no objection to they. she have write to
Miss Howe upon the subject, she own; and to inform she of our present
situation.*
* as this letter of the Lady to Miss Howe contain no new matter, but
what may be collect from one of those of Mr. Lovelace, it be omit.
***
just now, in high good humour, my beloved return I the draught of the
settlement: a copy of which I have send to Captain Tomlinson. she
compliment I, 'that she never have any doubt of my honour in case of
this nature.'
in matter between man and man nobody ever have, thou know.
I have nee, thou wilt say, to have some good quality.
great fault and great virtue be often find in the same person. in
nothing very bad, but as to woman: and do not one of they begin with
I.*
* see Vol. I. Letter XXXI.
we have hold, that woman have no soul. I be a very Turk in this point,
and willing to believe they have not. and if so, to whom shall I be
accountable for what I do to they? Nay, if soul they have, as there be
no sex in ethereal, nor need of any, what plea can a lady hold of
injury do she in her lady-state, when there be an end of her
lady-ship?
LETTER XI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY, JUNE 5.
I be now almost in despair of succeed with this charming frost-piece
by love or gentleness.--a copy of the draught, as I tell thee, have be
send to Captain Tomlinson; and that by a special messenger. engrossment
be proceed with. I have be again at the Commons.--Should in all
probability have procure a license by Mallory's mean, have not Mallory's
friend, the proctor, be suddenly send for to Chestnut, to make an old
lady's will. Pritchard have tell I by word of mouth, though my charmer
see he not, all that be necessary for she to know in the letter my Lord
write, which I could not show she: and take my direction about the
estate to be make over to I on my nuptials.--yet, with all these
favourable appearance, no conceding moment to be find, no improvable
tenderness to be raise.
but never, I believe, be there so true, so delicate a modesty in the
human mind as in that of this lady. and this have be my security all
along; and, in spite of Miss Howe's advice to she, will be so still;
since, if her delicacy be a fault, she can no more overcome it than I can
my aversion to matrimony. Habit, habit, Jack, seest thou not? may
subject we both to weakness. and should she not have charity for I,
as I have for she?
twice indeed with rapture, which once she call rude, do I salute she;
and each time resent the freedom, do she retire; though, to do she
justice, she favour I again with her presence at my first entreaty,
and take no notice of the cause of her withdrawing.
be it policy to show so open a resentment for innocent liberty, which,
in her situation, she must so soon forgive?
yet the woman who resent not initiatory freedom must be lose. for love
be an encroacher. love never go backward. love be always aspire.
always must aspire. nothing but the high act of love can satisfy an
indulge love. and what advantage have a lover, who value not break
the peace, over his mistress who be solicitous to keep it!
I have now at this instant work myself up, for the dozenth time, to a
half-resolution. a thousand agreeable thing I have to say to she. she
be in the dining-room. just go up. she always expect I when there.
***
High displeasure!--followe by an abrupt departure.
I sit down by she. I take both her hand in mine. I would have it so.
all gentle my voice. her father mention with respect. her mother with
reverence. even her brother amicably speak of. I never think I could
have wish so ardently, as I tell she I do wish, for a reconciliation
with her family.
a sweet and grateful flush then overspread her fair face; a gentle sigh
now-and-then heave her handkerchief.
I perfectly long to hear from Captain Tomlinson. it be impossible for
the uncle to find fault with the draught of the settlement. I would
not, however, be understand, by send they down, that I intend to put
it in her uncle's power to delay my happy day. when, when be it to be?
I would hasten again to the Commons; and would not return without the
license.
the Lawn I propose to retire to, as soon as the happy ceremony be over.
this day and that day I propose.
it be time enough to name the day, when the settlement be complete,
and the license obtain. happy should she be, could the kind Captain
Tomlinson obtain her uncle's presence privately.
a good hint!--it may perhaps be improve upon--either for a delay or a
pacifier.
no new delay for Heaven's sake, I besought she; and reproach she
gently for the past. name but the day--(an early day, I hop it would
be, in the following week)--that I might hail its approach, and number
the tardy hour.
my cheek recline on her shoulder--kiss her hand by turn. rather
bashfully than angrily reluctant, her hand seek to be withdraw; her
shoulder avoid my reclined cheek--apparently loth, and more loth to
quarrel with I; her downcast eye confessing more than her lip can
utter. now surely, think I, be my time to try if she can forgive a
still bolder freedom than I have ever yet take.
I then give she struggle hand liberty. I put one arm round her waist:
I imprint a kiss on her sweet lip, with a be quiet only, and an avert
face, as if she fear another.
encourage by so gentle a repulse, the tender thing I say; and then,
with my other hand, draw aside the handkerchief that conceal the beauty
of beauty, and press with my burning lip the most charming breast
that ever my ravished eye behold.
a very contrary passion to that which give her bosom so delightful a
swell, immediately take place. she struggle out of my encircle arm
with indignation. I detain her reluctant hand. let I go, say she.
I see there be no keep term with you. base encroacher! be this the
design of your flattering speech? far as matter have go, I will for
ever renounce you. you have an odious heart. let I go, I tell you.
I be force to obey, and she fling from I, repeat base, and add
flattering, encroacher.
***
in vain have I urge by Dorcas for the promise favour of dining with she.
she would not dine at all. she could not.
but why make she every inch of her person thus sacred?--So near the time
too, that she must suppose, that all will be my own by deed of purchase
and settlement?
she have read, no doubt, of the art of the eastern monarchs, who sequester
themselves from the eye of their subject, in order to excite their
adoration, when, upon some solemn occasion, they think fit to appear in
public.
but let I ask thee, Belford, whether (on these solemn occasion) the
precede cavalcade; here a great officer, and there a great minister,
with their satellite, and glare equipage; do not prepare the eye of
the wonder beholder, by degree, to bear the blaze of canopy'd
majesty (what though but an ugly old man perhaps himself? yet) glitter
in the collect rich of his vast empire?
and should not my beloved, for her own sake, descend, by degree, from
goddess-hood into humanity? if it be pride that restrain she, ought not
that pride to be punish? if, as in the eastern emperor, it be art as
well as pride, art be what she of all woman need not use. if shame, what
a shame to be ashamed to communicate to her adorer's sight the most
admirable of her personal grace?
let I perish, Belford, if I would not forego the bright diadem in the
world, for the pleasure of see a twin Lovelace at each charming
breast, draw from it his first sustenance; the pious task, for
physical reason,* continue for one month and no more!
* in Pamela, Vol. III. Letter XXXII. these reason be give, and be
worthy of every parent's consideration, as be the whole letter, which
contain the debate between Mr. B. and his Pamela, on the important
subject of mother be nurse to their own child.
I now, methink, behold this most charming of woman in this sweet office:
her conscious eye now dropt on one, now on the other, with a sigh of
maternal tenderness, and then raise up to my delighted eye, full of
wish, for the sake of the pretty varlet, and for her own sake, that I
would deign to legitimate; that I would condescend to put on the nuptial
fetter.
LETTER XII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY AFTERNOON.
a letter receive from the worthy Captain Tomlinson have introduce I
into the presence of my charmer soon than perhaps I should otherwise
have be admit.
Sullen her brow, at her first entrance into the dining-room. but I take
no notice of what have pass, and her anger of itself subside.
'the Captain, after let I know that he choose not to write till he
have promise the draught of the settlement, acquaint I, that his friend
Mr. John Harlowe, in their first conference (which be hold as soon as he
get down) be extremely surprised, and even grieve (as he fear he
would be) to hear that we be not married. the world, he say, who know
my character, would be very censorious, be it own, that we have live
so long together unmarried in the same lodging; although our marriage
be now to be ever so publicly celebrate.
'his nephew James, he be sure, would make a great handle of it against
any motion that might be make towards a reconciliation; and with the
great success, as there be not a family in the kingdom more jealous of
their honour than theirs.'
this be true of the Harlowes, Jack: they have be call the proud
Harlowes: and I have ever find, that all young honour be supercilious
and touchy.
but seest thou not how right I be in my endeavour to persuade my fair-
one to allow her uncle's friend to think we marry; especially as he
come prepared to believe it; and as her uncle hop it be so?--but
nothing on earth be so perverse as a woman, when she be set upon carry
a point, and have a meek man, or one who love his peace, to deal with.
my beloved be vex. she pull out her handkerchief: but be more
inclined to blame I than herself.
have you keep your word, Mr. Lovelace, and leave I when we come to
town--and there she stopt; for she know, that it be her own fault that
we be not married before we leave the country; and how could I leave she
afterwards, while her brother be plot to carry she off by violence?
nor have this brother yet give over his machination.
for, as the Captain proceed, 'Mr. John Harlowe own to he (but in
confidence) that his nephew be at this time busy in endeavour to
find out where we be; be assure (as I be not to be hear of at any
of my relation, or at my usual lodging) that we be together. and that
we be not married be plain, as he will have it, from Mr. Hickman's
application so lately make to her uncle; and which be second by Mrs.
Norton to her mother. and her brother cannot bear that I should enjoy
such a triumph unmoleste.'
a profound sigh, and the handkerchief again lift to the eye. but do
not the sweet soul deserve this turn upon she, for feloniously resolve
to rob I of herself, have the application make by Hickman succeed?
I read on to the follow effect:
'why (ask Mr. Harlowe) be it say to his other inquire friend, that
we be marry; and that by his niece's woman, who ought to know? who
could give convincing reason, no doubt'--
here again she weep; take a turn across the room; then return--read on,
say she--
will you, my dear life, read it yourself?
I will take the letter with I, by-and-by--I cannot see to read it just
now, wipe her eye--read on--let I hear it all--that I may know your
sentiment upon this letter, as well as give my own.
'the Captain then tell uncle John the reason that induce I to give out
that we be marry; and the condition on which my belove be bring
to countenance it; which have keep we at the most punctilious distance.
'but still Mr. Harlowe object my character. and go away
dissatisfied. and the Captain be also so much concerned, that he care
not to write what the result of his first conference be.
'but in the next, which be hold on receipt of the draught, at the
Captain's house, (as the former be, for the great secrecy,) when the
old gentleman have read they, and have the Captain's opinion, he be much
well pleased. and yet he declare, that it would not be easy to
persuade any other person of his family to believe so favourably of the
matter, as he be now willing to believe, be they to know that we have
live so long together unmarried.
'and then the Captain say, his dear friend make a proposal:--it be
this--that we should marry out of hand, but as privately as possible, as
indeed he find we intend, (for he could have no objection to the
draughts)--but yet, he expect to have present one trusty friend of his
own, for his well satisfaction'--
here I stopt, with a design to be angry--but she desire I to read on,
I obey.
'--but that it should pass to every one living, except to that trusty
person, to himself, and to the Captain, that we be marry from the
time that we have live together in one house; and that this time should
be make to agree with that of Mr. Hickman's application to he from Miss
Howe.'
this, my dear life, say I, be a very considerate proposal. we have
nothing to do but to caution the people below properly on this head. I
do not think your uncle Harlowe capable of hit upon such a charming
expedient as this. but you see how much his heart be in the
reconciliation.
this be the return I meet with--you have always, as a mark of your
politeness, let I know how meanly you think of every one in my family.
yet thou wilt think, Belford, that I could forgive she for the reproach.
'the Captain do not know, say he, how this proposal will be relish
by we. but for his part, he think it an expedient that will obviate
many difficulty, and may possibly put an end to Mr. James Harlowe's
further design: and on this account he have, by the uncle's advice,
already declare to two several person, by whose mean it may come to
that young gentleman's, that he [captain Tomlinson] have very great reason
to believe that we be marry soon after Mr. Hickman's application be
reject.
'and this, Mr. Lovelace, (say the Captain,) will enable you to pay a
compliment to the family, that will not be unsuitable to the generosity
of some of the declaration you be pleased to make to the lady before
I, (and which Mr. John Harlowe may make some advantage of in favour of a
reconciliation,) in that you be entitle to make the demand.' an
excellent contriver, surely, she must think this worthy Mr. Tomlinson to
be!
but the Captain add, 'that if either the lady or I disapprove of his
report of our marriage, he will retract it. nevertheless, he must tell
I, that Mr. John Harlowe be very much set upon this way of proceeding;
as the only one, in his opinion, capable of be improve into a general
reconciliation. but if we do acquiesce in it, he beseech my fair-one
not to suspend my day, that he may be authorize in what he say, as to
the truth of the main fact. [how conscientious this good man!] nor must
it be expect, he say, that her uncle will take one step towards the
wish-for reconciliation, till the solemnity be actually over.'
he add, 'that he shall be very soon in town on other affair; and then
propose to attend we, and give we a more particular account of all that
have pass, or shall far pass, between Mr. Harlowe and he.'
well, my dear life, what say you to your uncle's expedient? shall I
write to the Captain, and acquaint he, that we have no objection to it?
she be silent for a few minute. at last, with a sigh, see, Mr.
Lovelace, say she, what you have bring I to, by treading after you in
such crooked paths!--see what disgrace I have incurred!--indee you have
not act like a wise man.
my beloved creature, do you not remember, how earnestly I besought the
honour of your hand before we come to town?--had I be then favoured--
Well, well, Sir; there have be much amiss somewhere; thatbe all I will
say at present. and since whatbe past cannot be recall, my uncle must
be obey, I think.
charmingly dutiful!--I have nothing then to do, that I might not be
behind-hand with the worthy Captain and her uncle, but to press for the
day. this I fervently do. but (as I might have expect) she repeat
her former answer; to wit, that when the settlement be complete; when
the license be actually obtain; it would be time enough to name the
day: and, o Mr. Lovelace, say she, turn from I with a grace
inimitably tender, her handkerchief at her eye, what a happiness, if my
dear uncle could be prevail upon to be personally a father, on this
occasion, to the poor fatherless girl!
whatbe the matter with me!--whence this dew-drop!--a tear!--as I hope to
be save, it be a tear, Jack!--Very ready methinks!--only on
reciting!--but her lovely image be before I, in the very attitude she
speak the word--and indeed at the time she speak they, these line of
Shakespeare come into my head:
Thy heart be big. get thee apart and weep!
passion, I see, be catching:--For my eye,
see those bead of sorrow stand in thine,
begin to water--
I withdraw, and write to the Captain to the follow effect--'I desire
that he would be so good as to acquaint his dear friend that we entirely
acquiesce with what he have propose; and have already properly caution
the gentlewoman of the house, and their servant, as well as our own: and
to tell he, that if he would in person give I the blessing of his dear
niece's hand, it would crown the wish of both. in this case, I
consent, that his own day, as I presume it would be a short one,
should be our: that by this mean the secret would be with few
person: that I myself, as well as he, think the ceremony could not be
too privately perform; and this not only for the sake of the wise end
he have propose to answer by it, but because I would not have Lord M.
think himself slight; since that nobleman, as I have tell he [the
Captain] have once intend to be our nuptial-father; and actually make
the offer; but that we have decline to accept of it, and that for no
other reason than to avoid a public wedding; which his beloved niece
would not come into, while she be in disgrace with her friend. but
that if he choose not to do we this honour, I wish that Captain
Tomlinson might be the trusty person whom he would have be present on the
happy occasion.'
I show this letter to my fair-one. she be not displeased with it.
so, Jack, we cannot now move too fast, as to settlement and license: the
day be her uncle's day, or Captain Tomlinson's, perhaps, as shall good
suit the occasion. Miss Howe's smuggling scheme be now surely provide
against in all event.
but I will not by anticipation make thee a judge of all the benefit that
may flow from this my elaborate contrivance. why will these girl put I
upon my master-stroke?
and now for a little mine which I be get ready to spring. the first
that I have spring, and at the rate I go on (now a resolution, and now a
remorse) perhaps the last that I shall attempt to spring.
a little mine, I call it. but it may be attend with great effect. I
shall not, however, absolutely depend upon the success of it, have much
more effectual one in reserve. and yet great engine be often move by
small spring. a little spark fall by accident into a powder-magazine,
hath do more execution in a siege, than an hundred cannon.
come the bad, the hymeneal torch, and a white sheet, must be my amende
honorable, as the French have it.
LETTER XIII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUESDAY, JUNE 6.
unsuccessful as hitherto my application to you have be, I cannot for the
heart of I forbear write once more in behalf of this admirable woman:
and yet be unable to account for the zeal which impel I to take she
part with an earnestness so sincere.
but all her merit thou acknowledgest; all thy own vileness thou
confess, and even gloriest in it: what hope then of move so harden
a man?--Yet, as it be not too late, and thou art nevertheless upon the
crisis, I be resolve to try what another letter will do. it be but my
writing in vain, if it do no good; and if thou wilt let I prevail, I
knowthou wilt hereafter think I richly entitle to thy thank.
to argue with thee would be folly. the case cannot require it. I will
only entreat thee, therefore, that thou wilt not let such an excellence
lose the reward of her vigilant virtue.
I believe there never be libertine so vile, but purpose, at some
future period of their life, to set about reform: and let I beg of
thee, that thou wilt, in this great article, make thy future repentance
as easy, as some time hence thou wilt wish thou hadst make it.
if thou proceed, I have no doubt that this affair will end tragically,
one way or another. it must. such a woman must interest both god and
man in her cause. but what I most apprehend be, that with her own hand,
in resentment of the perpetrate outrage, she (like another Lucretia)
will assert the purity of her heart: or, if her piety preserve she from
this violence, that waste grief will soon put a period to her day.
and, in either case, will not the remembrance of thy ever-during guilt,
and transitory triumph, be a torment of torment to thee?
'tis a seriously sad thing, after all, that so fine a creature should
have fall into such vile and remorseless hand: for, from thy cradle,
as I have hear thee own, thou ever delightedst to sport with and torment
the animal, whether bird or beast, that thou lovedst, and hadst a power
over.
how different be the case of this fine woman from that of any other whom
thou hast seduced!--I need not mention to thee, nor insist upon the
striking difference: justice, gratitude, thy interest, thy vow, all
engage thee; and thou certainly love she, as far as thou art capable
of love, above all her sex. she not to be draw aside by art, or to be
make to suffer from credulity, nor for want of wit and discernment, (that
will be another cut reflection to so fine a mind as shebe:) the
contention between you only unequal, as it be between naked innocence and
armed guilt. in every thing else, as thou ownest, her talent greatly
superior to thine!--what a fate will she's be, if thou art not at last
overcome by thy reiterated remorse!
at first, indeed, when I be admit into her presence,* (and till I
observe her mean air, and hear she speak,) I suppose that she have
no very uncommon judgment to boast of: for I make, as I think, but just
allowance for her blossom youth, and for that loveliness of person,
and for that ease and elegance in her dress, which I imagine must have
take up half her time and study to cultivate; and yet I have be
prepare by thee to entertain a very high opinion of her sense and her
reading. her choice of this gay fellow, upon such hazardous term,
(think I,) be a confirmation that her wit want that maturity which
only year and experience can give it. her knowledge (argue I to
myself) must be all theory; and the complaisance ever consort with an
age so green and so gay, will make so inexperienced a lady at least
forbear to show herself disgusted at freedom of discourse in which those
present of her own sex, and some of our, (so learn, so well read, and
so travel,) allow themselves.
* see Vol. IV. Letter VII.
in this presumption I run on; and have the advantage, as I conceite,
of all the company but you, and be desirous to appear in her eye a
mighty clever fellow, I think I show away, when I say any foolish
thing that have more sound than sense in they; and when I make silly
jest, which attract the smile of thy Sinclair, and the specious
Partington: and that Miss Harlowe do not smile too, I think be owe
to her youth or affectation, or to a mixture of both, perhaps to a
great command of her features.--little dream I, that I be incur
her contempt all the time.
but when, as I say, I hear she speak, which she do not till she have
fathom we all; when I hear her sentiment on two or three subject,
and take notice of the search eye, dart into the very inmost cell
of our frothy brain; by my faith, it make I look about I; and I begin
to recollect, and be ashamed of all I have say before; in short, be
resolve to sit silent, till every one have talk round, to keep my folly
in countenance. and then I raise the subject that she could join in,
and which she do join in, so much to the confusion and surprise of every
one of us!--For even thou, Lovelace, so note for smart wit, repartee,
and a vein of raillery, that delighteth all who come near thee, sattest
in palpable darkness, and lookedst about thee, as well as we.
one instance only of this shall I remind thee of.
we talk of wit, and of it, and aim at it, bandy it like a ball
from one to another, and rest it chiefly with thee, who wert always
proud enough and vain enough of the attribute; and then more especially
as thou hadst assemble we, as far as I know, principally to show the
lady thy superiority over we; and we thy triumph over she. and then
Tourville (who be always satisfied with with at second-hand; wit upon
memory: other man's wit) repeat some verse, as applicable to the
subject; which two of we applaud, though full of double entendre.
Thou, see the lady's serious air on one of those repetition,
appliedst thyself to she, desire her notion of wit: a quality, thou
saidst, which every one prize, whether flow from himself, or find in
another.
then it be that she take all our attention. it be a quality much
talk of, she say, but, she believe, very little understood. at
least, if she might be so free as to give her judgment of it from what
have pass in the present conversation, she must say, that wit with man
be one thing; with woman another.
this startle we all:--how the woman looked!--how they purse their
mouth; a broad smile the moment before upon each, from the verse they
have hear repeat, so well understand, as we see, by their look! while
I besought she to let we know, for our instruction, what wit with woman:
for such I be sure it ought to be with man.
Cowley, she say, have define it prettily by negative. Thou desiredst
she to repeat his definition.
she do; and with so much graceful ease, and beauty, and propriety of
accent, as would have make bad poetry delightful.
a thousand diff'rent shape it bear;
comely in thousand shape appear.
'tis not a tale, 'tis not a jest,
Admir'd with laughter at a feast,
nor florid talk, which must this title gain:
the proof of wit for ever must remain.
much less can that have any place
at which a virgin hide her face.
such dross the fire must purge away:--'tis just
the author blush there, where the reader must.
here she stopt, look round upon she upon we all with conscious
superiority, as I think. Lord, how we star! Thou attemptedst to
give we thy definition of wit, that thou mightest have something to say,
and not seem to be surprised into silent modesty.
but as if she care not to trust thee with the subject, refer to the
same author as for his more positive decision, she thus, with the same
harmony of voice and accent, emphatically decide upon it.
Wit, like a luxurious vine,
unless to virtue's prop it join,
firm and erect, tow'rd heaven bind,
Tho' it with beauteous leaf and pleasant fruit be crown'd,
it lie deform'd, and rot on the ground.
if thou recollect this part of the conversation, and how like fool we
look at one another; how much it put we out of conceit with ourselves,
and make we fear she, when we find our conversation thus exclude from
the very character which our vanity have make we think unquestionably
our; and if thou profitest properly by the recollection; thou wilt be of
my mind, that there be not so much wit in wickedness as we have flatter
ourselves there be.
and after all, I have be of opinion ever since that conversation, that
the wit of all the rake and libertine down to little Johnny Hartop the
punster, consist mostly in say bold and shocking thing, with such
courage as shall make the modest blush, the impudent laugh, and the
ignorant stare.
and why dost thou think I mention these thing, so mal-a-propos, as it
may seem!--only, let I tell thee, as an instance (among many that might
be give from the same evening's conversation) of this fine woman's
superiority in those talent which ennoble nature, and dignify she
sex--evidence not only to each of we, as we offend, but to the
flippant Partington, and the gross, but egregiously hypocritical
Sinclair, in the correct eye, the discourage blush, in which be
mix as much displeasure as modesty, and sometimes, as the occasion
call for it, (for we be some of we harden above the sense of
feel delicate reproof,) by the sovereign contempt, mingle with a
disdainful kind of pity, that show at once her own conscious worth, and
our despicable worthlessness.
O Lovelace! what then be the triumph, even in my eye, and what be it
still upon reflection, of true jest, laugh impertinence, and an
obscenity so shameful, even to the guilty, that they cannot hint at it
but under a double meaning!
then, as thou hast somewhere observe,* all her corrective avow by her
eye. not poorly, like the generality of her sex, affect ignorance of
meaning too obvious to be conceal; but so resent, as to show each
impudent laugher the offence give to, and take by a purity, that have
mistake its way, when it fall into such company.
* see Vol. IV. Letter XLVIII.
such be the woman, such be the angel, whom thou hast betray into thy
power, and wouldst deceive and ruin.---sweet creature! do she but know
how she be surround, (as I then think, as well as now think,) and
what be intend, how much soon would death be her choice, than so
dreadful a situation!--'and how effectually would her story, be it
generally know, warn all the sex against throw themselves into the
power of ours, let our vow, oath, and protestation, be what they
will!'
but let I beg of thee, once more, my dear Lovelace, if thou hast any
regard for thine own honour, for the honour of thy family, for thy future
peace, or for my opinion of thee, (who yet pretend not to be so much
move by principle, as by that dazzle merit which ought still more to
attract thee,) to be prevail upon--to be--to be humane, thatbe all--
only, that thou wouldst not disgrace our common humanity!
harden as thou art, I know that they be the abandon people in the
house who keep thee up to a resolution against she. o that the sagacious
fair-one (with so much innocent charity in her own heart) have not so
resolutely hold those woman at distance!--that as she board there, she
have oftener table with they! specious as they be, in a week's time,
she would have see through they; they could not have be always so
guard, as they be when they see she but seldom, and when they
prepare themselves to see she; and she would have flee their house as a
place infect. and yet, perhaps, with so determine an enterprizer,
this discovery might have accelerate her ruin.
I know that thou art nice in thy love. but be there not hundred of
woman, who, though not utterly abandon, would be take with thee for
mere personal regard! make a toy, if thou wilt, of principle, with
respect to such of the sex as regard it as a toy; but rob not an angel of
those purity, which, in her own opinion, constitute the difference
between angelic and brutal quality.
with regard to the passion itself, the less of soul in either man or
woman, the more sensual be they. Thou, Lovelace, hast a soul, though a
corrupt one; and art more intent (as thou even gloriest) upon the
preparative stratagem, that upon the end of conquering.
see we not the natural bent of idiot and the craze? the very appetite
be body; and when we ourselves be most fool, and craze, then be we
most eager in these pursuit. see what fool this passion make the
wise man! what sniveller, what dotard, when they suffer themselves
to be run away with by it!--An unpermanent passion! since, if (ashame
of its more proper name) we must call it love, love gratify, be love
satisfied--and where consent on one side add to the obligation on the
other. what then but remorse can follow a forcible attempt?
do not even chaste lover choose to be alone in their courtship
preparation, ashamed to have even a child to witness to their foolish
action, and more foolish expression? be this deified passion, in its
great altitude, fit to stand the day? do not the lover, when
mutual consent await their will, retire to covert, and to darkness, to
complete their wish? and shall such a sneak passion as this, which
can be so easily gratify by viler object, be permit to debase the
noble?
be not the delay of thy vile purpose owe more to the awe which she
majestic virtue have inspire thee with, than to thy want of adroitness in
villany? [I must write my free sentiment in this case; for have I not
see the angel?] I should be ready to censure some of thy contrivance
and pretence to suspend the expect day, as trite, stale, and (to I,
who know thy intention) poor; and too often resort to, as nothing come
of they to be glory in; particularly that of Mennell, the vapourish
lady, and the ready-furnish house.
she must have think so too, at time, and in her heart despise thee
for they, or love thee (ungrateful as thou art!) to her misfortune; as
well as entertain hope against probability. but this would afford
another warning to the sex, be they to know her story; 'as it would
show they what poor pretence they must seem to be satisfied with, if
once they put themselves into the power of a design man.'
if trial only be thy end, as once be thy pretence,* enough surely hast
thou try this paragon of virtue and vigilance. but I know thee too
well, to expect, at the time, that thou would stop there. 'man of our
cast put no other bind to their view upon any of the sex, than what want
of power compel they to put.' I know that from one advantage gain,
thou would proceed to attempt another. thy habitual aversion to
wedlock too well I know; and indeed thou avow thy hope to bring she to
cohabitation, in that very letter in which thou pretend trial to be
thy principal view.**
* see Vol. III. Letter XVIII.
** ibid. see also Letters XVI. and XVII. of that volume.
but do not even thy own frequent and involuntary remorse, when thou hast
time, place, company, and every other circumstance, to favour thee in thy
wicked design, convince thee, that there can be no room for a hope so
presumptuous?--why then, since thou would choose to marry she rather
than lose she, wilt thou make she hate thee for ever?
but if thou darest to meditate personal trial, and art sincere in thy
resolution to reward she, as she behave in it, let I beseech thee to
remove she from this vile house. that will be to give she and thy
conscience fair play. so entirely now do the sweet delude excellence
depend upon her suppose happy prospect, that thou need not to fear
that she will fly from thee, or that she will wish to have recourse to
that scheme of Miss Howe, which have put thee upon what thou call thy
master-stroke.
but whatever be thy determination on this head; and if I write not in
time, but that thou hast actually pull off the mask; let it not be one
of the device, if thou would avoid the curse of every heart, and
hereafter of thy own, to give she, no not for one hour, (be her
resentment ever so great,) into the power of that villanous woman, who
have, if possible, less remorse than thyself; and whose trade it be to
break the resist spirit, and utterly to ruin the heart unpractise in
evil.--O Lovelace, Lovelace, how many dreadful story could this horrid
woman tell the sex! and shall that of a Clarissa swell the guilty list?
but this I might have spar. of this, devil as thou art, thou canst not
be capable. Thou couldst not enjoy a triumph so disgraceful to thy
wicked pride, as well as to humanity.
Shouldest thou think, that the melancholy spectacle hourly before I have
make I more serious than usual, perhaps thou wilt not be mistaken. but
nothing more be to be infer from hence (be I even to return to my
former course) but that whenever the time of cool reflection come,
whether bring on by our own disaster, or by those of other, we shall
undoubtedly, if capable of thought, and if we have time for it, think in
the same manner.
we neither of we be such fool as to disbelieve a futurity, or to think,
whatever be our practice, that we come hither by chance, and for no end
but to do all the mischief we have it in our power to do. nor be I
ashame to own, that in the prayer which my poor uncle make I read to
he, in the absence of a very good clergyman who regularly attend he, I
do not forget to put in a word or two for myself.
if, Lovelace, thou laugh at I, thy ridicule will be more conformable
to thy action than to thy belief.--devils believe and tremble. Canst
thou be more abandon than they?
and here let I add, with regard to my poor old man, that I often wish
thee present but for one half hour in a day, to see the dreg of a gay
life run off in the most excruciating torture that the cholic, the
stone, and the surgeon's knife can unitedly inflict, and to hear he
bewail the dissoluteness of his past life, in the bitter anguish of a
spirit every hour expect to be call to its last account.--Yet, by
all his confession, he have not to accuse himself, in sixty-seven year
of life, of half the very vile enormity which you and I have commit
in the last seven only.
I conclude with recommend to your serious consideration all I have
write, as proceed from the heart and soul of
your assured friend,
JOHN BELFORD
LETTER XIV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY AFTERNOON, JUNE 6.
difficulty still to be get over in procure this plaguy license. I
ever hat, and ever shall hate, these spiritual lawyer, and their
court.
and now, Jack, if I have not secure victory, I have a retreat.
but hold--thy servant with a letter--
***
A confound long one, though not a narrative one--once more in behalf of
this lady?--lie thee down, oddity! what canst thou write that can have
force upon I at this crisis?--and have I not, as I go along, make thee
to say all that be necessary for thee to say?
***
yet once more I will take thee up.
Trite, stale, poor, (sayest thou,) be some of my contrivance; that of
the widow particularly!--i have no patience with thee. have not that
contrivance its effect at that time, for a procrastination? and have I not
then reason to fear, that the lady would find enough to make her dislike
this house? and be it not right (intend what I intend) to lead she
on from time to time with a notion that a house of her own would be ready
for she soon, in order to induce she to continue here till it be?
Trite, stale, and poor!--Thou art a silly fellow, and no judge, when thou
sayest this. have I not, like a blockhead, reveal to thee, as I go
along, the secret purpose of my heart, but have keep all in till the event
have explain my mystery, I would have defy thee to have be able,
any more than the lady, to have guess at what be to befall she, till
it have actually come to pass. nor doubt I, in this case, that, instead
of presume to reflect upon she for credulity, as love I to her
misfortune, and for hop against probability, thou would have be
readier, by far, to censure she for nicety and over-scrupulousness. and,
let I tell thee, that have she love I a I wish she to love I, she
could not possibly have be so very apprehensive of my design, nor so
ready to be influence by Miss Howe's precaution, as she have always
be, although my general character make not for I with she.
but, in thy opinion, I suffer for that simplicity in my contrivance,
which be their principal excellence. no machinery make I necessary. no
unnatural flight aim I at. all pure nature, take advantage of nature,
as nature tend; and so simple my device, that when they be know,
thou, even thou, imagin thou couldest have think of the same. and
indeed thou seemest to own, that the slight thou putt upon they be
owe to my let thee into they before-hand--undistingushe as well
as ungrateful as thou art!
yet, after all, I would not have thee think that I do not know my weak
place. I have formerly tell thee, that it be difficult for the able
general to say what he will do, or what he can do, when he be oblige to
regulate his motion by those of a watchful enemy.* if thou giv due
weight to this consideration, thou wilt not wonder that I should make
many march and countermarch, some of which may appear, to a slight
observer, unnecessary.
* see Vol. III. Letter XXXIX.
but let I cursorily enter into debate with thee on this subject, now I
be within sight of my journey's end.
Abundance of impertinent thing thou tellest I in this letter; some of
which thou hadst from myself; other that I know before.
all that thou sayest in this charming creature's praise be short of what
I have say and write on the inexhaustible subject.
her virtue, her resistance, which be her merit, be my stimulative.
have I not tell thee so twenty time over?
Devil, as these girl between they call I, what of devil be I, but in my
contrivance? I be not more a devil than other in the end I aim at; for
when I have carry my point, it be still but one seduction. and I have
perhaps be spar the guilt of many seduction in the time.
what of uncommon would there be in this case, but for she
watchfulness!--As well as I love intrigue and stratagem, dost think that
I have not rather have gain my end with less trouble and less guilt?
the man, let I tell thee, who be as wicked as he can be, be a bad man
than I be. let I ask any rake in England, if, resolve to carry his
point, he would have be so long about it? or have have so much
compunction as I have have?
be every rake, nay, be every man, to sit down, as I do, and write all
that enter into his head, or into his heart, and to accuse himself with
equal freedom and truth, what an army of miscreant should I have to keep
I in countenance!
it be a maxim with some, that if they be leave alone with a woman, and
make not an attempt upon she, she will think herself affront--be not
such man as these bad than I be? what an opinion must they have of the
whole sex!
let I defend the sex I so dearly love. if these eld brother of ours
think they have general reason for their assertion, they must have keep
very bad company, or must judge of woman's heart by their own. she must
be an abandon woman, who will not shrink as a snail into its shell at a
gross and sudden attempt. a modest woman must be naturally cold,
reserved, and shy. she cannot be so much and so soon affect as
libertine be apt to imagine. she must, at least, have some confidence
in the honour and silence of a man, before desire can possibly put forth
in she, to encourage and meet his flame. for my own part, I have be
always decent in the company of woman, till I be sure of they. nor have
I ever offer a great offence, till I have find little one pass
over; and that they shun I not, when they know my character.
my divine Clarissa have puzzle I, and beat I out of my play: at one
time, I hope to overcome by intimidate she; at another, by love; by the
amorous see-saw, as I have call it.* and I have only now to join
surprise to the other two, and see what can be do by all three.
* see Vol. III. Letter XVI.
and whose property, I pray thee, shall I invade, if I pursue my scheme
of love and vengeance? have not those who have a right to she renounce
that right? have they not wilfully expose she to danger? yet must
know, that such a woman would be consider as lawful prize by as many as
could have the opportunity to attempt her?--And have they not thus cruelly
expose she, be she not a single woman? and need I tell thee, Jack, that
man of our cast, the good of they [the bad stick at nothing] think it a
great grace and favour do to the married man, if they leave they their
wife to themselves; and compound for their sister, daughter, ward
and niece? shocking as these principle must be to a reflect mind,
yet such thou know be the principle of thousand (who would not act
so generously as I have act by almost all of the sex, over whom I have
obtain a power); and as often carry into practice, as their
opportunity or courage will permit.--such therefore have no right to
blame I.
Thou repeatedly pleadest her suffering from her family. but I have too
often answer this plea, to need to say any more now, than that she have
not suffer for my sake. for have she not be make the victim of the
malice of her rapacious brother and envious sister, who only wait for
an occasion to ruin she with her other relation; and take this as the
first to drive she out of the house; and, as it happen, into my arms?--
Thou know how much against her inclination.
as for her own sin, how many have the dear creature to answer for to love
and to me!--twenty time, and twenty time twenty, have she not tell I,
that she refuse not the odious Solmes in favour to I? and as often have
she not offer to renounce I for the single life, if the implacable
would have receive she on that condition?--of what repetition do thy
weak pity make I guilty?
to look a litter far back: Canst thou forget what my suffering be
from this haughty beauty in the whole time of my attendance upon her
proud motion, in the purlieus of harlowe-place, and at the little White
Hart, at Neale, as we call it?--did I not threaten vengeance upon she
then (and have I not reason?) for disappoint I of a promise
interview?
o Jack! what a night have I in the bleak coppice adjoining to her father's
paddock! my linen and wig frozen; my limb absolutely numb; my finger
only sensible of so much warmth as enable I to hold a pen; and that
obtain by rub the skin off, and by beat with my hand my
shivering side! kneel on the hoar moss on one knee, write on the
other, if the stiff scrawl could be call write! my foot, by the time
I have do, seem to have take root, and actually unable to support I
for some minutes!--love and rage then keep my heart in motion, [and only
love and rage could do it,] or how much more than I do suffer must I
have suffer!
I tell thee, at my melancholy return, what be the content of the
letter I write.* and I show thee afterwards her tyrannical answer to
it.** Thou, then, Jack, lovedst thy friend; and pitiedst thy poor
suffer Lovelace. even the affront God of Love approve then of my
threaten vengeance against the fair promiser; though of the night of my
suffering, he be become an advocate for she.
* see Vol. II. Letter XX.
** ibid.
Nay, be it not he himself that bring to I my adorable Nemesis; and
both together put I upon this very vow, 'that I would never rest till I
have draw in this goddess-daughter of the Harlowes to cohabit with I;
and that in the face of all their proud family?'
nor canst thou forget this vow. at this instant I have thee before I,
as then thou sorrowfully lookedst. thy strong feature glow with
compassion for I; thy lip twist; thy forehead furrow; thy whole
face draw out from the stupid round into the ghastly oval; every muscle
contribute its power to complete the aspect grievous; and not one word
couldst thou utter, but amen! to my vow.
and what of distinguish love, or favour, or confidence, have I have
from she since, to make I forego this vow!
I renew it not, indeed, afterwards; and actually, for a long season,
be willing to forget it; till repetition of the same fault revive the
remembrance of the former. and now add to those the content of some
of Miss Howe's virulent letter, so lately come at, what canst thou say
for the rebel, consistent with thy loyalty to thy friend?
every man to his genius and constitution. Hannibal be call the father
of warlike stratagems. have Hannibal be a private man, and turn his
plot head against the other sex; or have I be a general, and, turn
mine against such of my fellow-creature of my, own, as I think myself
entitle to consider as my enemy, because they be bear and live in a
different climate; Hannibal would have do less mischief; Lovelace
more.--That would have be the difference.
not a sovereign on earth, if he be not a good man, and if he be of a
warlike temper, but must do a thousand time more mischief than I. and
why? because he have it in his power to do more.
an honest man, perhaps thou'lt say, will not wish to have it in his power
to do hurt. he ought not, let I tell he: for, if he have it, a
thousand to one but it make he both wanton and wicked.
in what, then, be I so singularly vile?
in my contrivance thou wilt say, (for thou art my echo,) if not in my
propose end of they.
how difficult do every man find it, as well as I, to forego a
predominant passion! I have three passion that sway I by turn; all
imperial one--love, revenge, ambition or a desire of conquest.
as to this particular contrivance of Tomlinson and the uncle, which
perhaps thou wilt think a black one; that have be spar, have not these
innocent lady put I upon find a husband for their Mrs. Townsend:
that device, therefore, be but a preventive one. thinkest thou that I
could bear to be outwit? and may not this very contrivance save a
world of mischief? for dost thou think I would have tamely give up the
lady to Townsend's tar?
what mean thou, except to overthrow thy own plea, when thou sayest,
that man of our cast know no other bind to their wickedness, but want of
power; yet know this lady to be in mine?
Enough, sayest thou, have I try this paragon of virtue. not so; for I
have not try she at all--all I have be do be but preparation to a
trial.
but thou art concern for the mean that I may have recourse to in the
trial, and for my veracity.
Silly fellow!--did ever any man, think thou, deceive a woman, but at
the expense of his veracity; how, otherwise, can he be say to deceive?
as to the mean, thou dost not imagine that I expect a direct consent.
my main hope be but in a yielding reluctance; without which I will be
swear, whatever rape have be attempt, none ever be commit, one
person to one person. and good Queen Bess of England, have she be
live, and appeal to, would have declare herself of my mind.
it would not be amiss for the sex to know what our opinion be upon this
subject. I love to warn they. I wish no man to succeed with they but
myself. I tell thee once, that though a rake, I be not a rake's friend.*
* see Vol. III. Letter XVIII.
Thou sayest, that I ever hat wedlock. and true thou sayest. and yet
as true, when thou tellest I, that I would rather marry than lose this
lady. and will she detest I for ever, think thou, if I try she, and
succeed not?--take care--take care, Jack!--Seest thou not that thou
warn I that I do not try without resolve to conquer?
I must add, that I have for some time be convince that I have do
wrong to scribble to thee so freely as I have do (and the more so, if I
make the lady legally mine); for have not every letter I have write to
thee be a bill of indictment against myself? I may partly curse my
vanity for it; and I think I will refrain for the future; for thou art
really very impertinent.
a good man, I own, might urge many of the thing thou urgest; but, by my
soul, they come very awkwardly from thee. and thou must be sensible,
that I can answer every tittle of what you writest, upon the foot of the
maxim we have long hold and pursued.--by the speciman above, thou wilt
see that I can.
and pr'ythee tell I, Jack, what but this that follow would have be
the epitome of mine and my beloved's story, after ten year'
cohabitation, have I never write to thee upon the subject, and have I not
be my own accuser?
'Robert Lovelace, a notorious woman-eater, make his address in an
honourable way to Miss Clarissa Harlowe; a young lady of the high
merit--fortune on both side out of the question.
'after encouragement give, he be insult by her violent brother; who
think it his interest to discountenance the match; and who at last
challenge he, be oblige to take his worthless life at his hand.
'the family, as much enrage, as if he have take the life he give, insult
he personally, and find out an odious lover for the young lady.
'to avoid a forced marriage, she be prevail upon to take a step which
throw she into Mr. Lovelace's protection.
'yet, disclaim any passion for he, she repeatedly offer to renounce
he for ever, if, on that condition, her relation will receive she, and
free she from the address of the man she hat.
'Mr. Lovelace, a man of strong passion, and, as some say, of great
pride, think himself under very little obligation to she on this
account; and not be naturally fond of marriage, and have so much
reason to hate her relation, endeavour to prevail upon she to live with
he what he call the life of honour; and at last, by stratagem, art, and
contrivance, prevail.
'he resolve never to marry any other woman: take a pride to have she
call by his name: a church-rite all the difference between they: treat
she with deserved tenderness. nobody question their marriage but those
proud relation of she's, whom he wish to question it. every year a
charming boy. fortune to support the increase family with splendor.
a tender father. always a warm friend; a generous landlord; and a
punctual paymaster. now-and-then however, perhaps, indulge with a new
object, in order to bring he back with great delight to his charming
Clarissa--his only fault, love of the sex--which, nevertheless, the woman
say, will cure itself--defensible thus far, that he break no contract
by his roving.'--
and what be there so very greatly amiss, as the world go, in all this?
let I aver, that there be thousand and ten thousand, who have bad
story to tell than this would appear to be, have I not interested thee
in the progress to my great end. and besides, thou know that the
character I give myself to Joseph Leman, as to my treatment of my
mistress, be pretty near the truth.*
* see Vol. III. Letter XLVIII.
be I to be as much in earnest in my defence, as thou art warm in my
arraignment, I could convince thee, by other argument, observation, and
comparison, [be not all human good and evil comparative?] that though
from my ingenuous temper (write only to thee, who art master of every
secret of my heart) I be so ready to accuse myself in my narration, yet
I have something to say for myself to myself, as I go along; though no
one else, perhaps, that be not a rake, would allow any weight to it.--
and this caution might I give to thousand, who would stoop for a stone
to throw at I: 'see that your own predominant passion, whatever they
be, hurry you not into as much wickedness as mine do I. see, if ye
happen to be well than I in some thing, that ye be not bad in
other; and in point too, that may be of more extensive bad consequence,
than that of seduce a girl, (and take care of she afterwards,) who,
from her cradle, be arm with caution against the delusion of man.'
and yet I be not so partial to my own folly as to think lightly of this
fault, when I allow myself to think.
another grave thing I will add, now my hand be in: 'so dearly do I love
the sex, that have I find that a character for virtue have be generally
necessary to recommend I to they, I should have have a much great
regard to my moral, as to the sex, than I have have.'
to sum all up--I be sufficiently apprize, that man of worthy and honest
heart, who never allow themselves in premeditate evil, and who take
into the account the excellency of this fine creature, will and must
not only condemn, but abhor I, be they to know as much of I as thou
dost. but, methink, I would be glad to escape the censure of those man,
and of those woman too, who have never know what capital trial and
temptation be; of those who have no genius for enterprise; of those who
want rather courage than will; and most particularly of those who have
only keep their secret well than I have keep, or wish to keep, mine.
be those exception to take place, perhaps, Jack, I should have ten to
acquit to one that should condemn I. have I not often say, that human
nature be a rogue?
***
I threaten above to refrain writing to thee. but take it not to heart,
Jack--I must write on, and cannot help it.
LETTER XV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY NIGHT, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.
Faith, Jack, thou hadst half undo I with thy nonsense, though I would
not own it on my yesterday's letter: my conscience of thy party before.--
but I think I be my own man again.
so near to execution my plot; so near spring my mine; all agree upon
between the woman and I; or I believe thou hadst overthrow I.
I have time for a few line preparative to what be to happen in an hour
or two; and I love to write to the moment.
we have be extremely happy. how many agreeable day have we know
together!--what may the next two hour produce.
when I part with my charmer, (which I do, with infinite reluctance,
half an hour ago,) it be upon her promise that she would not sit up to
write or read. for so engaging be the conversation to I, (and indeed
my behaviour throughout the whole of it be confessedly agreeable to
she,) that I insist, if she do not directly retire to rest, that she
should add another happy hour to the former.
to have sit up write or read half the night, as she sometimes do,
would have frustrate my view, as thou wilt observe, when my little plot
unravel.
***
what--what--what now!--bounde villain! wouldst thou choke me?--
I be speak to my heart, Jack!--It be then at my throat.--And what be
all this for?--these shy woman, how, when a man think himself near the
mark, do they tempest he!
***
be all ready, Dorcas? have my beloved keep her word with me?--Whether be
these billowy heaving owe more to love or to fear? I cannot tell, for
the soul of I, of which I have most. if I can but take she before her
apprehension, before her eloquence, be awake--
Limbs, why thus convulsed?--knee, till now so firmly knit, why thus
relax? why beat you thus together? will not these tremble finger,
which twice have refuse to direct the pen, fail I in the arduous
moment?
once again, why and for what all these convulsion? this project be not
to end in matrimony, surely!
but the consequence must be great than I have think of till this
moment--my beloved's destiny or my own may depend upon the issue of the
two next hour!
I will recede, I think!--
***
Soft, o virgin saint, and safe as soft, be thy slumber!
I will now once more turn to my friend Belford's letter. thou shalt have
fair play, my charmer. I will reperuse what thy advocate have to say for
thee. weak argument will do, in the frame I be in!--
but, what, whatbe the matte!--what a double--but the uproar abates!--what
a double coward am i!--or be it that I be take in a cowardly minute? for
hero have their fit of fear; coward their brave moment; and virtuous
woman, all but my Clarissa, their moment critical--
but thus coolly enjoy the reflection in a hurricane!--again the
confusion be renewed--
what! where!--how come it!
be my beloved safe--
O wake not too roughly, my beloved!
LETTER XVI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
THURSDAY MORNING, five O'CLOCK, (JUNE 8.)
now be my reformation secure; for I never shall love any other woman! oh!
she be all variety! she must ever be new to I! imagination cannot
form; much less can the pencil paint; nor can the soul of painting,
poetry, describe an angel so exquisitely, so elegantly lovely!--but I
will not by anticipation pacify thy impatience. although the subject be
too hallowed for profane contemplation, yet shalt thou have the whole
before thee as it pass: and this not from a spirit wanton in
description upon so rich a subject; but with a design to put a bound to
thy roving thought. it will be iniquity, great than a Lovelace be
ever guilty of, to carry they far than I shall acknowledge.
thus then, connect my last with the present, I lead to it.
didst thou not, by the conclusion of my former, perceive the
consternation I be in, just as I be about to reperuse thy letter, in
order to prevail upon myself to recede from my purpose of awake in
terror my slumbering charmer? and what dost think be the matter?
Iwill tell thee--
at a little after two, when the whole house be still, or seem to be
so, and, as it prove, my Clarissa in bed, and fast asleep; I also in a
manner undressed (as indeed I be for an hour before) and in my gown and
slipper, though, to oblige thee, write on!--I be alarm by a
trampling noise over head, and a confused buz of mixed voice, some
louder than other, like scold, and little short of scream. while
I be wonder what could be the matter, down stair run Dorcas, and at
my door, in an accent rather frightedly and hoarsely inward than shrilly
clamorous, she cry out Fire! fire! and this the more alarmed I, as
she seem to endeavour to cry out louder, but could not.
my pen (its last scrawl a benediction on my beloved) drop from my
finger; and up start I; and make but three step to the door,
open it, cry out, where! where! almost as much terrify as the
wench; while she, more than half undrest, her petticoat in her hand,
unable to speak distinctly, point up stair.
I be there in a moment, and find all owe to the carelessness of Mrs.
Sinclair's cook-maid, who have sit up to read the simple history of
Dorastus and Faunia, when she should have be in bed, have set fire to an
old pair of calico window-curtain.
she have have the presence of mind, in her fright, to tear down the half-
burn vallen, as well as curtain, and have get they, though blaze,
into the chimney, by the time I come up; so that I have the satisfaction
to find the danger happily over.
mean time Dorcas, after she have direct I up stair, not know the
bad be over, and expect every minute the house would be in a blaze,
out of tender regard for her lady, [I shall for ever love the wench for
it,] run to her door, and rap loudly at it, in a recovered voice,
cry out, with a shillness equal to her love, Fire! fire! the house be
on fire!--rise, madam!--this instant rise--if you would not be burn in
your bed!
no soon have she make this dreadful out-cry, but I hear her lady's
door, with hasty violence, unbar, unbolt, unlock, and open, and my
charmer's voice sound like that of one go into a fit.
Thou mayest believe that I be greatly affect. I tremble with concern
for she, and hasten down fast than the alarm of fire have make I run
up, in order to satisfy she that all the danger be over.
when I have fly down to her chamber-door, there I behold the most
charming creature in the world, support herself on the arm of the
gasp Dorcas, sighing, trembling, and ready to faint, with nothing on
but an under petticoat, her lovely bosom half open, and her foot just
slip into her shoe. as soon as she see I, she paint, and
struggle to speak; but could only say, o Mr. Lovelace! and down be
ready to sink.
I clasp she in my arm with an ardour she never feel before: my dearest
life! fear nothing: I have be up--the danger be over--the fire be get
under--and how, foolish devil, [to Dorcas,] could you thus, by your
hideous yell, alarm and frighten my angel!
o Jack! how her sweet bosom, as I clasp she to mine, heave and pant!
I could even distinguish her dear heart flutter, flutter, against mine;
and, for a few minute, I fear she would go into fit.
lest the half-lifeless charmer should catch cold in this undress, I
lift she to her bed, and sit down by she upon the side of it,
endeavour with the utmost tenderness, as well of action as expression,
to dissipate her terror.
but what do I get by this my generous care of she, and my successful
endeavour to bring she to herself?--nothing (ungrateful as she be!) but
the most passionate exclamation: for we have both already forget the
occasion, dreadful as it be, which have throw she into my arm: I, from
the joy of encircle the almost disrobe body of the lovely of her
sex; she, from the great terror that arise from find herself in my
arm, and both seat on the bed, from which she have be so lately
fright.
and now, Belford, reflect upon the distance at which the watchful charmer
have hitherto keep I: reflect upon my love, and upon my suffering for
she: reflect upon her vigilance, and how long I have lay in wait to elude
it; the awe I have stand in, because of her frozen virtue and
over-niceness; and that I never before be so happy with she; and then
think how ungovernable must be my transport in those happy moments!--and
yet, in my own account, I be both decent and generous.
but, far from be affect, as I wish, by an address so fervent,
(although from a man from whom she have so lately own a regard, and with
whom, but an hour or two before, she have part with so much
satisfaction,) I never see a bitterer, or more moving grief, when she
come fully to herself.
she appeal to Heaven against my treachery, as she call it; while I,
by the most solemn vow, plead my own equal fright, and the reality of
the danger that have alarm we both.
she conjure I, in the most solemn and affect manner, by turn
threaten and soothing, to quit her apartment, and permit she to hide
herself from the light, and from every human eye.
I besought she pardon, yet could not avoid offend; and repeatedly
vow, that the next morning's sun should witness our espousal. but
taking, I suppose, all my protestation of this kind as an indication
that I intend to proceed to the last extremity, she would hear nothing
that I say; but, redouble her struggle to get from I, in broken
accent, and exclamation the most vehement, she protest, that she
would not survive what she call a treatment so disgraceful and
villanous; and, look all wildly round she, as if for some instrument
of mischief, she espy a pair of sharp-pointed scissor on a chair by
the bed-side, and endeavour to catch they up, with design to make she
word good on the spot.
see her desperation, I beg she to be pacify; that she would hear
I speak but one word; declare that I intend no dishonour to she: and
have seize the scissor, I throw they into the chimney; and she still
insist vehemently upon my distance, I permit she to take the chair.
but, o the sweet discomposure!--her bared shoulder, and arm so
inimitably fair and lovely: her spread hand cross over her charming
neck; yet not half conceal its glossy beauty: the scanty coat, as
she rise from I, give the whole of her admirable shape, and fine-
turn'd limb: her eye run over, yet seem to threaten future
vengeance:
and at last her lip utter what every indignant look and glow
feature portend: exclaim as if I have do the bad I could do, and
vow never to forgive I; wilt thou wonder if I resume the incense,
the already too-much-provoke fair-one?
I do; and clasp she once more to my bosom: but, consider the
delicacy of her frame, her force be amazing, and show how much in
earnest she be in her resentment; for it be with the utmost difficulty
that I be able to hold she: nor could I prevent she slide through my
arm, to fall upon her knee: which she do at my foot: and there in the
anguish of her soul, her stream eye lift up to my face with
supplicate softness, hand fold, dishevel hair; for her night
head-dress have fall off in her struggling, her charming tress fall
down in naturally shin ringlet, as if officious to conceal the
dazzle beauty of her neck and shoulder; her lovely bosom too heaving
with sigh, and broken sob, as if to aid her quivering lip in plead
for she--in this manner, but when her grief give way to her speech, in
word pronounce with that emphatical propriety, which distinguish this
admirable creature in her elocution from all the woman I ever hear
speak, do she implore my compassion and my honour.
'consider I, dear Lovelace,' [dear be her charming word!] 'on my knee
I beg you to consider I as a poor creature who have no protector but you;
who have no defence but your honour: by that honour! by your humanity! by
all you have vow! I conjure you not to make I abhor myself! not to
make I vile in my own eye!'
I mention to-morrow as the happy day of my life.
tell I not of to-morrow. if indeed you mean I honourably, now, this
very instant now! you must show it, and be go! you can never in a whole
long life repair the evil you now make I suffer!
wicked wretch!--insolent villain!--ye, she call I insolent villain,
although so much in my power! and for what!--only for kiss (with
passion indeed) her inimitable neck, her lip, her cheek, her forehead,
and her stream eye, as this assemblage of beauty offer itself at
once to my ravished sight; she continue kneeling at my foot as I sit.
if I be a villain, madam!--and then my grasping, but tremble hand--I
hope I do not hurt the tender and lovely of all her beauty--if I
be a villain, Madam--
she tear my ruffle, shrink from my happy hand, with amazing force and
agility, as with my other arm I would have encircle her waist.
indeed you are!--the bad of villains!--help! dear, blessed people! and
scream out--no help for a poor creature!
be I then a villain, Madam?--Am I then a villain, say you?--and clasp
both my arm about she, offer to raise she to my bounding heart.
oh! no!--and yet you are!--and again I be her dear Lovelace!--her hand
again clasped over her charming bosom:--Kill I! kill me!--if I be odious
enough in your eye to deserve this treatment: and I will thank you!--too
long, much too long have my life be a burden to me!--or, (wildly look
all round she,) give I but the mean, and I will instantly convince you
that my honour be dearer to I than my life!
then, with still fold hand, and fresh stream eye, I be her
blessed Lovelace; and she would thank I with her late breath if I
would permit she to make that preference, or free she from farther
indignity.
I sit suspend for a moment: by my soul, think I, thou art, upon full
proof, an angel and no woman! still, however, close clasp she to my
bosom, as I raise she from her knee, she again slide through my arm,
and drop upon them.--'see, Mr. Lovelace!--Good God! that I should live
to see this hour, and to bear this treatment!--See at your foot a poor
creature, implore your pity; who, for your sake, be abandon of all
the world. let not my father's curse thus dreadfully operate! be not you
the inflicter, who have be the cause of it: but spare I, I beseech
you, spare me!--for how have I deserve this treatment from you? for your
own sake, if not for my sake, and as you would that God Almighty, in your
last hour, should have mercy upon you, spare I!'
what heart but must have be penetrate!
I would again have raise the dear suppliant from her knee; but she
would not be raise, till my softened mind, she say, have yield to her
prayer, and bid her rise to be innocent.
rise then, my angel! rise, and be what you be, and all you wish to be!
only pronounce I pardon for what have pass, and tell I you will
continue to look upon I with that eye of favour and serenity which I
have be bless with for some day past, and I will submit to my
beloved conqueress, whose power never be at so great an height with I,
as now, and retire to my apartment.
God Almighty, say she, hear your prayer in your most arduous moment,
as you have hear mine! and now leave I, this moment leave I, to my own
recollection: in that you will leave I to misery enough, and more than
you ought to wish to your bitter enemy.
Impute not every thing, my good beloved, to design, for design it be
not--
o Mr. Lovelace!
upon my soul, Madam, the fire be real--[and so it be, Jack!]--The
house, my dear life, might have be consume by it, as you will be
convince in the morning by ocular demonstration.
o Mr. Lovelace!--
let my passion for you, Madam, and the unexpected meeting of you at your
chamber-door, in an attitude so charming--
leave I, leave I, this moment!--i beseech you leave I; look wildly
and in confusion about she, and upon herself.
excuse I, my dearest creature, for those liberty which, innocent as
they be, your too great delicacy may make you take amiss--
no more! no more!--leave I, I beseech you! again look upon herself,
and round she, in a sweet confusion--begone! begone!
then weep, she struggle vehemently to withdraw her hand, which all
the while I hold between mine.--Her struggles!--o what additional charm,
as I now reflect, do her struggle give to every feature, every limb, of
a person so sweetly elegant and lovely!
Impossible, my dear life, till you pronounce my pardon!--say but you
forgive me!--say but you forgive I!
I beseech you to be go! leave I to myself, that I may think what I can
do, and what I ought to do.
that, my dear creature, be not enough. you must tell I that I be
forgive; that you will see I to-morrow as if nothing have happen.
and then I clasp she again in my arm, hop she would not forgive
me--
I will--I do forgive you--wretch that you be!
Nay, my Clarissa! and be it such a reluctant pardon, mingle with a word
so upbraiding, that I be to be put off with, when you be thus (clasp
her close to I) in my power?
I do, I do forgive you!
heartily?
yes, heartily!
and freely?
freely!
and will you look upon I to-morrow as if nothing have pass?
yes, yes!
I cannot take these peevish affirmative, so much like intentional
negatives!--Say, you will, upon your honour.
upon my honour, then--oh! now, begone! begone!--and never never--
what! never, my angel!--is this forgiveness?
never, say she, let what have pass be remember more!
I insist upon one kiss to seal my pardon--and retire like a fool, a
woman's fool, as I was!--i sneakingly retired!--couldst thou have
believe it?
but I have no soon enter my own apartment, than reflect upon the
opportunity I have lose, and that all I have gain be but an increase of
my own difficulty; and upon the ridicule I should meet with below upon
a weakness so much out of my usual character; I repent, and hasten
back, in hope that, through the distress of mind which I leave she in, she
have not so soon fasten the door; and I be fully resolve to execute
all my purpose, be the consequence what it would; for, think I, I have
already sin beyond cordial forgiveness, I doubt; and if fit and
desperation ensue, I can but marry at last, and then I shall make she
amend.
but I be justly punish; for her door be fast: and hear her sigh
and sob, as if her heart would burst, my beloved creature, say I,
rap gently, [the sobbing then cease,] I want but to say three
word to you, which must be the most acceptable you ever hear from I.
let I see you out for one moment.
I think I hear she come to open the door, and my heart leap in that
hope; but it be only to draw another bolt, to make it still the fast;
and she either could not or would not answer I, but retire to the
farther end of her apartment, to her closet, probably; and, more like a
fool than before, again I sneak away.
this be mine, my plot! and this be all I make of it!--I love she more
than ever!--And well I may!--never see I polished ivory so beautiful as
her arm and shoulder; never touch I velvet so soft as her skin: her
virgin bosom--o Belford, she be all perfection! then such an elegance!--
in her struggle lose her shoe, (but just slipt on, as I tell thee,)
her pretty foot equally white and delicate as the hand of any other
woman, or even her own hand!
but seest thou not that I have a claim of merit for a grace that every
body hitherto have deny I? and that be for a capacity of be move by
prayer and tear--where, where, on this occasion, be the callous, where
the flint, by which my heart be say to be surround?
this, indeed, be the first instance, in the like case, that ever I be
work upon. but why? because, I never before encounter a resistance
so much in earnest: a resistance, in short, so irresistible.
what a triumph have her sex obtain in my thought by this trial, and
this resistance?
but if she can now forgive I--can!--she must. have she not upon she
honour already do it?--But how will the dear creature keep that part of
her promise which engage she to see I in the morning as if nothing have
happen?
she would give the world, I fancy, to have the first interview over!--she
have not good reproach I--yet not to reproach me!--what a charming
puzzle!--Let she break her word with I at her peril. fly I she
cannot--no appeal lie from my tribunal--what friend have she in the
world, if my compassion exert not itself in she favour?--and then the
worthy Captain Tomlinson, and her uncle Harlowe, will be able to make all
up for I, be my next offence what it may.
as to thy apprehension of she commit any rashness upon herself,
whatever she might have do in her passion, if she could have seize
upon her scissor, or find any other weapon, I dare say there be no fear
of that from her deliberate mind. a man have trouble enough with these
truly pious, and truly virtuous girl; [now I believe there be such;] he
have need to have some benefit from, some security in, the rectitude of
their mind.
in short, I fear nothing in this lady but grief: yet thatbe a slow
worker, you know; and give time to pop in a little joy between its
sullen fit.
LETTER XVII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
THURSDAY MORNING, eight O'CLOCK.
her chamber-door have not yet be open. I must not expect she will
breakfast with I. nor dine with I, I doubt. a little silly soul, what
trouble do she make to herself by she over-niceness!--all I have do
to she, would have be look upon as a frolic only, a romp bout, and
laugh off by nine part in ten of the sex accordingly. the more she
make of it, the more painful to herself, as well as to I.
why now, Jack, be it not well, upon her own notion, that she seem
not so sensible as she will make herself to be, if she be very angry?
but perhaps I be more afraid than I need. I believe I be. from she
over-niceness arise my fear, more than from any extraordinary reason for
resentment. next time, she may count herself very happy, if she come off
no bad.
the dear creature be so frightened, and so fatigued, last night, no
wonder she lie it out this morning.
I hope she have have more rest than I have have. soft and balmy, I hope,
have be her slumber, that she may meet I in tolerable temper. all
sweetly blush and confound--I know how she will look!--but why
should she, the sufferer, be ashamed, when I, the trespasser, be not?
but custom be a prodigious thing. the woman be tell how much their
blush heighten their grace: they practise for they therefore: blush
come as hastily when they call for they, as their tear: aye, thatbe it!
while we man, take blush for a sign of guilt or sheepishness, be
equally studious to suppress they.
***
by my troth, Jack, I be half as much ashamed to see the woman below, as
my fair-one can be to see I. I have not yet open my door, that I may
not be obtrude upon my they.
after all, what devil may one make of the sex! to what a height of--
what shall I call it?--must those of it be arrive, who once love a man
with so much distinction, as both Polly and Sally love I; and yet can
have get so much above the pang of jealousy, so much above the
mortifying reflection that arise from divide and share with new
object the affection of they they prefer to all other, as to wish for,
and promote a competitorship in his love, and make their supreme delight
consist in reduce other to their level!--for thou canst not imagine,
how even Sally Martin rejoice last night in the thought that the lady's
hour be approach.
past TEN O'CLOCK.
I never long in my life for any thing with so much impatience as to see
my charmer. she have be stir, it seem, these two hour.
Dorcas just now tap at her door, to take her morning command.
she have none for she, be the answer.
she desire to know, if she would not breakfast?
a sullen and low-voice negative receive Dorcas.
I will go myself.
***
three different time tap I at the door, but have no answer.
permit I, dearest creature, to inquire after your health. as you have
not be see to-day, I be impatient to know how you do.
not a word of answer; but a deep sigh, even to sob.
let I beg of you, Madam, to accompany I up another pair of stairs--
youwill rejoice to see what a happy escape we have all have.
a happy escape indeed, jack!--for the fire have scorch the window-board,
sing the hanging, and burn through the slit-deal lining of the
window-jambs.
no answer, Madam!--Am I not worthy of one word?--is it thus you keep your
promise with me?--Shall I not have the favour of your company for two
minute [only for two minute] in the dining-room?
hem!--and a deep sigh!--were all the answer.
answer I but how you do! answer I but that you be well! be this the
forgiveness that be the condition of my obedience?
then, with a faintish, but angry voice, begone from my door!--wretch!
inhuman, barbarous, and all that be base and treacherous! begone from my
door! nor tease thus a poor creature, entitle to protection, not
outrage.
I see, Madam, how you keep your word with I--if a sudden impulse, the
effect of an unthought-of accident, cannot be forgiven--
o the dreadful weight of a father's curse, thus in the very letter of
it--
and then her voice die away in murmur inarticulate, I look through
the key-hole, and see she on her knee, her face, though not towards I,
lift up, as well as hand, and these fold, depreciating, I suppose,
that gloomy tyrant's curse.
I could not help be move.
my dear life! admit I to your presence but for two minute, and
confirm your promise pardon; and may lightning blast I on the spot, if
I offer any thing but my penitence, at a shrine so sacred!--I will
afterwards leave you for a whole day; till to-morrow morning; and then
attend you with writing, all ready to sign, a license obtain, or if it
cannot, a minister without one. this once believe I! when you see the
reality of the danger that give occasion for this your unhappy
resentment, you will think less hardly of I. and let I beseech you to
perform a promise on which I make a reliance not altogether ungenerous.
I cannot see you! would to Heaven I never have! if I write, thatbe all I
can do.
let your writing then, my dear life, confirm your promise: and I will
withdraw in expectation of it.
past ELEVEN O'CLOCK.
she ring her bell for Dorcas; and, with her door in her hand, only half
open, give she a billet for I.
how do the dear creature look, Dorcas?
she be dress. she turn her face quite from I; and sigh, as if
her heart would break.
Sweet creature:--i kiss the wet wafer, and draw it from the paper with
my breath.
these be the contents.--no inscriptive Sir! no Mr. Lovelace!
I cannot see you: nor will I, if I can help it. word cannot express the
anguish of my sou on your baseness and ingratitude.
if the circumstance of thing be such, that I can have no way for
reconciliation with those who would have be my natural protector from
such outrage, but through you, [the only inducement I have to stay a
moment long in your knowledge,] pen and ink must be, at present, the
only mean of communication between we.
Vilest of man, and most detestable of plotter! how have I deserve from
you the shocking indignity--but no more--only for your own sake, wish
not, at least for a week to come, to see
the undeservedly injure and insult
CLARISSA HARLOWE
***
so thou seest, nothing could have stand I in stead, but this plot of
Tomlinson and her uncle! to what a pretty pass, nevertheless, have I
bring myself!--Had Caesar be such a fool, he have never pass the
rubicon. but after he have pass it, have he retreat re infecta,
intimidate by a senatorial edict, what a pretty figure would he have
make in history!--i might have know, that to attempt a robbery, and put
a person in bodily fear, be as punishable as if the robbery have be
actually commit.
but not to see she for a week!--dear, pretty soul! how she anticipate I
in every thing! the counsellor will have finish the writing to-day or
to-morrow, at furth: the license with the parson, or the parson
without the license, must also be procure within the next four-and-
twenty hour; Prtichard be as good as ready with his indenture
tripartite: tomlinson be at hand with a favourable answer from her uncle
--yet not to see she for a week!----dear sweet soul;--her good angel be
go a journey: be truante at least. but nevertheless, in thy week's
time, or in much less, my charmer, I doubt not to complete my triumph!
but what vex I of all thing be, that such an excellent creature
should break her word:--fie, fie, upon her!--but nobody be absolutely
perfect! 'tis human to err, but not to persevere--I hope my charmer
cannot be inhuman!
LETTER XVIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
KING's ARMS, PALL-MALL, THURSDAY, TWO O'CLOCK.
several billet pass between we before I go out, by the
internuncioship of Dorcas: for which reason mine be superscribe by she
married name.--She would not open her door to receive they; lest I should
be near it, I suppose: so Dorcas be force to put they under the door
(after copy they for thee); and thence to take the answer. read
they, if thou wilt, at this place.
***
to MRS. LOVELACE
indeed, my dear life, you carry this matter too far. what will the
people below, who suppose we one as to the ceremony, think of so great a
niceness? liberty so innocent! the occasion so accidental!--you will
expose yourself as well as me.--Hitherto they know nothing of what have
pass. and what indeed have pass to occasion all this resentment?--i
be sure you will not, by a breach of your word of honour, give I reason
to conclude that, have I not obey you, I could have fare no bad.
most sincerely do I repent the offence give to your delicacy--but must
I, for so accidental an occurrence, be brand by such shocking names?--
Vilest of man, and most detestable of plotter, be hard words!--from the
pen of such a lady too.
if you step up another pair of stair, you will be convince, that,
however detestable I may be to you, I be no plotter in this affair.
I must insist upon see you, in order to take your direction upon some
of the subject we talk of yesterday in the evening.
all that be more than necessary be too much. I claim your promise
pardon, and wish to plead it on my knee.
I beg your presence in the dining-room for one quarter of an hour, and I
will then leave you for the day, I be,
my dear life,
your ever adore and truly penitent
LOVELACE.
***
to MR. LOVELACE
I will not see you. I cannot see you. I have no direction to give you.
let Providence decide for I as it please.
the more I reflect upon your vileness, your ungrateful, your barbarous
vileness, the more I be exasperate against you.
you be the last person whose judgment I will take upon what be or be not
carry too far in matter of decency.
'tis grievous to I to write, or even to think of you at present. urge
I no more then. once more, I will not see you. nor care I, now you
have make I vile to myself, what other people think of I.
***
to MRS. LOVELACE
Again, Madam, I remind you of your promise: and beg leave to say, I
insist upon the performance of it.
remember, dear creature, that the fault of a blameable person cannot
warrant a fault in one more perfect. overniceness may be underniceness!
I cannot reproach myself with any thing that deserve this high
resentment.
I own that the violence of my passion for you might have carry I
beyond fit bound--but that your command and adjuration have power over
I at such a moment, I humbly presume to say, deserve some
consideration.
you enjoin I not to see you for a week. if I have not your pardon
before Captain Tomlinson come to town, what shall I say to he?
I beg once more your presence in the dining-room. by my soul, Madam, I
must see you.
I want to consult you about the license, and other particular of great
importance. the people below think we marry; and I cannot talk to you
upon such subject with the door between we.
for Heaven's sake, favour I with your presence for a few minute: and I
will leave you for the day.
if I be to be forgive, accord to your promise, the early
forgiveness will be most oblige, and will save great pain to yourself,
as well as to
your truly contrite and afflict
LOVELACE.
***
to MR. LOVELACE
the more you tease I, the bad it will be for you.
Time be want to consider whether I ever should think of you at all.
at present, it be my sincere wish, that I may never more see your face.
all that can afford you the least shadow of favour from I, arise from
the hop-for reconciliation with my real friend, not my Judas
protector.
I be careless at present of consequence. I hate myself: and who be it I
have reason to value?--not the man who could form a plot to disgrace his
own hope, as well as a poor friendless creature, (make friendless by
himself,) by insult not to be think of with patience.
***
to MRS. LOVELACE
MADAM,
I will go to the Commons, and proceed in every particular as if I have not
the misfortune to be under your displeasure.
I must insist upon it, that however faulty my passion, on so unexpected
an incident, make I appear to a lady of your delicacy, yet my compliance
with your entreaty at such a moment [as it give you an instance of your
power over I, which few man could have show] ought, duly consider, to
entitle I to the effect of that solemn promise which be the condition
of my obedience.
I hope to find you in a kinder, and, I will say, juster disposition on my
return. whether I get the license, or not, let I beg of you to make the
soon you have be pleased to bid I hope for, to-morrow morning. this
will reconcile every thing, and make I the happy of man.
the settlement be ready to sign, or will be by night.
for Heaven's sake, Madam, do not carry your resentment into a displeasure
so disproportionate to the offence. for that would be to expose we both
to the people below; and, what be of infinite more consequence to we, to
Captain Tomlinson. let we be able, I beseech you, Madam, to assure he,
on his next visit, that we be one.
as I have no hope to be permit to dine with you, I shall not return
till evening: and then, I presume to say, I expect [your promise
authorize I to use the word] to find you disposed to bless, by your
consent for to-morrow,
your adoring
LOVELACE.
***
what pleasure do I propose to take, how to enjoy the sweet confusion in
which I expect to find she, while all be so recent!--But she must, she
shall, see I on my return. it be well to herself, as well as for
I, that she have not make so much ado about nothing. I must keep my anger
alive, lest it sink into compassion. love and compassion, be the
provocation ever so great, be hard to be separate: while anger convert
what would be pity, without it, into resentment. nothing can be lovely
in a man's eye with which he be thoroughly displeased.
I order Dorcas, on put the last billet under the door, and find
it take up, to tell she, that I hop an answer to it before I go out.
her reply be verbal, tell he that I care not whither he go, nor what
he does.--and this, re-urge by Dorcas, be all she have to say to I.
I look through the key-hole at my go by her door, and see she on her
knee, at her bed's foot, her head and bosom on the bed, her arm
extend; [sweet creature how I adore she!] and in an agony she seem to
be, sob, as I hear at that distance, as if her heart would break.--
by my soul, Jack, I be a pityful fellow! Recollection be my enemy!--
Divine excellence!--happy with she for so many day together! now so
unhappy!--and for what?--but she be purity herself. and why, after all,
should I thus torment--but I must not trust myself with myself, in the
humour I be in.
***
wait here for Mowbray and Mallory, by whose aid I be to get the
license, I take paper out of my pocket, to divert myself; and thy last
popt officiously the first into my hand. I give it the honour of a
re-perusal; and this revive the subject with I, with which I have
resolve not to trust myself.
I remember, that the dear creature, in her torn answer to my proposal,
say, condescension be not meanness. she well know how to make this
out, than any mortal breathing. condescension indeed imply dignity:
and dignity ever be there in her condescension. yet such a dignity as
give grace to the condescension; for there be no pride, no insult, no
apparent superiority, indicate by it.--This, Miss Howe confirm to be a
part of her general character.*
* see Vol. IV. Letter XXIII.
I can tell she, how she might behave, to make I her own for ever. she
know she cannot fly I. she know she must see I soon or later; the
soon the more gracious.--I would allow she to resent [not because the
liberty I take with her require resentment, be she not a CLARISSA;
but as it become her particular niceness to resent]: but would she show
more love than abhorrence of I in her resentment; would she seem, if it
be but to seem, to believe the fire no device, and all that follow
merely accidental; and descend, upon it, to tender expostulation, and
upbraid for the advantage I would have take of her surprise; and
would she, at last, be satisfied (as well she may) that it be attend
with no further consequence; and place some generous confidence in my
honour, [power love to be trust, Jack;] I think I would put an end to
all her trial, and pay she my vow at the altar.
yet, to have take such bold step, as with Tomlinson and her uncle--to
have make such a progress--o Belford, Belford, how I have puzzle myself,
as well as her!--this curse aversion to wedlock how it have entangle
me!--what contradiction have it make I guilty of!
how pleasing to myself, to look back upon the happy day I give she;
though mine would doubtless have be unmixedly so, could I have
determine to lay aside my contrivance, and to be as sincere all the
time, as she deserve that I should be!
if I find this humour hold but till to-morrow morning, [and it have now
last two full hour, and I seem, methink, to have pleasure in
encourage it,] I will make thee a visit, I think, or get thee to come
to I; and then will I--consult thee upon it.
but she will not trust I. she will not confide in my honour. Doubt, in
this case, be defiance. she love I not well enough to forgive I
generously. she be so greatly above I! how can I forgive she for a
merit so mortifying to my pride! she think, she know, she have tell I,
that she be above I. these word be still in my ear, 'be go,
lovelace!--my soul be above thee, man!--Thou hast a proud heart to
contend with!--my soul be above thee, man!'* Miss Howe think she above
I too. Thou, even thou, my friend, my intimate friend and companion,
art of the same opinion. then I fear she as much as I love her.--How
shall my pride bear these reflection? my wife (as I have often say,
because it so often recur to my thought) to be so much my superior!--
Myself to be consider but as the second person in my own family!--Canst
thou teach I to bear such a reflection as this!--to tell I of my
acquisition in she, and that she, with all her excellency, will be mine
in full property, be a mistake--it cannot be so--for shall I not be
shebe; and not my own?--will not every act of her duty (as I cannot
deserve it) be a condescension, and a triumph over me?--And must I owe
it merely to she goodness that she do not despise me?--To have she
condescend to bear with my follies!--To wound I with an eye of pity!--a
daughter of the Harlowes thus to excel the last, and as I have heretofore
say, not the mean of the lovelaces**--forbid it!
* see Vol. IV. Letter XLVII.
** see Vol. III. Letter XVIII.
yet forbid it not--for do I not now--do I not every moment--see she
before I all over charm, and elegance and purity, as in the struggle
of the past midnight? and in these struggle, heart, voice, eye, hand,
and sentiment, so greatly, so gloriously consistent with the character
she have sustain from her cradle to the present hour?
but what advantage do I give thee?
yet have I not always do her justice? why then thy teasing
impertinence?
however, I forgive thee, Jack--since (so much generous love be I capable
of!) I have rather all the world should condemn I, than that her
character should suffer the least impeachment.
the dear creature herself once tell I, that there be a strange mixture
in my mind.* I have be call Devil and Beelzebub, between the two
proud beauty: I must indeed be a Beelzebub, if I have not some tolerable
quality.
* see Vol. III. Letter XXXIII.
but as Miss Howe say, the suffer time of this excellent creature be
her shin time.* Hitherto she have do nothing but shine.
* see Vol. IV. Letter XXIII.
she call I villain, Belford, within these few hour. and what be the
sum of the present argument; but that have I not be a villain in her
sense of the word, she have not be such an angel?
o Jack, Jack! this midnight attempt have make I mad; have utterly undo
I! how can the dear creature say, I have make her vile in her own eye,
when her behaviour under such a surprise, and her resentment under such
circumstance, have so greatly exalt she in mine?
whence, however, this strange rhapsody?--is it owe to my be here?
that I be not at Sinclair's? but if there be infection in that house,
how have my beloved escape it?
but no more in this strain!--i will see what her behaviour will be on my
return--yet already do I begin to apprehend some little sinking, some
little retrogradation: for I have just now a doubt arise, whether, for
her own sake, I should wish she to forgive I lightly, or with
difficulty?
***
I be in a way to come at the wish-for license.
I have now give every thing between my beloved and I a full
consideration; and my puzzle be over. what have bring I to a speedy
determination be, that I think I have find out what she mean by the
week's distance at which she intend to hold I. it be, that she may
have time to write to Miss Howe, to put in motion that curse scheme of
she's, and to take measure upon it which shall enable she to abandon and
renounce I for ever. now, Jack, if I obtain not admission to her
presence on my return; but be refuse with haughtiness; if her week be
insist upon (such prospect before she); I shall be confirm in my
conjecture; and it will be plain to I, that weak at well be that love,
which could give place to punctilio, at a time when that all-reconciling
ceremony, as she must think, wait she command:--then will I recollect
all her perverseness; then will I re-peruse Miss Howe's letter, and
the transcript from other of they; give way to my aversion to the life
of shackle: and then shall she be mine in my own way.
but, after all, I be in hope that she will have well consider of
every thing by the evening; that her threat of a week's distance be
throw out in the heat of passion; and that she will allow, that I have
as much cause to quarrel with she for breach of her word, as she have with
I for breach of the peace.
these line of Rowe have get into my head; and I shall repeat they very
devoutly all the way the chairman shall poppet I towards she by-and-by.
teach I, some power, the happy art of speech,
to dress my purpose up in gracious word;
such as may softly steal upon her soul,
and never waken the tempestuous passion.
LETTER XIX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
THURSDAY EVENING, JUNE 8.
o for a curse to kill with!--ruined! Undone! outwit!
tricked!--zound, man, the lady have go off!--absolutely go off!
Escaped!--
Thou know not, nor canst conceive, the pang that wring my heart!--
what can I do!--O Lord, o Lord, o Lord!
and thou, too, who hast endeavour to weaken my hand, wilt but clap thy
dragon's wing at the tiding!
yet I must write, or I shall go distracted! little less have I be
these two hour; dispatch messenger to every stage, to every inn, to
every waggon or coach, whether fly or creep, and to every house
with a bill up, for five mile around.
the little hypocrite, who know not a soul in this town, [I think I be
sure of she at any time,] such an unexperienced traitress--give I hope
too, in her first billet, that her expectation of the family-
reconciliation would withhold she from take such a step as this--curse
upon her contrivances!--i thought, that it be owe to her bashfulness,
to her modesty, that, after a few innocent freedom, she could not look
I in the face; when, all the while, she be impudently [yes, I say,
impudently, though she be Clarissa Harlowe] contrive to rob I of the
dear property I have ever purchase--purchase by a painful servitude
of many month; fight through the wild-beast of her family for she,
and combat with a wind-mill virtue, which hath cost I million of
perjury only to attempt; and which now, with its damn'd air-fan, have
tost I a mile and a half beyond hope!--And this, just as I have arrive
within view of the consummation of all my wish!
o Devil of Love! God of Love no more--how have I deserve this of
thee!--never before the friend of frozen virtue?--powerless demon, for
powerless thou must be, if thou meaned not to frustrate my hope; who
shall henceforth kneel at thy altars!--May every enterprise heart
abhor, despise, execrate, renounce thee, as I do!--but, o Belford,
Belford, what signify curse now!
***
how she could effect this her wicked escape be my astonishment; the whole
sisterhood have charge of her;--for, as yet, I have not have patience
enough to inquire into the particular, nor to let a soul of they
approach I.
of this I be sure, or I have not bring her hither, there be not a
creature belong to this house, that could be corrupt either by
virtue or remorse: the high joy every infernal nymph, of this bad
than infernal habitation, could have know, would have be to reduce
this proud beauty to her own level.--and as to my villain, who also have
charge of she, he be such a seasoned varlet, that he delight in mischief
for the sake of it: no bribe could seduce he to betray his trust, be
there but wickedness in it!--'Tis well, however, he be out of my way
when the cursed news be impart to me!--gone, the villain! in quest of
she: not to return, nor to see my face [so it seem he declare] till he
have hear some tiding of she; and all the out-of-place varlet of his
numerous acquaintance be summon and employ in the same business.
to what purpose bring I this angel (angel I must yet call she) to this
hellish house?--and be I not meditate to do she deserve honour? by
my soul, Belford, I be resolve--but thou know what I have
conditionally resolve--and now, who can tell into what hand she may
have fall!
I be mad, stark mad, by Jupiter, at the thought of this!--unprovided,
destitute, unacquainted--some villain, bad than myself, who adore she
not as I adore she, may have seize she, and take advantage of she
distress!--let I perish, Belford, if a whole hecatomb of innocent, as
the little plague be call, shall atone for the broken promise and
wicked artifice of this cruel creature!
***
go home, as I do, with resolution favourable to she, judge thou of
my distraction, when her escape be first hint to I, although but in
break sentence. I know not what I say, nor what I do. I want to
kill somebody. I fly out of one room into another, who break the matter
to I. I charge bribery and corruption, in my first fury, upon all; and
threaten destruction to old and young, as they should come in my way.
Dorcas continue lock up from I: Sally and Polly have not yet dare to
appear: the vile sinclair--
but here come the odious devil. she tap at the door, think thatbe
only a-jar, whine and snuffle, to try, I suppose, to coax I into
temper.
***
what a helpless state, where a man can only execrate himself and other;
the occasion of his rage remain; the evil increase upon reflection;
time itself conspire to deepen it!--o how I curs'd she!
I have she now, methink, before I, blubber--how odious do sorrow
make an ugly face!--thine, Jack, and this old beldam's, in penitential,
instead of move compassion, must evermore confirm hatred; while beauty
in tear, be beauty heighten, and what my heart have ever delight to
see.----
'what excuse!--confound you, and your cursed daughter, what excuse can
you make?--is she not go--have she not escaped?--but before I be quite
distract, before I commit half a hundred murder, let I hear how it
be.'----
***
I have hear she story!--art, damn'd, confound, wicked, unpardonable
art, be a woman of her character--but show I a woman, and Iwill show thee
a plotter!--This plaguy sex be art itself: every individual of it be a
plotter by nature.
this be the substance of the old wretch's account.
she tell I, 'that I have no soon leave the vile house, than Dorcas
acquaint the syren' [do, Jack, let I call she names!--I beseech thee,
Jack, to permit I to call her name!] 'that Dorcas acquaint her lady
with it; and that I have leave word, that I be go to doctor-commons,
and should be hear of for some hour at the Horn there, if inquire
after by the counsellor, or anybody else: that afterwards I should be
either at the Cocoa-tree, or king'-arm, and should not return till
late. she then urge she to take some refreshment.
'she be in tear when Dorcas approach she; her saucy eye swell with
weeping: she refuse either to eat or drink; sigh as if her heart would
break.'--false, devilish grief! not the humble, silent, grief, that only
deserve pity!--Contriving to ruin I, to despoil I of all that I hold
valuable, in the very midst of it.
'nevertheless, be resolve not to see I for a week at least, she
order she to bring up three or four french roll, with a little butter,
and a decanter of water; tell she, she would dispense with her
attendance; and that should be all she should live upon in the interim.
so artful creature! pretend to lay up for a week's siege.'--For, as to
substantial food, she, no more than other angel--Angels! say I--the
devil take I if she be any more an angel!--for she be odious in my eye;
and I hate she mortally!
but O Lovelace, thou liest!--she be all that be lovely. all that be
excellent!
but be she, can she be gone!--Oh! how Miss Howe will triumph!--but if
that little fury receive she, fate shall make I rich amend; for then
will I contrive to have they both.
I be look back for connection--but the devil take connection; I have
no business with it: the contrary good befit distraction, and that will
soon be my lot!
'Dorcas consult the old wretch about obey she: o yes, by all mean;
for Mr. Lovelace know how to come at she at any time: and direct a
bottle of sherry to be add.
'this cheerful compliance so oblige she, that she be prevail upon to
go up, and look at the damage do by the fire; and seem not only
shock by it, but, as they think, satisfy it be no trick; as she
own she have at first apprehend it to be. all this make they secure;
and they laugh in their sleeve, to think what a childish way of
show her resentment she have find out; Sally throw out her
witticism, that Mrs. Lovelace be right, however, not to quarrel with
her bread and butter.'
now this very childishness, as they imagine it, in such a genius, would
have make I suspect either her head, after what have happen the night
before; or her purpose, when the marriage be (so far as she know) to be
complete within the week in which she be resolve to secrete herself
from I in the same house.
'she send Will. with a letter to Wilson's, direct to Miss Howe,
order he to inquire if there be not one for she there.
'he only pretend to go, and bring word there be none; and put she
letter in his pocket for I.
'she then order he to carry another (which she give he) to the Horn
Tavern to me.--All this do without any seeming hurry: yet she appear
to be very solemn; and put she handkerchief frequently to her eye.
'will. pretend to come to I with this letter. but thou the dog have
the sagacity to mistrust something on she send he out a second time;
(and to I, whom she have refuse to see;) which he think extraordinary;
and mention his mistrust to Sally, Polly, and Dorcas; yet they make
light of his suspicion; Dorcas assure they all, that her lady seem
more stupid with her grief, than active; and that she really believe she
be a little turn in her head, and know not what she do. but all of
they depend upon her inexperience, her open temper, and upon she not
make the least motion towards go out, or to have a coach or chair
call, as sometimes she have do; and still more upon the preparation
she have make for a week's siege, as I may call it.
'Will. go out, pretend to bring the letter to I; but quickly
return; his heart still misgive he, on recollect my frequent
caution, that he be not to judge for himself, when he have positive
order; but if any doubt occur, from circumstance I could not
foresee, literally to follow they, as the only way to avoid blame.
'but it must have be in this little interval, that she escape; for
soon after his return, they make fast the street-door and hatch, the
mother and the two nymph take a little turn into the garden; Dorcas
go up stair, and Will. (to avoid be see by his lady, or his voice
heard) down into the kitchen.
'about half an hour after, Dorcas, who have plant herself where she
could see her lady's door open, have the curiosity to go look through the
keyhole, have a misgiving, as she say, that the lady might offer some
violence to herself, in the mood she have be in all day; and find the
key in the door, which be not very usual, she tap at it three or four
time, and have no answer, open it, with Madam, Madam, do you call?
--suppose she in her closet.
'have no answer, she stept forward, and be astonish to find she be
not there. she hastily run into the dining-room, then into my
apartment; search every closet; dread all the time to behold some
sad catastrophe.
'not find she any where, she run down to the old creature, and her
nymph, with a have you see my lady?--then shebe gone!--Shebe no where
above!
'they be sure she could not be go out.
'the whole house be in an uproar in an instant; some run up-stair,
some down, from the upper room to the low; and all scream, how
should they look I in the face!
'will. cry out, he be a dead man: he blame they; they he; and every
one be an accuser, and an excuser, at the same time.
'when they have search the whole house, and every closet in it, ten
time over, to no purpose, they take it into their head to send to all
the porter, chairman, and hackney-coachman, that have be near the house
for two hour past, to inquire if any of they see such a young lady;
describe she.
'this bring they some light: the only dawn for hope, that I can
have, and which keep I from absolute despair. one of the chairman give
they this account: that he see such a one come out of the house a little
before four (in a great hurry, and as if fright) with a little parcel
tie up in a handkerchief, in her hand: that he take notice to his
fellow, who ply she without her answering, that she be a fine young
lady: that hewould warrant, she have either a husband, or very cross parent;
for that her eye seem swell with crying. upon which, a third fellow
reply, that it might be a doe escape from mother Damnable's park.
this Mrs. Sinclair tell I with a curse, and a wish that she have a well
reputation; so handsomely as she live, and so justly as she pay every
body for what she buy; her house visit by the good and civil of
gentleman; and no noise or brawl ever hear or know in it.
'from these appearance, the fellow who give this information, have the
curiosity to follow she, unperceive. she often look back. every body
who pass she, turn to look after she; pass their verdict upon her
tear, her hurry, and her charming person; till come to a stand of
coach, a coachman ply she; be accept; alight; open the
coach-door in a hurry, see her hurry; and in it she stumble for
haste; and, as the fellow believe, hurt her shin with the stumble.'
the devil take I, Belford, if my generous heart be not move for she,
notwithstanding her wicked deceit, to think what must be her reflection
and apprehension at the time:--a mind so delicate, heed no censure;
yet, probably afraid of be lay hold of by a Lovelace in every one she
see! at the same time, not know to what danger she be about to
expose herself; nor of whom she could obtain shelter; a stranger to the
town, and to all its way; the afternoon far go: but little money; and
no clothe but those she have on!
it be impossible, in this little interval since last night, that Miss
Howe's townsend could be co-operate.
but how she must abhor I to run all these risque; how heartily she must
detest I for my freedom of last night! oh! that I have give she
great reason for a resentment so violent!--as to her virtue, I be too
much enraged to give she the merit due to that. to virtue it cannot be
owe that she should fly from the charming prospect that be before
she; but to malice, hatred, contempt, Harlowe pride, (the bad of
pride,) and to all the deadly passion that ever reign in a female
breast--and if I can but recover she--but be still, be calm, be hush,
my stormy passion; for be it not Clarissa [Harlowe must I say?] that
thus far I rave against?
'the fellow hear she say, drive fast! very fast! where, Madam? to
Holborn-bar, answer she; repeating, drive very fast!--and up she
pull both the window: and he lose sight of the coach in a minute.
'Will., as soon as he have this intelligence, speed away in hope to
trace she out; declare, that he would never think of see I, till he
have hear some tiding of his lady.'
and now, Belford, all my hope be, that this fellow (who attend we in
our airing to Hampstead, to Highgate, to Muswell-hill, to kentish-town)
will hear of she at some one or other of those place. and on this I the
rather build, as I remember she be once, after our return, very
inquisitive about the stage, and their price; praise the conveniency
to passenger in their go off every hour; and this in Will.'s hearing,
who be then in attendance. woe be to the villain, if he recollect not
this!
***
I have be traverse her room, meditating, or take up every thing she
but touch or use: the glass she dress at, I be ready to break, for
not give I the personal image it be willnot to reflect of she, whose
idea be for ever present with I. I call for she, now in the tender,
now in the most reproachful term, as if within hearing: want she, I
want my own soul, at least every thing dear to it. what a void in my
heart! what a chilness in my blood, as if its circulation be arrest!
from her room to my own; in the dining-room, and in and out of every
place where I have see the beloved of my heart, do I hurry; in none can
I tarry; her lovely image in every one, in some lively attitude, rush
cruelly upon I, in differently remember conversation.
but when in my first fury, at my return, I go up two pair of stair,
resolve to find the lock-up Dorcas, and behold the vainly-burn
window-board, and recollect my baffled contrivance, baffle by my own
weak folly, I think my distraction complete; and down I run as one
fright at a spectre, ready to howl for vexation; my head and my temple
shoot with a violence I have never feel before; and my back aching as
if the vertebrae be disjoint, and fall in piece.
but now that I have hear the mother's story, and contemplate the
dawn hope give by the chairman's information, I be a good deal
easy, and can make cooler reflection. most heartily pray I for
Will.'s success, every four or five minute. if I lose she, all my rage
will return with redoubled fury. the disgrace to be thus outwit by a
novice, an infant in stratagem and contrivance, add to the violence of
my passion for she, will either break my heart, or (what save many a
heart, in evil insupportable) turn my brain. what have I to do to go out
a license-hunting, at least till I have see she, and make up matter with
she? and indeed, be it not the privilege of a principal to lay all his
own fault upon his underling, and never be to blame himself, I should
be apt to reflect, that I be more in fault than any body. and, as the
sting of this reflection will sharpen upon I, if I recover she not, how
shall I ever be able to bear it?
if ever--
[here Mr. Lovelace lay himself under a curse, too shocking to be
repeat, if he revenge not himself upon the Lady, should he once more
get she into his hand.]
***
I have just now dismiss the snivel toad Dorcas, who be introduce
to I for my pardon by the whining mother. I give she a kind of negative
and ungracious forgiveness. yet I shall as violently curse the two
nymph, by-and-by, for the consequence of my own folly: and if this will
be a good way too to prevent their ridicule upon I, for lose so
glorious an opportunity as I have last night, or rather this morning.
I have correct, from the result of the inquiry make of the chairman,
and from Dorcas's observation before the cruel creature escape, a
description of her dress; and be resolve, if I cannot otherwise hear of
she, to advertise she in the gazette, as an eloped wife, both by she
maiden and acknowledge name; for her elopement will soon be know by
every enemy: why then should not my friend be make acquainted with it,
from whose inquiry and information I may expect some tiding of she?
'she have on a brown lustring night-gown, fresh, and look like new, as
every thing she wear do, whether new or not, from an elegance natural
to she. a beaver hat, a black ribbon about her neck, and blue knot on
her breast. a quilted petticoat of carnation-colour satin; a rose
diamond ring, suppose on her finger; and in her whole person and
appearance, as I shall express it, a dignity, as well as beauty, that
command the repeat attention of every one who see she.'
the description of her person I shall take a little more pain about. my
mind must be more at ease, before I undertake that. and I shall
threaten, 'that if, after a certain period give for her voluntary
return, she be not hear of, I will prosecute any person who presume to
entertain, harbour, abet, or encourage she, with all the vengeance that
an injure gentleman and husband may be warrant to take by law, or
otherwise.'
***
fresh cause of aggravation!--but for this scribble vein, or I should
still run mad.
again go into her chamber, because it be she's, and sigh over the
bed, and every piece of furniture in it, I cast my eye towards the
drawer of the dressing-glass, and see peep out, as it be, in one of
the half-draw drawer, the corner of a letter. I snatch it out, and
find it superscribe, by she, to Mr. Lovelace. the sight of it make my
heart leap, and I tremble so, that I could hardly open the seal.
how do this damn'd love unman me!--but nobody ever love as I love!--It
be even increase by her unworthy flight, and my disappointment.
ungrateful creature, to fly from a passion thus ardently flame! which,
like the palm, rise the more for be depressed and slight.
I will not give thee a copy of this letter. I owe she not so much
service.
but wouldst thou think, that this haughty promise-breaker could resolve
as she do, absolutely and for ever to renounce I for what pass last
night? that she could resolve to forego all her opening prospect of
reconciliation; the reconciliation with a worthless family, on which she
have set her whole heart?--Yet she do--she acquit I of all obligation
to she, and herself of all expectation from I--and for what?--O that
indeed I have give her real cause! Damn'd confound niceness, prudery,
affectation, or pretty ignorance, if not affectation!--By my soul,
Belford, I tell thee all--I be more indebted to her struggle, than to
my own forwardness. I cannot support my own reflection upon a decency
so ill-requited.--She could not, she would not have be so much a
Harlowe in her resentment. all she fear have then be over; and her
own good sense, and even modesty, would have teach she to make the good
of it.
but if ever again I get she into my hand, art, and more art, and
compulsion too, if she make it necessary, [and 'tis plain that nothing
else will do,] shall she experience from the man whose fear of she have
be above even his passion for she; and whose gentleness and forbearance
she have thus perfidiously triumph over. well, say the Poet,
'tis nobler like a lion to invade
when appetite direct, and seize my prey,
than to wait tamely, like a beg dog,
till dull consent throw out the scrap of love.
Thou know what I have so lately vow--and yet, at time [cruel
creature, and ungrateful as cruel!] I can subscribe with too much truth
to those line of another Poet:
she reign more fully in my soul than ever;
she garrison my breast, and man against I
Ev'n my own rebel thought, with thousand grace,
ten thousand charm, and new-discover beauty!
LETTER XX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
a letter be put into my hand by Wilson himself.--such a letter!
a letter from Miss Howe to her cruel friend!--
I make no scruple to open it.
it be a miracle that I fall not into fit at the reading of it; and at
the thought of what might have be the consequence, have it come into the
hand of this Clarissa Harlowe. let my justly-excite rage excuse my
irreverence.
Collins, though not his day, bring it this afternoon to Wilson's, with
a particular desire that it might be send with all speed to Miss
Beaumont's lodging, and give, if possible, into her own hand. he have
before be here (at Mrs. Sinclair's with intent to deliver it to the
lady with his own hand; but be tell [too truly tell!] that she be
abroad; but that they would give she any thing he should leave for she
the moment she return.) but he care not to trust they with his
business, and go away to Wilson's, (as I find by the description of he
at both place,) and there leave the letter; but not till he have a second
time call here, and find she not come in.
the letter [which I shall enclose; for it be too long to transcribe] will
account to thee for Collins's come hither.
o this devilish Miss Howe;--something must be resolve upon and do with
that little fury!
***
thou wilt see the margin of this cursed letter crowd with index
[>>>]. I put they to mark the place which call for vengeance upon the
vixen writer, or which require animadversion. return thou it to I the
moment thou hast peruse it.
read it here; and avoid tremble for I, if thou canst.
to MISS LAETITIA BEAUMONT
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 7.
my DEAREST FRIEND,
you will perhaps think that I have be too
long silent. but I have begin two letter at differ-
ent time since my last, and write a great deal
>>> each time; and with spirit enough, I assure you;
incense as I be against the abominable wretch you
be with; particularly on read your' of the 21st
of the past month.*
* see Vol. IV. Letter XLVI.
>>> the first I intend to keep open till I could
give you some account of my proceeding with Mrs.
Townsend. it be some day before I see she:
and this intervenient space give I time to re-
peruse what I have write, I think it proper to lay
>>> that aside, and to write in a style a little less fervent;
>>> for you would have blame I, I know, for the free-
dom of some of my expression. [execration, if
you please.] and when I have go a good way
in the second, the change in your prospect, on his
communicating to you Miss Montague's letter, and
his well behaviour, occasion a change in your
mind, I lay that aside also. and in this uncer-
tainty, think I would wait to see the issue of
affair between you before I write again; believe
that all would soon be decide one way or other.
I have still, perhaps, hold this resolution, [as every
appearance, accord to your letter, be more and
more promising,] have not the two pass day fur-
nishe I with intelligence which it highly import
you to know.
but I must stop here, and take a little walk, to
try to keep down that just indignation which rise
to my pen, when I be about to relate to you what
I must communicate.
***
I be not my own mistress enough--then my
mother--always up and down--and watch as if
I be write to a fellow. but I will try if I can
contain myself in tolerable bound.
the woman of the house where you be--o my
dear, the woman of the house--but you never
think highly of they--so it cannot be very sur-
>>> prising--nor would you have staid so long with
they, have not the notion of remove to one of your
own, make you less uneasy, and less curious about
their character, and behaviour. yet I could now
wish, that you have be less reserved among they
>>> --But I tease you--in short, my dear, you be
certainly in a devilish house!--Be assure that the
woman be one of the vile woman--nor do
she go to you by her right name--[very true!]--
her name be not Sinclair, nor be the street she live
in Dover-street. do you never go out by your-
self, and discharge the coach or chair, and return
>>> by another coach or chair? if you do, [yet I
donot remember that you ever write to I, that
you do,] you would never have find your way to
the vile house, either by the woman's name, Sin-
clair, or by the street's name, mention by that
Doleman in his letter about the lodging.*
* Vol. III. letter XXXVIII. and XXXIX.
the wretch might indeed have hold out these
false light a little more excusably, have the house
be an honest house; and have his end only be
to prevent mischief from your brother. but this
contrivance be antecedent, as I think, to your
brother's project; so that no excuse can be make
>>> for his intention at the time--the man, whatever he
may now intend, be certainly then, even then, a
villain in his heart.
***
>>> I be excessively concerned that I should be pre-
vaile upon, between your over-niceness, on one
hand, and my mother's positiveness, on the other, to
be satisfied without know how to direct to you
at your lodging. I think too, that the proposal
that I should be put off to a third-hand knowledge,
or rather veil in a first-hand ignorance, come from
he, and that it be only acquiesce in by you, as
it be by I,* upon needless and weak considera-
tion; because, truly, I might have it to say, if
challenge, that I know not where to send to you!
I be ashamed of myself!--had this be at first
excusable, it could not be a good reason for go
on in the folly, when you have no liking to the
>>> house, and when he begin to play trick, and delay
with you.--what! I be to mistrust myself, be
I? I be to allow it to be think, that I could
>>> not keep my own secret?--but the house to be
>>> take at this time, and at that time, lead we both on
>>> --like fool, like tame fool, in a string. upon my
life, my dear, this man be a vile, a contemptible
villain--I must speak out!--how have he laugh
in his sleeve at we both, I warrant, for I cannot tell
how long!
* see Vol. III. Letter LVI. par. 12. and Letter LVIII. par. 12.--where
the reader will observe, that the proposal come from herself; which, as
it be also mention by Mr. Lovelace, (towards the end of Letter I. in
Vol. IV.) she may be presume to have forget. so that Clarissa have a
double inducement for acquiesce with the propose method of carry on
the correspondence between Miss Howe and herself by Wilson's conveyance,
and by the name of Laetitia Beaumont.
and yet who could have think that a man of
>>> fortune, and some reputation, [this Doleman, I
mean--not your wretch, to be sure!] formerly a
rake, indeed, [I inquire after he long ago; and
so be the easier satisfied;] but marry to a
woman of family--have have a palsy-blow--and,
>>> one would think, a penitent, should recommend
such a house [why, my dear, he could not inquire
of it, but must find it to be bad] to such a man as
Lovelace, to bring his future, nay, his then suppose,
bride to?
***
>>> I write, perhaps, with too much violence, to be
clear, but I cannot help it. yet I lie down my
pen, and take it up every ten minute, in order to
write with some temper--my mother too, in and
out--what need I, (she ask I,) lock myself in,
if I be only read past correspondencie? for
>>> that be my pretence, when she come poke in with
her face sharpen to an edge, as I may say, by a
curiosity that give she more pain than pleasure.--
>>> the Lord forgive I; but I believe I shall huff
she next time she come in.
***
do you forgive I too, my dear--my mother
ought; because she say, I be my father's girl; and
because I be sure I be she's. I donot kow what
to do--I donot know what to write next--I have
so much to write, yet have so little patience, and so
little opportunity.
but I will tell you how I come by my intelli-
>>> gence. that be a fact, and require the less
attention, I will try to account to you for that.
thus, then, it come about: 'Miss Lardner
(whom you have see at her cousin Biddulph's)
see you at St. James's Church on Sunday be fort-
night. she keep you in her eye during the whole
time; but could not once obtain the notice of your's,
though she courtesie to you twice. she think to
pay her compliment to you when the service be
over, for she doubt not but you be married--
>>> and for an odd reason--because you come to church
by yourself. every eye, (as usual, wherever you
be, she say,) be upon you; and this seem to
give you hurry, and you be nearer the door than
she, you slide out, before she could get to you.--but
she order her servant to follow you till you be
house. this servant see you step into a chair,
which wait for you; and you order the man to
carry you to the place where they take you up.
'the next day, Miss Lardner send the same
servant, out of mere curiosity, to make private in-
quiry whether Mr. Lovelace be, or be not,
with you there.--and this inquiry bring out,
>>> from different people, that the house be suspect
to be one of those genteel wicked house, which
receive and accommodate fashionable people of both
sex.
'Miss Lardner, confound at this strange intel-
ligence, make further inquiry; enjoin secrecy
to the servant she have send, as well as to the gentle-
>>> man whom she employ; who have it confirm
from a rakish friend, who know the house; and
tell he, that there be two house: the one in
which all decent appearance be preserve, and guest
rarely admit; the other, the receptacle of those
who be absolutely engaged, and break to the
vile yoke.'
>>> Say--my dear creature--say--Shall I not exe-
crate the wretch?--but word be weak--what
can I say, that will suitably express my abhorrence
of such a villain as he must have be, when he
meditate to carry a Clarissa to such a place!
'Miss Lardner keep this to herself some day,
not know what to do; for she love you, and
admire you of all woman. at last she reveal it,
but in confidence, to Miss Biddulph, by letter.
Miss Biddulph, in like confidence, be afraid it
would distract I, be I to know it, communi-
cat it to Miss Lloyd; and so, like a whisper
scandal, it pass through several canal, and then
it come to I; which be not till last Monday.'
I think I should have faint upon the surpris-
ing communication. but rage take place, it blow
away the sudden illness. I besought Miss Lloyd
to re-enjoin secrecy to every one. I tell she that
>>> I would not for the world that my mother, or any
of your family, should know it. and I instantly
cause a trusty friend to make what inquiry he
could about Tomlinson.
>>> I have thought to have do it before I have this
intelligence: but not imagine it to be needful, and
little thinking that you could be in such a house, and
as you be pleased with your changed prospect, I
>>> forbore. and the rather forbore, as the matter be
so lay, that Mrs. Hodges be suppose to know
nothing of the project treaty of accommodation;
but, on the contrary, that it be design to be a
secret to she, and to every body but immediate
party; and it be Mrs. Hodges that I have pro-
pose to sound by a second hand.
>>> now, my dear, it be certain, without apply to
that too-much-favour housekeeper, that there be
not such a man within ten mile of your uncle.--
very true!--one tomkin there be, about four mile
off; but he be a day-labourer: and one Thompson,
about five mile distant the other way; but he be a
parish schoolmaster, poor, and about seventy.
>>> a man, think but of L.800 a year, cannot come
from one country to settle in another, but every
body in both must know it, and talk of it.
>>> Mrs. Hodges may yet be sound at a distance,
if you will. your uncle be an old man. old man
imagine themselves under obligation to their para-
>>> mour, if young than themselves, and seldom
keep any thing from their knowledge. but if we
suppose he to make secret of this design treaty,
it be impossible, before that treaty be think of,
but she must have see he, at least have hear
your uncle speak praisefully of a man he be say to
be so intimate with, let he have be ever so little
a while in those part.
>>> yet, methink, the story be so plausible--Tom-
linson, as you describe he, be so good a man, and
so much of a gentleman; the end to be answer
>>> by his be an impostor, so much more than neces-
sary if Lovelace have villany in his head; and as
>>> you be in such a house--your wretch's behaviour
to he be so petulant and lordly; and Tomlin-
son's answer so full of spirit and circumstance;
>>> and then what he communicate to you of Mr.
Hickman's application to your uncle, and of Mrs.
Norton's to your mother, [some of which particu-
>>> lar, I be satisfied, his vile agent, Joseph Leman,
could not reveal to his vile employer;] his press-
ing on the marriage-day, in the name of your
uncle, which it could not answer any wicked pur-
>>> pose for he to do; and what he write of your
uncle's proposal, to have it think that you be
married from the time that you have live in one
house together; and that to be make to agree with
the time of Mr. Hickman's visit to your uncle.
>>> the insisting on a trusty person's be present at
the ceremony, at that uncle's nomination--these
thing make I willing to try for a tolerable construc-
tion to be make of all. though I be so much
puzzle by what occur on both side of the ques-
>>> tion, that I cannot but abhor the devilish wretch,
whose invention and contrivance be for ever em-
ploye an inquisitive head, as mine be, without
afford the mean of absolute detection.
but this be what I be ready to conjecture, that
Tomlinson, specious as he be, be a machine of Love-
>>> lace; and that he be employ for some end, which
have not yet be answer. this be certain, that
not only Tomlinson, but Mennell, who, I think,
attend you more than once at this vile house,
must know it to be a vile house.
what can you then think of Tomlinson's declar-
e himself in favour of it upon inquiry?
Lovelace too must know it to be so; if not
before he bring you to it, soon after.
>>> perhaps the company he find there, may be the
most probable way of accounting for his bearing
with the house, and for his strange suspension of
marriage, when it be in his power to call such an
angel of a woman his.--
>>> o my dear, the man be a villain!--the great
of villain, in every light!--I be convinced that he
is.--and this Doleman must be another of his
implement!
>>> there be so many wretch who think that to
be no sin, which be one of the great and most
ungrateful of all sins,--to ruin young creature of
our sex who place their confidence in they; that
the wonder be less than the shame, that people, of
appearance at least, be find to promote the horrid
purpose of profligate of fortune and interest!
>>> but can I think [you will ask with indignant
astonishment] that Lovelace can have design upon
your honour?
>>> that such design he have have, if he still hold
they or not, I can have no doubt, now that I know
the house he have bring you to, to be a vile one.
this be a clue that have lead I to account for all his
behaviour to you ever since you have be in his
hand.
allow I a brief retrospection of it all.
we both know, that pride, revenge, and a delight
to tread in unbeaten path, be principal ingredient
in the character of this finished libertine.
>>> he hat all your family--yourself except:
and I have several time think, that I have see
>>> he sting and mortify that love have oblige he
to kneel at your footstool, because you be a Har-
lowe. yet be this wretch a savage in love.--Love
>>> that humanize the fierce spirit, have not be able
to subdue his. his pride, and the credit which a
>>> few plausible quality, sprinkle among his odious
one, have give he, have secure he too good
a reception from our eye-judging, our undistinguish-
ing, our self-flattering, our too-confide sex, to
make assiduity and obsequiousness, and a conquest
of his unruly passion, any part of his study.
>>> he have some reason for his animosity to all the
man, and to one woman of your family. he have
always show you, and his own family too, that he
>>> prefer his pride to his interest. he be a declare
marriage-hater; a notorious intriguer; full of his
invention, and glory in they: he never could
draw you into declaration of love; nor till your
>>> wise relation persecute you as they do, to receive
his address as a lover. he know that you pro-
fessedly dislike he for his immorality; he could
not, therefore, justly blame you for the coldness
and indifference of your behaviour to he.
>>> the prevention of mischief be your first main
view in the correspondence he draw you into. he
ought not, then, to have wonder that you declare
your preference of the single life to any matrimonial
engagement. he know that this be always you
>>> preference; and that before he trick you away
so artfully. what be his conduct to you
afterwards, that you should of a sudden change
it?
thus be your whole behaviour regular, con-
sistent, and dutiful to those to whom by birth you
owe duty; and neither prudish, coquettish, nor
tyrannical to he.
>>> he have agree to go on with you upon those
your own term, and to rely only on his own merit
and future reformation for your favour.
>>> it be plain to I, indeed, to whom you com-
municate all that you know of your own heart,
though not all of it that I find out, that love have
pretty early gain footing in it. and this you
yourself would have discover soon than you
>>> do, have not his alarming, his unpolite, his rough
conduct, keep it under.
>>> I know by experience that love be a fire that be
not to be play with without burn one's finger:
I know it to be a dangerous thing for two single
person of different sex to enter into familiarity
and correspondence with each other: since, as to
the latter, must not a person be capable of premedi-
tat art, who can sit down to write, and not write
from the heart?--and a woman to write her heart
to a man practise in deceit, or even to a man of
some character, what advantage do it give he
over she?
>>> as this man's vanity have make he imagine, that
no woman could be proof against love, when his
address be honourable; no wonder that he
struggle, like a lion hold in toil, against a passion
that he think not return. and how could
you, at first, show a return in love, to so fierce
a spirit, and who have seduce you away by vile
artifice, but to the approval of those artifice.
>>> hence, perhaps, it be not difficult to believe, that
it become possible for such a wretch as this to give
way to his old prejudice against marriage; and to
that revenge which have always be a first passion
with he.
this be the only way, I think, to account for his
horrid view in bring you to a vile house.
and now may not all the rest be naturally
account for?--His delay--his teasing ways--
his bring you to bear with his lodging in the
same house--his make you pass to the people of
>>> it as his wife, though restrictively so, yet with hope,
no doubt, (vilest of villain as he be!) to take you
>>> at an advantage--his bring you into the com-
pany of his libertine companion--the attempt of
impose upon you that Miss Partington for a
bedfellow, very probably his own invention for
the bad of purpose--his terrify you at many
different time--his obtrude himself upon you
when you go out to church; no doubt to prevent
your finding out what the people of the house be
--the advantage he make of your brother's foolish
project with Singleton.
see, my dear, how naturally all this follow from
>>> the discovery make by Miss Lardner. see how
the monster, whom I think, and so often call,
>>> a fool, come out to have be all the time one of
the great villain in the world!
but if this be so, what, [it would be ask by
an indifferent person,] have hitherto save you?
glorious creature!--what, morally speak, but
your watchfulness! what but that, and the
majesty of your virtue; the native dignity, which,
in a situation so very difficult, (friendless, destitute,
pass for a wife, cast into the company of crea-
ture accustom to betray and ruin innocent heart,)
have hitherto enable you to baffle, over-awe, and
confound, such a dangerous libertine as this; so
habitually remorseless, as you have observe he
to be; so very various in his temper, so inventive,
so seconded, so support, so instigated, too pro-
bably, as he have been!--that native dignity, that
heroism, I will call it, which have, on all proper
occasion, exert itself in its full lustre, unmingled
>>> with that charming obligingness and condescend
sweetness, which be evermore the softener of that
dignity, when your mind be free and unapprehen-
sive!
>>> let I stop to admire, and to bless my beloved
friend, who, unhappily for herself, at an age so
tender, unacquainted as she be with the world, and
with the vile art of libertine, have be call
upon to sustain the hard and most shocking trial,
from persecute relation on one hand, and from
a villanous lover on the other, have be enable to
give such an illustrious example of fortitude and
prudence as never woman give before she; and
who, as I have heretofore observe,* have make a
far great figure in adversity, than she possibly
could have make, have all her shin quality be
exert in their full force and power, by the con-
>>> tinuance of that prosperous run of fortune which
attend she for eighteen year of life out of
nineteen.
* see Vol. IV. Letters XXIV.
***
>>> but now, my dear, do I apprehend, that you
be in great danger than ever yet you have be
in; if you be not married in a week; and yet stay
in this abominable house. for be you out of it,
I own I should not be much afraid for you.
these be my thought, on the most deliberate
>>> consideration: 'that he be now convince, that
he have not be able to draw you off your guard:
that therefore, if he can obtain no new advantage
over you as he go along, he be resolve to do you
all the poor justice that it be in the power of such a
wretch as he to do you. he be the rather induced to
this, as he see that all his own family have warmly
engage themselves in your cause: and that it be
>>> his high interest to be just to you. then the
horrid wretch love you (as well he may) above all
woman. I have no doubt of this: with such a love
>>> as such a wretch be capable of: with such a love as
Herod love his Marianne. he be now therefore,
very probably, at last, in earnest.'
I take time for inquiry of different nature, as
I know, by the train you be in, that whatever his
design be, they cannot ripen either for good or
>>> evil till something shall result from this device
of his about Tomlinson and your uncle.
device I have no doubt that it be, whatever this
dark, this impenetrable spirit intend by it.
>>> and yet I find it to be true, that Counsellor
Williams (whom Mr. Hickman know to be a man
of eminence in his profession) have actually as good
>>> as finish the settlement: that two draught of
they have be make; one avowedly to be send to
one Captain Tomlinson, as the clerk says:--and I
find that a license have actually be more than once
endeavour to be obtain; and that difficulty
have hitherto be make, equally to Lovelace's
>>> vexation and disappointment. my mother's proctor,
who be very intimate with the proctor apply to
by the wretch, have come at this information in
confidence; and hint, that, as Mr. Lovelace be a
man of high fortune, these difficulty will probably
be get over.
but here follow the cause of my apprehension of
your danger; which I should not have have a thought
>>> of (since nothing very vile have yet be attempt)
but on find what a house you be in, and, on that
discovery, lay together and ruminate on past
occurrence.
'you be oblige, from the present favourable
>>> appearance, to give he your company whenever
he request it.--you be under a necessity of for-
getting, or seem to forget, past disobligation;
and to receive his address as those of a betrothed
lover.--you will incur the censure of prudery and
affectation, even perhaps in your own apprehension,
if you keep he at that distance which have hitherto
>>> be your security.--his sudden (and as suddenly
recovered) illness have give he an opportunity to
find out that you love he. [alas! my dear, I
know you love he!] he be, as you relate, every
>>> hour more and more an encroacher upon it. he
have seem to change his nature, and be all love and
>>> gentleness. the wolf have put on the sheep's cloth-
ing; yet more than once have show his tooth, and
his hardly-sheathe claw. the instance you have
give of his freedom with your person,* which you
could not but resent; and yet, as matter be
cricumstance between you, could not but pass
over, when Tomlinson's letter call you into his
>>> company,** show the advantage he have now over
you; and also, that if he can obtain great, he
will.--And for this very reason (as I apprehend) it
>>> be, that Tomlinson be introduce; that be to say, to
give you the great security, and to be a mediator,
if mortal offence be give you by any villanous
attempt.--the day seem not now to be so much
in your power as it ought to be, since that now
partly depend on your uncle, whose presence, at
your own motion, he have wish on the occasion.
a wish, be all real, very unlikely, I think, to be
grant.'
* she mean the freedom Mr. Lovelace take with she before the fire-plot.
see Vol. V. Letter XI. when Miss Howe write this letter she could not
know of that.
** see Vol. V. Letter XII.
>>> and thus situate, should he offer great free-
dom, must you not forgive he?
I fear nothing (as I know who have say) that
devil carnate or incarnate can fairly do against a
>>> virtue so established.*--but surprize, my dear, in
such a house as you be in, and in such circum-
stance as I have mention, I greatly fear! the
>>> man one who have already triumph over person
worthy of his alliance.
>>> what then have you to do, but to fly this house,
this infernal house!--o that your heart would let
you fly the man!
>>> if you should be dispose so to do, Mrs. Towns-
end shall be ready at your command.--but if you
meet with no impediment, no new cause of doubt,
I think your reputation in the eye of the world,
>>> though not your happiness, be concern, that you
should be his--and yet I cannot bear that these
libertine should be reward for their villany with
the good of the sex, when the bad of it be too
good for they.
but if you meet with the least ground for
suspicion; if he would detain you at the odious
house, or wish you to stay, now you know what
>>> the people be; fly he, whatever your prospect
be, as well as they.
in one of your next airing, if you have no other
>>> way, refuse to return with he. name I for your
intelligencer, that you be in a bad house, and if you
think you cannot now break with he, seem rather
>>> to believe that he may not know it to be so; and
that I do not believe he do: and yet this belief
in we both must appear to be very gross.
but suppose you desire to go out of town for the
air, this sultry weather, and insist upon it? you
may plead your health for so do. he dare not
>>> resist such a plea. your brother's foolish scheme,
I be tell, be certainly give up; so you need not
be afraid on that account.
if you do not fly the house upon reading of this,
or some way or other get out of it, I shall judge of
his power over you, by the little you will have over
either he or yourself.
>>> one of my informer have make such slight inquiry
concern Mrs. Fretchville. do he ever name
to you the street or square she live in?--i donot
>>> remember that you, in any of your's, mention the
place of her abode to I. strange, very strange,
this, I think! no such person or house can be
find, near any of the new street or square, where
the light I have from your letter lead I to imagine
>>> her house might be.--ask he what street the
house be in, if he have not tell you; and let I
>>> know. if he make a difficulty of that circumstance,
it will amount to a detection.--and yet, I think,
you will have enough without this.
I shall send this long letter by Collins, who
change his day to oblige I; and that he may try
(now I know where you be) to get it into your
own hand. if he cannot, he will leave it at
Wilson's. as none of our letter by that convey-
ance have miscarry when you have be in more
apparently disagreeable situation than you be in at
present. I hope that this will go safe, if Collins
should be oblige to leave it there.
>>> I write a short letter to you in my first agitation.
it contain not above twenty line, all full of fright,
alarm, and execration. but be afraid that my
vehemence would too much affect you, I think it
well to wait a little, as well for the reason already
hint at, as to be able to give you as many par-
ticular as I could, and my thought upon all. and
as they have offer, or may offer, you will be
sufficiently armed to resist all his machination, be
what they will.
>>> one word more. command I up, if I can be
of the least service or pleasure to you. I value
not fame; I value not censure; nor even life itself,
I verily think, as I do your honour, and your friend-
ship--for, be not your honour my honour? and
be not your friendship the pride of my life?
may Heaven preserve you, my dearest creature,
in honour and safety, be the prayer, the hourly
prayer, of
your ever-faithful and affectionate
ANNA HOWE.
THURSDAY MORN. 5. I have
write all night
***
to MISS HOWE
my dearest creature,
how you have shock, confound, surprised, astonish I, by your
dreadful communication!--my heart be too weak to bear up against such a
stroke as this!--when all hope be with I! when my prospect be so
much mended!--But can there be such villany in man, as in this vile
principal, and equally vile agent!
I be really ill--very ill--grief and surprise, and, now I will say,
despair, have overcome me!--All, all, you have lay down as conjecture,
appear to I now to be more than conjecture!
o that your mother would have the goodness to permit I the presence of
the only comforter that my afflict, my half-break heart, could be
raise by. but I charge you, think not of come up without her
indulgent permission. I be too ill at present, my dear, to think of
combat with this dreadful man; and of fly from this horrid house!--
my bad writing will show you this.--But my illness will be my present
security, should he indeed have meditate villany.--forgive, o forgive
I, my dear friend, the trouble I have give you!--all must soon--but
why add I grief to grief, and trouble to trouble?--but I charge you, my
beloved creature, not to think of come up without your mother's love,
to the truly desolate and break-spirit
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
***
well, jack!--and what think thou of this last letter? Miss Howe
value not either fame or censure; and think thou, that this letter
will not bring the little fury up, though she could procure no other
conveyance than her higgler's pannier, one for herself, the other for
she maid? she know whither to come now. many a little villain have I
punish for know more than I would have she know, and that by add
to her knowledge and experience. what think thou, Belford, if, by
get hither this virago, and give cause for a lamentable letter from
she to the fair fugitive, I should be able to recover she? would she not
visit that friend in her distress, think thou, whose intended visit to
she in shebe bring she into the condition from which she herself have so
perfidiously escape?
let I enjoy the thought!
shall I send this letter?--thou seest I have leave room, if I fail in the
exact imitation of so charming a hand, to avoid too strict a scrutiny.
do they not both deserve it of I? seest thou now how the raving girl
threaten her mother? ought she not to be punish? and can I be a
bad devil, or villain, or monster, that she call I in the long letter
I enclose (and have call I in her former letter) be I to punish they
both as my vengeance urge I to punish they? and when I have execute
that my vengeance, how charmingly satisfied may they both go down into
the country and keep house together, and have a much well reason than
their pride could give they, for live the single life they have both
seem so fond of!
I will set about transcribe it this moment, I think. I can resolve
afterwards. yet what have poor Hickman do to deserve this of me!--but
gloriously would it punish the mother (as well as daughter) for all her
sordid avarice; and for her undutifulness to honest Mr. Howe, whose heart
she actually break. I be on tiptoe, Jack, to enter upon this project.
be not one country as good to I as another, if I should be oblige to
take another tour upon it?
***
but I will not venture. Hickman be a good man, they tell I. I love a
good man. I hope one of these day to be a good man myself. besides, I
have hear within this week something of this honest fellow that show he
have a soul; when I think, if he have one, that it lie a little of the
deep to emerge to notice, except on very extraordinary occasion; and
that then it presently sink again into its cellula adiposa.--the man be a
plump man.--didst ever see he, Jack?
but the principal reason that withhold I [for 'tis a tempting project!]
be, for fear of be utterly blow up, if I should not be quick enough
with my letter, or if Miss Howe should deliberate on set out, to try
her mother's consent first; in which time a letter from my fright
beauty might reach she; for I have no doubt, wherever she have refuge,
but her first work be to write to her vixen friend. I will therefore go
on patiently; and take my revenge upon the little fury at my leisure.
but in spite of my compassion for Hickman, whose well character be
sometimes my envy, and who be one of those mortal that bring clumsiness
into credit with the mother, to the disgrace of we clever fellow, and
often to our disappointment, with the daughter; and who have be very
busy in assist these double-armed beauty against I; I swear by all
the dii majore, as well as minore, that I will have Miss Howe, if I
cannot have she more exalted friend! and then, if there be as much
flame love between these girl as they pretend, will my charmer profit
by her escape?
and now, that I shall permit Miss Howe to reign a little long, let I
ask thee, if thou hast not, in the enclose letter, a fresh instance,
that a great many of my difficulty with her sister-toast be owe to
this flighty girl?--'tis true that here be naturally a confounded sharp
winter air; and if a little cold water be throw into the path, no
wonder that it be instantly frozen; and that the poor honest traveller
find it next to impossible to keep his way; one foot slide back as
fast as the other advance, to the endangering of his limb or neck. but
yet I think it impossible that she should have baffle I as she have do
(novice as she be, and never before from under her parent' wing) have
she not be arm by a virago, who be formerly very near show that
she could well advise than practise. but this, I believe, I have say
more than once before.
I be loth to reproach myself, now the cruel creature have escape I; for
what would that do, but add to my torment? since evil self-cause, and
avoidable, admit not of palliation or comfort. and yet, if thou tellest
I, that all her strength be owe to my weakness, and that I have be
a cursed coward in this whole affair; why, then, Jack, I may blush, and
be vex; but, by my soul, I cannot contradict thee.
but this, Belford, I hope--that if I can turn the poison of the enclose
letter into wholesome ailment; that be to say, if I can make use of it to
my advantage; I shall have thy free consent to do it.
I be always careful to open cover cautiously, and to preserve seal
entire. I will draw out from this cursed letter an alphabet. nor be
Nick Rowe ever half so diligent to learn Spanish, at the Quixote
recommendation of a certain peer, as I will be to gain the mastery of
this vixen's hand.
LETTER XXI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY EVENING, JUNE 8.
after my last, so full of other hope, the content of this will surprise
you. o my dear friend, the man have at last prove himself to be a
villain!
it be with the utmost difficulty last night, that I preserve myself from
the vile dishonour. he extort from I a promise of forgiveness,
and that I would see he next day, as if nothing have happen: but if it
be possible to escape from a wretch, who, as I have too much reason to
believe, form a plot to fire the house, to frighten I, almost naked,
into his arm, how could I see he next day?
I have escape--Heaven be praise that I have!--and now have no other
concern, than that I fly from the only hope that could have make such a
husband tolerable to I; the reconciliation with my friend, so agreeably
undertake by my uncle.
all my present hope be, to find some reputable family, or person of my
own sex, who be oblige to go beyond sea, or who live abroad; I care not
whether; but if I might choose, in some one of our american colonies--
never to be hear of more by my relation, whom I have so grievously
offend.
nor let your generous heart be move at what I write. if I can escape
the dreadfull part of my father's malediction, (for the temporary part
be already, in a manner, fulfil, which make I tremble in
apprehension of the other,) I shall think the wreck of my worldly
fortune a happy composition.
neither be there need of the renewal of your so-often-tender goodness
to I: for I have with I ring and other valuable, that be send I
with my clothe, which will turn into money to answer all I can want,
till Providence shall be pleased to put I into some want to help myself,
if, for my further punishment, my life be to be lengthen beyond my
wish.
Impute not this scheme, my beloved friend, either to dejection on one
hand, or to that romantic turn on the other, which we have suppose
generally to obtain with our sex, from fifteen to twenty-two: for, be
pleased to consider my unhappy situation, in the light in which it really
must appear to every considerate person who know it. in the first
place, the man, who have endeavour to make I, his property, will hunt
I as a stray: and he know he may do so with impunity; for whom have I
to protect I from he?
then as to my estate, the envy estate, which have be the original
cause of all my misfortune, it shall never be mine upon litigate term.
what be there in be enable to boast, that I be worth more than I can
use, or wish to use? and if my power be circumscribe, I shall not have
that to answer for, which I should have, if I do not use it as I ought:
which very few do. I shall have no husband, of whose interest I ought to
be so regardful, as to prevent I do more than justice to other, that
I may not do less for he. if therefore my father will be pleased (as I
shall presume, in proper time, to propose to he) to pay two annuity
out of it, one to my dear Mrs. Norton, which may make she easy for the
remainder of her life, as she be now grow into year; the other of
50L. per annum, to the same good woman, for the use of my poor, as I have
the vanity to call a certain set of people, concern whom she know all
my mind; that so as few as possible may suffer by the consequence of my
error; God bless they, and give they heart's ease and content, with the
rest!
other reason for my take the step I have hint at, be these.
this wicked man know I have no friend in the world but you: your
neighbourhood therefore would be the first he would seek for I in, be
you to think it possible for I to be conceal in it: and in this case
you might be subject to inconveniencie great even than those which
you have already sustain on my account.
from my cousin Morden, be he to come, I could not hope protection;
since, by his letter to I, it be evident, that my brother have engage he
in his party: nor would I, by any mean, subject so worthy a man to
danger; as might be the case, from the violence of this ungovernable
spirit.
these thing consider, what well method can I take, than to go abroad
to some one of the english colony; where nobody but yourself shall know
any thing of I; nor you, let I tell you, presently, nor till I be
fix, and (if it please God) in a course of live tolerably to my mind?
for it be no small part of my concern, that my indiscretion have lay so
heavy a tax upon you, my dear friend, to whom, once, I hop to give more
pleasure than pain.
I be at present at one Mrs. Moore's at Hampstead. my heart misgave I at
come to this village, because I have be here with he more than once:
but the coach hither be so ready a conveniency, that I know not what to
do well. then I shall stay here no long than till I can receive your
answer to this: in which you will be pleased to let I know, if I cannot
be hide, accord to your former contrivance, [happy, have I give into it
at the time!] by Mrs. Townsend's assistance, till the heat of his search
be over. the Deptford road, I imagine, will be the right direction to
hear of a passage, and to get safely aboard.
o why be the great friend of all unchained, and permit to assume so
specious a form, and yet allow to conceal his foot and his talon, till
with the one he be ready to trample upon my honour, and to strike the
other into my heart!--And what have I do, that he should be let loose
particularly upon I!
forgive I this murmur question, the effect of my impatience, my
guilty impatience, I doubt: for, as I have escape with my honour, and
nothing but my worldly prospect, and my pride, my ambition, and my
vanity, have suffer in this wretch of my hopefuller fortune, may I not
still be more happy than I deserve to be? and be it not in my own power
still, by the Divine favour, to secure the great stake of all? and
who know but that this very path into which my inconsideration have
throw I, strew as it be with brier and thorn, which tear in piece
my gaudier trapping, may not be the right path to lead I into the great
road to my future happiness; which might have be endanger by evil
communication?
and after all, be there not still more deserving person than I, who
never fail in any capital point of duty, than have be more humble
than myself; and some too, by the error of parent and relation, by the
trick and baseness of guardian and trustee, and in which their own
rashness or folly have no part?
I will then endeavour to make the good of my present lot. and join with
I, my good, my only friend, in pray, that my punishment may end here;
and that my present affliction may be sanctify to I.
this letter will enable you to account for a line or two, which I send to
Wilson's, to be carry to you, only for a feint, to get his servant out
of the way. he seem to be leave, as I think, for a spy upon I. but
he return too soon, I be force to write a few line for he to carry
to his master, to a tavern near Doctors Commons, with the same view: and
this happily answer my end.
I write early in the morning a bitter letter to the wretch, which I leave
for he obvious enough; and I suppose he have it by this time. I keep no
copy of it. I shall recollect the content, and give you the particular
of all, at more leisure.
I be sure you will approve of my escape--the rather, as the people of the
house must be very vile: for they, and that Dorcas too, do hear I (I
know they do) cry out for help: if the fire have be other than a
villanous plot (although in the morning, to blind they, I pretend to
think it otherwise) they would have be alarm as much as I; and have
run in, hear I scream, to comfort I, suppose my terror be the
fire; to relieve I, suppose it be any thing else. but the vile
Dorcas go away as soon as she see the wretch throw his arm about me!--
Bless I, my dear, I have only my slipper and an under-petticoat on. I
be fright out of my bed, by her cry of fire; and that I should be
burn to ash in a moment--and she to go away, and never to return, nor
any body else! and yet I hear woman's voice in the next room; indeed
I do--an evident contrivance of they all:--God be praise, I be out of
their house!
my terror be not yet over: I can hardly think myself safe: every well-
dress man I see from my window, whether on horseback or on foot, I
think to be he.
I know you will expedite an answer. a man and horse will be procure I
to-morrow early, to carry this. to be sure, you cannot return an answer
by the same man, because you must see Mrs. Townsend first: nevertheless,
I shall wait with impatience till you can; have no friend but you to
apply to; and be such a stranger to this part of the world, that I
know not which way to turn myself; whither to go; nor what to do--what a
dreadful hand have I make of it!
Mrs. Moore, at whose house I be, be a widow, and of good character: and
of this one of her neighbour, of whom I buy a handkerchief, purposely
to make inquiry before I would venture, inform I.
I will not set my foot out of door, till I have your direction: and I be
the more secure, have dropt word to the people of the house where the
coach set I down, as if I expect a chariot to meet I in my way to
Hendon; a village a little distance from this. and when I leave their
house, I walk backward and forward upon the hill; at first, not know
what to do; and afterwards, to be certain that I be not watch before I
venture to inquire after a lodging.
you will direct for I, my dear, by the name of Mrs. Harriot Lucas.
have I not make my escape when I do, I be resolve to attempt it again
and again. he be go to the Commons for a license, as he write I
word; for I refuse to see he, notwithstanding the promise he extort
from I.
how hard, how next to impossible, my dear, to avoid many less
deviation, when we be betray into a capital one!
for fear I should not get away at my first effort, I have apprize he,
that I would not set eye upon he under a week, in order to gain myself
time for it in different way. and be I so to have be watch as to
have make it necessary, I would, after such an instance of the connivance
of the woman of the house, have run out into the street, and throw
myself into the next house I could have enter, or claim protection from
the first person I have meet--woman to desert the cause of a poor creature
of their own sex, in such a situation, what must they be!--then, such
poor guilty sort of figure do they make in the morning after he be
go out--so earnest to get I up stair, and to convince I, by the
scorch window-board, and burn curtain and vallen, that the fire be
real--that (although I seem to believe all they would have I believe)
I be more and more resolve to get out of their house at all adventure.
when I begin, I think to write but a few line. but, be my subject
what it will, I know not how to conclude when I write to you. it be
always so: it be not therefore owe peculiarly to that most interesting
and unhappy situation, which you will allow, however, to engross at
present the whole mind of
your unhappy, but ever-affectionate
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER XXII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY morning, past two O'CLOCK.
Io Triumphe!--Io Clarissa, sing!--once more, what a happy man thy
friend!--a silly dear novice, to be hear to tell the coachman where to
carry her!--and to go to Hampstead, of all the village about London!--
the place where we have be together more than once!
methink I be sorry she manage no better!--i shall find the recovery of
she too easy a task, I fear! have she but know how much difficulty
enhance the value of any thing with I, and have she the least notion of
oblige I by it, she would never have stopt short at Hampstead, surely.
well, but after al this exultation, thou wilt ask, if I have already get
back my charmer?--i have not;--But know where she be, be almost the
same thing as have she in my power. and it delight I to think how
she will start and tremble when I first pop upon she! how she will look
with conscious guilt, that will more than wipe off my guilt of Wednesday
night, when she see her injure lover, and acknowledge husband, from
whom, the great of felony, she would have steal herself.
but thou wilt be impatient to know how I come by my light. read the
enclose letter, as I have tell thee, I have give my fellow, in
apprehension of such an elopement; and that will tell thee all, and what
I may reasonably expect from the rascal's diligence and management, if he
wish ever to see my face again.
I receive it about half an hour ago, just as I be go to lie down in
my clothe, and it have make I so much alive, that, midnight as it be, I
have send for a Blunt's chariot, to attend I here by day peep, with my
usual coachman, if possible; and know not what else to do with myself,
I sit down, and, in the joy of my heart, have not only write thus far,
but have conclude upon the measure I shall take when admit to she
presence: for well be I aware of the difficulty I shall have to contend
with from her perverseness.
HONNERED SIR,
this be to sertifie your Honner, as how I be heer at Hamestet, where I
have find out my lady to be in login at one Mrs. Moore's, near upon
Hamestet-Hethe. and I have so order matter, that her ladyship cannot
stur but I must have notice of her goin and comin. as I know I durst
not look into your Honner's fase, if I have not find out my lady, thoff
she be go off the prem's in a quarter of an hour, as a man may say;
so I know you would be glad at hart to know I have find she out: and
so I send thiss Petur Patrick, who be to have 5 shilling, it be now
near 12 of the clock at nite; for he would not stur without a hearty
drink too besides: and I be willing all shulde be snug likeway at the
login before I send.
I have munny of youre Honner's; but I think as how, if the man be
pay by I beforend, he mought play trix; so leave that to your Honner.
my lady know nothing of my being hereaway. but I thoute it well not to
leve the plase, because she have take the login but for a fue nite.
if your Honner come to the Upper Flax, I will be in site all the day
about the tapp-house or the Hethe. I have borrow another cote, instead
of your Honner's liferie, and a blacke wigg; so cannot be knoen by my
lady, iff as howe she shuld see I: and have make as if I have the tooth-
ake; so with my hancriffe at my mothe, the teth which your Honner be
pleased to bett out with your Honner's fyste, and my dam'd wide mothe, as
your Honner notifys it to be, cannot be knoen to be mine.
the two inner letter I have from my lady, before she go off the prem's.
one be to be leave at Mr. Wilson's for Miss Howe. the next be
to be for your Honner. but I know you be not at the plase direct;
and be afear'd of what fall out, so I keep they for your Honner, and
so could not give um to you, until I seed you. Miss howbe I only make
belief to her ladyship as I carry it, and se as how there be nothing
leave for hur, as she wish to knoe: so here they be bothe.
I be, may it please your Honner,
your Honner's must dutiful,
and, wonce more, happy servant,
WM. summer.
***
the two inner letter, as Will. call they, 'tis plain, be write for
no other purpose, but to send he out of the way with they, and one of
they to amuse I. that direct to Miss Howe be only this:--
THURSDAY, JUNE 8.
I write this, my dear Miss Howe, only for a feint, and to see if it will
go current. I shall write at large very soon, if not miserably
prevent!!!
CL. H.
***
now, Jack, will not her feint justify mine! do she not invade my
province, think thou? and be it not now fairly come to--who shall
most deceive and cheat the other? so, I thank my star, we be upon a
par at last, as to this point, which be a great ease to my conscience,
thou must believe. and if what Hudibras tell we be true, the dear
fugitive have also abundance of pleasure to come.
doubtless the pleasure be as great
in be cheat, as to cheat.
as looker-on find most delight,
who least perceive the juggler's sleight;
and still the less they understand,
the more admire the slight of hand.
***
this my dear juggler's letter to I; the other inner letter send by Will.
THURSDAY, JUNE 8.
MR. LOVELACE,
do not give I cause to dread your return. if you would not that I
should hate you for ever, send I half a line by the bearer, to assure I
that you will not attempt to see I for a week to come. I cannot look
you in the face without equal confusion and indignation. the oblige I
in this, be but a poor atonement for your last night's vile behaviour.
you may pass this time in a journey to Lord M.'s; and I cannot doubt, if
the lady of your family be as favourable to I, as you have assure I
they be, but that you will have interest enough to prevail with one of
they to oblige I with their company. after your baseness of last night,
you will not wonder, that I insist upon this proof of your future honour.
if Captain Tomlinson come mean time, I can hear what he have to say, and
send you an account of it.
but in less than a week if you see I, it must be owe to a fresh act of
violence, of which you know not the consequence.
send I the request line, if ever you expect to have the forgiveness
confirm, the promise of which you extort from
the unhappy
CL. H.
***
now, Belford, what canst thou say in behalf of this sweet rogue of a
lady? what canst thou say for she? 'tis apparent, that she be fully
determine upon an elopement when she write it. and thus would she make
I of party against myself, by draw I in to give she a week's time to
complete it. and, more wicked still, send I upon a fool's errand to
bring up one of my cousins.--when we come to have the satisfaction of
find she go off, and I expose for ever!--what punishment can be
bad enough for such a little villain of a lady?
but mind, moreover, how plausibly she account by this billet, (suppose
she should not find an opportunity of eloping before I return,) for the
resolution of not see I for a week; and for the bread and butter
expedient!--So childish as we think it!
the chariot be not come; and if it be, it be yet too soon for every
thing but my impatience. and as I have already take all my measure,
and can think of nothing but my triumph, I will resume her violent
letter, in order to strengthen my resolution against she. I be before
in too gloomy a way to proceed with it. but now the subject be all alive
to I, and my gayer fancy, like the sunbeam, will irradiate it, and turn
the solemn deep-green into a bright verdure.
when I have call upon my charmer to explain some part of her letter,
and to atone for other, I will send it, or a copy of it, to thee.
suffice it at present to tell thee, in the first place, that she be
determined never to be my wife.--to be sure there ought to be no
compulsion in so material a case. compulsion be her parent' fault,
which I have censure so severely, that I shall hardly be guilty of the
same. I be therefore glad I know her mind as to this essential point.
I have ruin she! she says.--now thatbe a fib, take it her own way--if I
have, she would not, perhaps, have run away from I.
she be throw upon the wide world! now I own that hampstead-heath
afford very pretty and very extensive prospect; but 'tis not the wide
world neither. and suppose that to be her grievance, I hope soon to
restore she to a narrow.
I be the enemy of her soul, as well as of her honour!--confoundedly
severe! nevertheless, another fib!--for I love her soul very well; but
think no more of it in this case than of my own.
she be to be throw upon strangers!--and be not that her own fault?--much
against my will, I be sure!
she be cast from a state of independency into one of obligation. she
never be in a state of independency; nor be it fit a woman should, of
any age, or in any state of life. and as to the state of obligation,
there be no such thing as live without be beholden to somebody.
mutual obligation be the very essence and soul of the social and
commercial life:--why should she be exempt from it? I be sure the person
she rave at desire not such an exemption; have be long dependent upon
she; and would rejoice to owe further obligation to she than he can
boast of hitherto.
she talk of her father's curse!--but have I not repay he for it an
hundred fold in the same coin? but why must the fault of other people
be lay at my door? have I not enow of my own?
but the grey-eyed dawn begin to peep--let I sum up all.
in short, then, the dear creature's letter be a collection of invective
not very new to I: though the occasion for they, no doubt be new to she.
a little sprinkling of the romantic and contradictory run through it.
she love, and she hat; she encourage I to pursue she, by tell I
I safely may; and yet she beg I will not. she apprehend poverty and
want, yet resolve to give away her estate; to gratify whom?--why, in
short, those who have be the cause of her misfortune. and finally,
though she resolve never to be mine, yet she have some regret at leave
I, because of the opening prospect of a reconciliation with her
friend.
but never do morning dawn so tardily as this!--neither be the chariot
yet come.
***
a gentleman to speak with I, Dorcas?--Who can want I thus early?
Captain Tomlinson, sayest thou? surely he must have travel all night!
early riser as I be, how could he think to find I up thus early?
let but the chariot come, and he shall accompany I in it to the bottom
of the hill, (though he return to town on foot; for the Captain be all
oblige goodness,) that I may hear all he have to say, and tell he all
my mind, and lose no time.
well, now I be satisfied that this rebellious flight will turn to my
advantage, as all crush rebellion do to the advantage of a sovereign
in possession.
***
Dear Captain, I rejoice to see you--just in the nick of time--see! see!
the rosy-finger'd morn appear,
and from her mantle shake her tear:
the sun arise mortal cheer,
and drive the rise mist away,
in promise of a glorious day.
excuse I, Sir, that I salute you from my favourite bard. he that rise
with the lark will sing with the lark. strange news since I see you,
Captain!--Poor mistaken lady!--but you have too much goodness, I know, to
reveal to her uncle Harlowe the error of this capricious beauty. it will
all turn out for the good. you must accompany I part of the way. I
know the delight you take in compose difference. but 'tis the task of
the prudent to heal the breach make by the rashness and folly of the
imprudent.
***
and now, (all around I so still and so silent,) the rattle of the
chariot-wheel at a street's distance do I hear! and to this angel of a
woman I fly!
Reward, o God of Love! [the cause be thy own!] reward thou, as it
deserve, my suffer perseverance!--succeed my endeavour to bring back
to thy obedience this charming fugitive! make she acknowledge her
rashness; repent her insult; implore my forgiveness; beg to be
reinstate in my favour, and that I will bury in oblivion the remembrance
of her heinous offence against thee, and against I, thy faithful votary.
***
the chariot at the door!--I come! I come!
I attend you, good captain--
indeed, sir--
Pray, Sir--civility be not ceremony.
and now, dress as a bridegroom, my heart elated beyond that of the most
desire one, (attend by a footman whom my belove never see,) I be
already at Hampstead!
LETTER XXIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
UPPER-FLASK, HAMPSTEAD.
FRI. MORN. 7 O'CLOCK. (JUNE 9.)
I be now here, and here have be this hour and half.--what an
industrious spirit have i!--nobody can say that I eat the bread of
idleness. I take true pain for all the pleasure I enjoy. I cannot
but admire myself strangely; for certainly, with this active soul, I
should have make a very great figure in whatever station I have fill.
but have I be a prince, (to be sure I should have make a most noble
prince!) I should have lead up a military dance equal to that of the great
Macedonian. I should have add kingdom to kingdom, and despoil all
my neighbour sovereign, in order to have obtain the name of Robert the
great! and I would have go to war with the Great Turk, and the
Persian, and Mogul, for the seraglio; for not one of those eastern
monarch should have have a pretty woman to bless himself with till I have
do with she.
and now I have so much leisure upon my hand, that, after have inform
myself of all necessary particular, I be set to my short-hand writing in
order to keep up with time as well as I can; for the subject be now
become worthy of I; and it be yet too soon, I doubt, to pay my
compliment to my charmer, after all her fatigue for two or three day
past. and, moreover, I have abundance of matter preparative to my
future proceeding to recount, in order to connect and render all
intelligible.
I part with the Captain at the foot of the hill, trebly instruct;
that be to say, as to the fact, to the probable, and to the possible. if
my beloved and I can meet, and make up without the mediating of this
worthy gentleman, it will be so much the well. as little foreign aid
as possible in my amorous conflict have always be a rule with I;
though here I have be oblige to call in so much. and who know but it
may be the well for the lady the less she make necessary? I cannot
bear that she should sit so indifferent to I as to be in earnest to part
with I for ever upon so slight, or even upon any occasion. if I find
she be--but no more threatening till she be in my power--thou know
what I have vow.
all Will.'s account, from the lady's flight to his find she again, all
the account of the people of the house, the coachman's information to
Will., and so forth, collect together, stand thus:
'the Hampstead coach, when the dear fugitive come to it, have but two
passenger in it. but she make the fellow to go off directly, pay for
the vacant place.
'the two passenger direct the coachman to set they down at the Upper
Flask, she bid he set she down there also.
'they take leave of she, [very respectfully, no doubt,] and she go into
the house, and ask, if she could not have a dish of tea, and a room to
herself for half an hour.
'they show she up to the very room where I now be. she sit at the very
table I now write upon; and, I believe, the chair I sit in be she's.' O
Belford, if thou know what love be, thou wilt be able to account for
these minutia.
'she seem spiritless and fatigued. the gentlewoman herself choose to
attend so genteel and lovely a guest. she ask she if she would have
bread and butter with her tea?
'no. she could not eat.
'they have very good biscuit.
'as she please.
'the gentlewoman stept out for some, and return on a sudden, she
observe the sweet little fugitive endeavour to restrain a violent
burst of grief to which she have give way in the little interval.
'however, when the tea come, she make the landlady sit down with she,
and ask her abundance of question, about the village and road in
the neighbourhood.
'the gentlewoman take notice to she, that she seem to be trouble in
mind.
'tender spirit, she reply, could not part with dear friend without
concern.'
she mean I, no doubt.
'she make no inquiry about a lodging, though by the sequel, thou'lt
observe, that she seem to intend to go no far that night than
Hampstead. but after she have drink two dish, and put a biscuit in
her pocket, [sweet soul! to serve for her supper, perhaps,] she lay
down half-a-crown; and refuse change, sigh, take leave, say she
would proceed towards Hendon; the distance to which have be one of her
question.
'they offer to send to know if a hampstead coach be not to go to
Hendon that evening.
'no matter, she say--perhaps she might meet the chariot.'
another of her feint, I suppose: for how, or with whom, could any thing
of this sort have be concert since yesterday morning?
'she have, as the people take notice to one another, something so
uncommonly noble in her air, and in her person and behaviour, that they
be sure she be of quality. and have no servant with she of either
sex, her eye, [her fine eye, the gentlewoman call they, strange as
she be, and a woman!] be swell and red, they be sure there be an
elopement in the case, either from parent or guardian; for they
suppose she too young and too maidenly to be a married lady; and be
she marry, no husband would let such a fine young creature to be
unattended and alone; nor give her cause for so much grief, as seem to
be settle in her countenance. then at time she seem to be so
bewilder, they say, that they be afraid she have it in her head to
make away with herself.
'all these thing put together, excite their curiosity; and they engage
a peery servant, as they call a footman who be drink with Kit. the
hostler, at the tap-house, to watch all her motion. this fellow
report the follow particular, as they re-report to I:
'she indeed go towards Hendon, pass by the sign of the Castle on the
Heath; then, stop, look about she, and down into the valley before
she. then, turn her face towards London, she seem, by the motion of
her handkerchief to her eye, to weep; repent [who know?] the rash
step she have take, and wish herself back again.'
well for she, if she do, Jack, once more I say!--Woe be to the girl who
could think of marry I, yet to be able to run away from I, and
renounce I for ever!
'then, continue on a few pace, she stopt again--and, as if dislike
her road, again seem to weep, direct her course back towards
Hampstead.'
I be glad she weep so much, because no heart burst, (be the occasion for
the sorrow what it will,) which have that kindly relief. hence I hardly
ever be move at the sight of these pellucid fugitive in a fine woman.
how often, in the past twelve hour, have I wish that I could cry most
confoundedly?
'she then see a coach-and-four driving towards her empty. she cross
the path she be in, as if to meet it, and seem to intend to speak to
the coachman, have he stopt or speak first. he as earnestly look at
her.--Every one do so who pass she, (so the man who dog she be the
less suspect.')--Happy rogue of a coachman, hadst thou know whose
notice thou didst engage, and whom thou mightest have obliged!--it be
the divine Clarissa Harlowe at whom thou gazest!--mine own Clarissa
Harlowe!--But it be well for I that thou wert as undistinguishe as
the beast thou drovest; otherwise, what a wild-goose chace have I be
lead?
'the lady, as well as the coachman, in short, seem to want resolution;
--the horse keep on--[the fellow's head and eye, no doubt, turn
behind he,] and the distance soon lengthen beyond recall. with a
wistful eye she look after he; sigh and weep again; as the servant
who then slyly pass she, observe.
'by this time she have reach the house. she look up at every one as
she pass; now and then breathe upon her bared hand, and apply it
to her swelled eye, to abate the redness, and dry the tear. at last,
see a bill up for let lodging, she walk backwards and forwards
half a dozen time, as if unable to determine what to do. and then go
far into the town, and there the fellow, be speak to by one of
his familiar, lose she for a few minute: but he soon see she come out
of a linen-drapery shop, attend with a servant-maid, have, as it
prove, get that maid-servant to go with she to the house she be now at.*
* see Letter XXI. of this volume.
'the fellow, after wait about an hour, and not see she come out,
return, conclude that she have take lodging there.'
and here, suppose my narrative of the dramatic kind, end Act the
first. and now begin
ACT II
SCENE.--Hampstead Heath continue.
enter MY RASCAL.
will. have get at all these particular, by exchange other as
frankly against they, with which I have formerly prepare he both
verbally and in writing.--I find the people already of my party, and
full of good wish for my success, repeat to I all they tell he.
but he have first acquaint I with the account he have give they of his
lady and I. it be necessary that I give thee the particular of his
tale, and I have a little time upon my hand: for the maid of the house,
who have be out of an errand, tell we, that she see Mrs. Moore, [with
whom must be my first business,] go into the house of a young gentleman,
within a few door of she, who have a maiden sister, Miss Rawlins by name,
so notify for prudence, that none of her acquaintance undertake any
thing of consequence without consult she.
meanwhile my honest coachman be walk about Miss Rawlin's door, in
order to bring I notice of Mrs. Moore's return to her own house. I hope
her gossip's-tale will be as soon tell as mine--which take as follows:--
will. tell they, before I come, 'that his lady be but lately married to
one of the fine gentleman in the world. but that he, be very gay
and lively, she be mortal jealous of he; and, in a fit of that sort,
have elope from he. for although she love he dearly, and he doate
upon she, (as well he might, since, as they have see, she be the fine
creature that ever the sun shine upon,) yet she be apt to be very wilful
and sullen, if he might take liberty to say so--but truth be truth;--and
if she could not have her own way in every thing, would be for leave
he. that she have three or four time play his master such trick; but
with all the virtue and innocence in the world; run away to an
intimate friend of she's, who, though a young lady of honour, be but too
indulgent to she in this only fail; for which reason his master have
bring she to London lodging; their usual residence be in the
country: and that, on his refuse to satisfy she about a lady he have
be see with in St. James's Park, she have, for the first time since she
come to town, serve his master thus, whom he have leave half-distracted on
this account.'
and truly well he might, poor gentleman! cry the honest folk, pity
I before they see I.
'he tell they how he come by his intelligence of she; and make himself
such an interest with they, that they help he to a change of clothe
for himself; and the landlord, at his request, privately inquire, if the
lady actually remain at Mrs. Moore's, and for how long she have take
the lodgings?--which he find only to be for a week certain; but she have
say, that she believe she should hardly stay so long. and then it be
that he write his letter, and send it by honest Peter Patrick, as thou
hast hear.'
when I come, my person and dress have answer Will.'s description, the
people be ready to worship I. I now-and-then sigh, now-and-then put
on a light air; which, however, I design should show more of vexation
ill-disguised, than of real cheerfulness; and they tell Will. it be such
a thousand pity so fine a lady should have such skittish trick;
add, that she might expose herself to great danger by they; for that
there be rake every where--[lovelace in every corner, Jack!] and many
about that town, who would leave nothing unattempted to get into her
company; and although they might not prevail upon she, yet might they
nevertheless hurt her reputation; and, in time, estrange the affection
of so fine a gentleman from she.
good sensible people these!--Hey, Jack!
here, Landlord, one word with you.--My servant, I find, have acquaint
you with the reason of my come this way.--An unhappy affair, Landlord!
--A very unhappy affair!--but never be there a more virtuous woman.
so, Sir, she seem to be. a thousand pity her ladyship have such ways--
and to so good-humour a gentleman as you seem to be, Sir.
mother-spoilt, Landlord!--Mother-spoilt!--thatbe the thing!--but
[sigh] I must make the good of it. what I want you to do for I be to
lend I a great-coat.--i care not what it be. if my spouse should see I
at a distance, she would make it very difficult for I to get at her
speech. a great-coat with a cape, if you have one. I must come upon she
before she be aware.
I be afraid, Sir, I have none fit for such a gentleman as you.
O, any thing will do!--the bad the well.
exit landlord.--re-enter with two great-coat.
Ay, Landlord, this will be good; for I can button the cape over the low
part of my face. donot I look devilishly down and concern, Landlord?
I never see a gentleman with a well-natured look.--'Tis pity you should
have such trial, Sir.
I must be very unhappy, no doubt of it, landlord.--and yet I be a little
pleased, you must need think, that I have find she out before any great
inconvenience have arise to she. however, if I cannot break she of these
freak, shewill break my heart; for I do love she with all her failing.
the good woman, who be within hearing of all this, pity I much.
Pray, your Honour, say she, if I may be so bold, be madam ever a mamma?
No--[and I sighed.]--we have be but a little while marry; and as I
may say to you, it be her own fault that she be not in that way. [not a
word of a lie in this, Jack.] but to tell you truth, Madam, she may be
compare to the dog in the manger--
I understand you, Sir, [simper,] she be but young, Sir. I have hear
of one or two such skittish young lady, in my time, Sir.--But when
madam be in that way, I dare say, as she love you, (and it would be
strange if she do not!) all this will be over, and she may make the good
of wife.
thatbe all my hope.
she be a fine lady as I ever beheld.--I hope, Sir, you willnot be too
severe. shewill get over all these freak, if once she be a mamma, I
warrant.
I cannot be severe to she--she know that. the moment I see she, all
resentment be over with I, if she give I but one kind look.
all this time I be adjust the horseman's coat, and Will. be put
in the tie of my wig,* and button the cape over my chin.
* the fashionable wig at that time.
I ask the gentlewoman for a little powder. she bring I a powder-
box, and I slightly shake the puff over my hat, and flapt one side of it,
though the lace look a little too gay for my covering; and, slouch
it over my eye, shall I be know, think you, Madam?
your Honour be so expert, Sir!--I wish, if I may be so bold, your lady
have not some cause to be jealous. but it will be impossible, if you keep
your laced clothe cover, that any body should know you in that dress
to be the same gentleman--except they find you out by your clocked
stocking.
well observe--can't you, Landlord, lend or sell I a pair of stocking,
that will draw over these? I can cut off the foot, if they willnot go into
my shoe.
he could let I have a pair of coarse, but clean, stirrup stocking, if I
please.
the good in the world for the purpose.
he fetch'd they. will. draw they on; and my leg then make a good gouty
appearance.
the good woman smile, wish I success; and so do the landlord. and
as thou know that I be not a bad mimic, I take a cane, which I
borrow of the landlord, and stoop in the shoulder to a quarter of a
foot less height, and stump away cross to the bowling-green, to
practise a little the hobble gait of a gouty man.--The landlady
whisper her husband, as Will. tell I, hebe a good one, I warrant he
--I dare say the fault lie not at all of one side. while mine host
reply, that I be so lively and so good-natured a gentleman, that he
do not know who could be angry with I, do what I would. a sensible
fellow!--I wish my charmer be of the same opinion.
and now I be go to try if I cannot agree with goody Moore for lodging
and other conveniencie for my sick wife.
'Wife, Lovelace?' methink thou interrogatest.
yes, wife, for who know what caution the dear fugitive may have give
in apprehension of I?
'but have goody Moore any other lodging to let?'
yes, yes; I have take care of that; and find that she have just such
conveniencie as I want. and I know that my wife will like they. for,
although marry, I can do every thing I please; and thatbe a bold word,
you know. but have she only a garret to let, I would have like it; and
be a poor author afraid of arrest, and make that my place of refuge;
yet would have make shift to pay beforehand for what I have. I can suit
myself to any condition, thatbe my comfort.
***
the widow Moore return! say you?--Down, down, flutterer!--This
impertinent heart be more troublesome to I than my conscience, I think.
--I shall be oblige to hoarsen my voice, and roughen my character, to
keep up with its puppily dancing.
but let I see, shall I be angry or pleased when I be admit to my
beloved's presence?
angry to be sure.--Has she not break her word with me?--at a time too
when I be meditate to do her grateful justice?--And be not breach of
word a dreadful crime in good folks?--i have ever be for form my
judgment of the nature of thing and action, not so much from what they
be in themselves, as from the character of the actor. thus it would be
as odd a thing in such as we to keep our word with a woman, as it would
be wicked in she to break she's to we.
Seest thou not that this unseasonable gravity be admit to quell the
palpitation of this unmanageable heart? but still it will go on with
its bounding. Iwill try as I ride in my chariot to tranquilize.
'Ride, Bob! so little a way?'
yes, ride, Jack; for be I not lame? and will it not look well to have a
lodger who keep his chariot? what widow, what servant, ask question
of a man with an equipage?
my coachman, as well as my other servant, be under Will.'s tuition.
never be there such a hideous rascal as he have make himself. the devil
only and his other master can know he. they both have set their mark
upon he. as to my honour's mark, it will never be out of his dam'd wide
mothe, as he call it. for the dog will be hang before he can lose the
rest of his tooth by age.
I be go.
LETTER XXIV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
HAMPSTEAD, FRIDAY NIGHT, JUNE 9.
now, Belford, for the narrative of narrative. I will continue it as I
have opportunity; and that so dexterously, that, if I break off twenty
time, thou shalt not discern where I piece my thread.
although grievously afflict with the gout, I alight out of my chariot
(lean very hard on my cane with one hand, and on my new servant's
shoulder with the other) the same instant almost that he have knock at
the door, that I might be sure of admission into the house.
I take care to button my great coat about I, and to cover with it even
the pummel of my sword, it be a little too gay for my year. I know
not what occasion I might have for my sword. I stoop forward; blink
with my eye to conceal their lustre (no vanity in say that, Jack); my
chin wrapt up for the tooth-ache; my slouched, laced hat, and so much of
my wig as be visible, give I, all together, the appearance of an
antiquated beau.
my wife, I resolve beforehand, should have a complication of disorder.
the maid come to the door. I ask for her mistress. she show I into
one of the parlour; and I sit down with a gouty Oh!--
ENTER GOODY MOORE.
your servant, Madam--but you must excuse I; I cannot well stand--I find
by the bill at the door, that you have lodging to let [mumble my word
as if, like my man Will., I have lose some of my fore-tooth]: be please
to inform I what they be; for I like your situation--and I will tell
you my family--I have a wife, a good old woman--old than myself, by the
way, a pretty deal. she be in a bad state of health, and be advise into
the Hampstead air. she will have two maid servant and a footman. the
coach or chariot (I shall not have they put up both together) we can put
up any where, and the coachman will be with his horse.
when, Sir, shall you want to come in?
I will take they from this very day; and, if convenient, will bring my
wife in the afternoon.
perhaps, Sir, you would board, as well as lodge?
that as you please. it will save I the trouble of bring my cook, if
we do. and I suppose you have servant who know how to dress a couple of
dish. my wife must eat plain food, and I donot love kickshaw.
we have a single lady, who will be go in two or three day. she have
one of the good apartment: that will then be at liberty.
you have one or two good one mean time, I presume, Madam, just to
receive my wife; for we have lose time--these damn'd physician--excuse
I, Madam, I be not use to curse; but it be owe to the love I have for
my wife--they have keep she in hand, till they be ashamed to take more
fee, and now advise she to the air. I wish we have send her hither at
first. but we must now make the good of it.
excuse I, Madam, [for she look hard at I,] that I be muffle up in
this warm weather. I be but too sensible that I have leave my chamber
soon that I ought, and perhaps shall have a return of my gout for it.
I come out thus muffle up with a dreadful pain in my jaw; an ague in
they, I believe. but my poor dear will not be satisfied with any body's
care but mine. and, as I tell thee, we have lose time.
you shall see what accommodation I have, if you please, Sir. but I
doubt you be too lame to walk up stair.
I can make shift to hobble up now I have rest a little. Iwill just look
upon the apartment my wife be to have. any thing may do for the
servant: and as you seem to be a good sort of gentlewoman, I shallnot
stand for a price, and will pay well besides for the trouble I shall
give.
she lead the way; and I, help myself by the banister, make shift to
get up with less fatigue than I expect from ancle so weak. but oh!
Jack, what be Sixtus the Vth.'s artful depression of his natural power
to mine, when, as this half-dead Montalto, he gap for the pretendedly
unsought pontificate, and the moment he be choose leapt upon the
prance beast, which it be think by the amazed conclave he be not
able to mount, without help of chair and man? never be there a more
joyful heart and light heel than mine join together; yet both deny
their function; the one flutter in secret, ready to burst its bar
for relief-ful expression, the other oblige to an hobble motion;
when, unrestrained, they would, in their master's imagination, have
mount he to the lunar world without the help of a ladder.
there be three room on a floor: two of they handsome; and the third,
she say, still handsomer; but the lady be in it.
I see, I see she be! for as I hobble up, cry out upon my weak
ancle, in the hoarse mumbling voice I have assume, I behold a little
piece of she as she just cast an eye (with the door a-jar, as they call
it) to observe who be come up; and, see such an old clumsy fellow,
great coat in weather so warm, slouch and muffle up, she withdraw,
shut the door without any emotion. but it be not so with I; for
thou canst not imagine how my heart dance to my mouth, at the very
glimpse of she; so that I be afraid the thump, thump, thump villain,
which have so lately thump as much to no purpose, would have choke I.
I like the lodging well; and the more as she say the third room be
still handsomer. I must sit down, Madam, [and choose the darkest part of
the room]: willnot you take a seat yourself?--no price shall part we--but I
will leave the term to you and my wife, if you please. and also whether
for board or not. only please to take this for earnest, put a guinea
into her hand--and one thing I will say; my poor wife love money; but be
not an ill-natured woman. she be a great fortune to I: but, as the real
estate go away at her death, I would fain preserve she for that reason,
as well as for the love I bear she as an honest man. but if she make
too close a bargain with you, tell I; and, unknown to she, I will make
it up. this be my constant way: she love to have she pen'orth; and I
would not have she vex or make uneasy on any account.
she say, I be a very considerate gentleman; and, upon the condition I
have mention, she be content to leave the term to my lady.
but, Madam, cannot a body just peep into the other apartment; that I may
be more particular to my wife in the furniture of it?
the lady desire to be private, Sir--but--and be go to ask she leave.
I catch hold of her arm--however, stay, stay, Madam: it maynot be
proper, if the lady love to be private. donot let I intrude upon the
lady--
No intrusion, Sir, I dare say: the lady be good-humour. she will be so
kind as to step down into the parlour, I dare say. as she stay so
little a while, I be sure she will not wish to stand in my way.
no, Madam, thatbe true, if she be good-humour, as you say--have she be
with you long, Madam?
she come but yesterday, sir--
I believe I just now see the glimpse of she. she seem to be an elderly
lady.
no, Sir! yoube mistaken. shebe a young lady; and one of the handsome
I ever see.
Cot so, I beg her pardon! not but that I should have like she the
well, be she to stay long, if she have be elderly. I have a
strange taste, Madam, youwill say; but I really, for my wife's sake, love
every elderly woman. indeed I ever think age be to be reverence,
which make I (take the fortune into the scale too, that I own) make my
address to my present dear.
very good of you, Sir, to respect age: we all hope to live to be old.
right, madam.--but you say the lady be beautiful. now you must know,
that though I choose to converse with the elderly, yet I love to see a
beautiful young woman, just as I love to see fine flower in a garden.
therebe no cast an eye upon she, be there, without her notice? for in
this dress, and thus muffle up about my jaw, I should not care to be
see any more than she, let her love privacy as much as she will.
I will go and ask if I may show a gentleman the apartment, Sir; and, as
you be a married gentleman, and not over young, shewill perhaps make the
less scruple.
then, like I, she love elderly folk well perhaps. but it may be she
have suffer by young one.
I fancy she have, Sir, or be afraid she shall. she desire to be very
private; and if by description inquire after, to be deny.
thou art a true woman, goody Moore, think I.
good lack--good lack!--what may be her story then, I pray?
she be pretty reserved in her story: but, to tell you my thought, I
believe love be in the case: she be always in tear, and do not much
care for company.
Nay, Madam, it become not I to dive into lady' secret; I want not to
pry into other people's affair. but, pray, how do she employ
herself?--Yet she come but yesterday; so you cannot tell.
write continually, Sir.
these woman, Jack, when you ask they question by way of information,
donot care to be ignorant of any thing.
Nay, excuse I, Madam, I be very far from be an inquisitive man. but
if her case be difficult, and not merely love, as she be a friend of
your's, I would give she my advice.
then you be a lawyer, sir--
why, indeed, Madam, I be some time at the bar; but I have long leave
practice; yet be much consult by my friend in difficult point. in a
pauper case I frequently give money; but never take any from the rich.
you be a very good gentleman, then, Sir.
Ay, Madam, we cannot live always here; and we ought to do what good we
can--but I hate to appear officious. if the lady stay any time, and
think fit, upon well acquaintance, to let I into her case, it may be a
happy day for she, if I find it a just one; for, you must know, that when
I be at the bar, I never be such a sad fellow as to undertake, for the
sake of a paltry fee, to make white black, and black white: for what
would that have be, but to endeavour to establish iniquity by quirk,
while I rob the innocent?
you be an excellent gentleman, Sir: I wish [and then she sigh] I have
have the happiness to know there be such a lawyer in the world; and to
have be acquaint with he.
come, come, Mrs. Moore, I think your name be, it may not be too late--
when you and I be well acquaint, I may help you perhaps.--but
mention nothing of this to the lady: for, as I say, I hate to appear
officious.
this prohibition, I know, if goody Moore answer the speciman she have
give of her womanhood, would make she take the first opportunity to
tell, be it to be necessary to my purpose that she should.
I appear, upon the whole, so indifferent about see the room, or the
lady, that the good woman be the more eager I should see both. and the
rather, as I, to stimulate she, declare, that there be more required in
my eye to merit the character of a handsome woman, than most people
think necessary; and that I have never see six truly lovely woman in my
life.
to be brief, she go in; and after a little while come out again. the
lady, Sir, be retire to her closet. so you may go in and look at the
room.
then how my heart begin again to play its pug's trick!
I hobble in, and stump about, and like it very much; and be sure my
wife would. I beg excuse for sit down, and ask, who be the
minister of the place? if he be a good preacher? who preach at the
Chapel? and if he be a good preacher, and a good liver too, Madam--I
must inquire after that: for I love, but I must need say, that the
clergy should practise what they preach.
very right, Sir; but that be not so often the case as be to be wish.
Morebe the pity, Madam. but I have a great veneration for the clergy in
general. it be more a satire upon human nature than upon the cloth, if
we suppose those who have the good opportunity to do good, less perfect
than other people. for my part, I donot love professional any more than
national reflections.--But I keep the lady in her closet. my gout make
I rude.
then up from my seat stump I--what do you call these window-curtain,
Madam?
stuff-damask, Sir.
it look mighty well, truly. I like it well than silk. it be warm
to be sure, and much fitter for lodging in the country; especially for
people in year. the bed be in a pretty state.
it be neat and clean, Sir: thatbe all we pretend to.
ay, mighty well--very well--a silk camblet, I think--very well, truly!--i
be sure my wife will like it. but we would not turn the lady out of her
lodging for the world. the other two apartment will do for we at
present.
then stump towards the closet, over the door of which hang a
picture--what picture be that--oh! I see; a St. Cecilia!
a common print, Sir!
pretty well, pretty well! it be after an italian master.--I would not
for the world turn the lady out of her apartment. we can make shift with
the other two, repeat I, louder still: but yet mumblingly hoarse: for I
have as great regard to uniformity in accent, as to my word.
o Belford! to be so near my angel, think what a painful constraint I be
under.
I be resolve to fetch she out, if possible: and pretend to be
go--you cannot agree as to any time, Mrs. Moore, when we can have this
third room, can you?--not that [whisper I, loud enough to be hear in
the next room; not that] I would incommode the lady: but I would tell my
wife when about--and woman, you know, Mrs. Moore, love to have every
thing before they of this nature.
Mrs. Moore (say my charmer) [and never do her voice sound so harmonious
to I: oh! how my heart bound again! it even talk to I, in a
manner; for I think I hear, as well as feel, its unruly flutter; and
every vein about I seem a pulse; Mrs. Moore] you may acquaint the
gentleman, that I shall stay here only for two or three day at most,
till I receive an answer to a letter I have write into the country; and
rather than be your hindrance, I will take up with any apartment a pair
of stair higher.
not for the world!--Not for the world, young lady! cry i.--my wife, as
I love she, should lie in a garret, rather than put such a considerate
young lady, as you seem to be, to the least inconveniency.
she open not the door yet; and I say, but since you have so much
goodness, Madam, if I could but just look into the closet as I stand, I
could tell my wife whether it be large enough to hold a cabinet she much
value, and ill have with she wherever she go.
then my charmer open the door, and blaze upon I, as it be, in a
flood of light, like what one might imagine would strike a man, who, bear
blind, have by some propitious power be bless with his sight, all at
once, in a meridian sun.
upon my soul, I never be so strangely affect before. I have much ado
to forbear discover myself that instant: but, hesitatingly, and in
great disorder, I say, look into the closet and around it, there be
room, I see, for my wife's cabinet; and it have many jewel in it of high
price; but, upon my soul, [for I could not forbear swearing, like a
puppy: habit be a cursed thing, Jack--] nothing so valuable as a lady I
see, can be bring into it.
she start, and look at I with terror. the truth of the compliment,
as far as I know, have take dissimulation from my accent.
I see it be impossible to conceal myself long from she, any more than
(from the violent impulse of my passion) to forbear manifest myself.
I unbutton therefore my cape, I pull off my flapt slouch hat; I
throw open my great coat, and, like the devil in Milton [an odd
comparison though!]--
I start up in my own form divine,
touch'd by the beam of her celestial eye,
more potent than Ithuriel's spear!--
now, Belford, for a similitude--now for a likeness to illustrate the
surprising scene, and the effect it have upon my charmer, and the
gentlewoman!--but nothing be like it, or equal to it. the plain fact
can only describe it, and set it off--thus then take it.
she no soon see who it be, than she give three violent scream; and,
before I could catch she in my arm, (as I be about to do the moment I
discover myself,) down she sink at my foot in a fit; which make I
curse my indiscretion for so suddenly, and with so much emotion,
reveal myself.
the gentlewoman, see so strange an alteration in my person, and
feature, and voice, and dress, cry out, Murder, help! murder, help! by
turn, for half a dozen time run. this alarm the house, and up
run two servant maid, and my servant after they. I cry out for water
and hartshorn, and every one fly a different way, one of the maid as
fast down as she come up; while the gentlewoman run out of one room into
another, and by turn up and down the apartment we be in, without
meaning or end, wring her foolish hand, and not know what she do.
up then come run a gentleman and his sister, fetch, and bring in
by the maid, who have run down, and have let in a cursed crab old
wretch, hobble with his gout, and mumble with his hoarse
break-toothed voice, who be metamorphose all at once into a lively,
gay young fellow, with a clear accent, and all his tooth, she would have
it, that I be neither more nor less than the devil, and could not keep
her eye from my foot, expect, no doubt, every minute to see it
discover itself to be cleave.
for my part, I be so intent upon restore my angel, that I regard
nobody else. and, at last, she slowly recover motion, with bitter
sigh and sob, (only the white of her eye however appear for some
moment,) I call upon she in the tender accent, as I kneel by she,
my arm support her head, my angel! my charmer! my Clarissa! look upon
I, my dear life!--I be not angry with you; I will forgive you, my
well beloved.
the gentleman and his sister know not what to make of all this: and the
less, when my fair-one, recover her sight, snatch another look at
I; and then again groan, and faint away.
I throw up the closet-sash for air, and then leave she to the care of the
young gentlewoman, the same notable Miss Rawlins, who I have hear of at
the Flask: and to that of Mrs. Moore; who by this time have recover
herself; and then retire to one corner of the room, I make my servant
pull off my gouty stocking, brush my hat, and loop it up into the usual
smart cock.
I then stept to the closet to Mr. Rawlins, whom, in the general
confusion, I have not much minded before.--Sir, say I, you have an
uncommon scene before you. the lady be my wife, and no gentleman's
presence be necessary here but my own.
I beg pardon, Sir; if the lady be your wife, I have no business here.
but, Sir, by her concern at see you--
Pray, Sir, none of your if's and butbe, I beseech you: nor your concern
about the lady's concern. you be a very unqualified judge in this
cause; and I beg of you, Sir, to oblige I with your absence. the woman
only be proper to be present on this occasion, add I; and I think
myself oblige to they for their care and kind assistance.
'tis well he make not another word: for I find my chol begin to rise.
I could not bear, that the fine neck, and arm, and foot, in the world,
should be expose to the eye of any man live but mine.
I withdraw once more from the closet, find she beginning to recover,
lest the sight of I too soon should throw she back again.
the first word she say, look round she with great emotion, be, oh!
hide I, hide I! be he gone?--oh! hide me!--is he go?
Sir, say Miss Rawlins, come to I with an air both peremptory and
assure, this be some surprising case. the lady cannot bear the sight of
you. what you have do be well know to yourself. but another such fit
will probably be she last. it would be but kind therefore for you to
retire.
it behove I to have so notable a person of my party; and the rather as
I have disoblige her impertinent brother.
the dear creature, say I, may well, be concerned to see I. if you,
Madam, have a husband who love you as I love she, you would not, I be
confident, fly from he, and expose yourself to hazard, as she do
whenever she have not all her way--and yet with a mind not capable of
intentional evil--but mother-spoilt!--this be her fault, and all her
fault: and the more inexcusable it be, as I be the man of her choice, and
have reason to think she love I above all the man in the world.
here, Jack, be a story to support to the lady; face to face too!*
* and here, Belford, lest thou, through inattention, should be surprised
at my assurance, let I remind thee (and that, thus, by way of marginal
observation, that I may not break in upon my narrative) that this my
intrepidity concert (as I have from time to time acquaint thee) in
apprehension of such an event as have fall out. for have not the dear
creature already pass for my wife before no less than four worthy
gentleman of family and fortune?** and before Mrs. Sinclair, and her
household, and Miss Partington? and have she not agree to her uncle's
expedient, that she should pass for such, from the time of Mr. Hickman's
application to that uncle;*** and that the worthy Capt. Tomlinson should
be allow to propagate that belief: as he have actually report to two
family (they possibly to more); purposely that it might come to the
ear of James Harlowe; and serve for a foundation for uncle John to build
his reconciliation-scheme upon? and canst thou think that nothing be
mean by all this contrivance? and that I be not still far prepare
to support my story?
** see Vol. IV. Letter IV. towards the conclusion.
*** ibid. Letter XVI.
ibid.
indeed, I little think, at the time that I form these precautionary
scheme, that she would ever have be able, if willing, to get out of my
hand. all that I hop I should have occasion to have recourse to they
for, be only, in case I should have the courage to make the grand
attempt, and should succeed in it, to bring the dear creature [and this
out of tenderness to she, for what attention do I ever yet pay to the
grief, the execration, the tear of a woman I have triumph over?] to
bear I in her sight: to expostulate with I, to be pacify by my plea,
and by my own future hope, found upon the reconciliatory-project, upon
my reiterated vow, and upon the Captain's assurance. since in that
case, to forgive I, to have go on with I, for a week, would have be
to forgive I, to have go on with I, for ever. and that, have my
eligible life of honour take place, her trial would all have be then
over: and she would have know nothing but gratitude, love, and joy, to
the end of one of our life. for never would I, never could I, have
abandon such an admirable creature as this. Thou know I never be a
sordid villain to any of her inferior--her inferior, I may say--for who
be not her inferior?
you speak like a gentleman; you look like a gentleman, say Miss
Rawlins--but, Sir, this be a strange case; the lady see to dread the
sight of you.
no wonder, Madam; take she a little on one side, near to Mrs. Moore.
I have three time already forgive the dear creature--but this be
jealousy!--there be a spice of that in it--and of phrensy too [whisper
I, that it might have the face of a secret, and of consequence the more
engage their attention]--but our story be too long.
I then make a motion to go to my beloved. but they desire that I would
walk into the next room; and they would endeavour to prevail upon she to
lie down.
I beg that they would not suffer she to talk; for that she be
accustom to fit, and, when in this way, would talk of any thing that
come uppermost: and the more she be suffer to run on, the bad she
be; and if not keep quiet, would fall into raving: which might possibly
hold she a week.
the promise to keep she quiet; and I withdraw into the next room;
order every one down but Mrs. Moore and Miss Rawlins.
she be full of exclamation! unhappy creature! miserable! ruin! and
undo! she call herself; wrung her hand, and beg they would assist
she to escape from the terrible evil she should otherwise be make to
suffer.
they preach patience and quietness to she; and would have have she to
lie down: but she refuse; sink, however, into an easy chair; for she
tremble so she could not stand.
by this time, I hop, that she be enough recover to bear a presence
that it behove I to make her bear; and fear she would throw out
something in her exclamation, that would still more disconcert I, I
go into the room again.
o there he be! say she, and throw her apron over her face--I cannot see
him!--i cannot look upon him!--Begone, begone! touch I not!--
for I take her struggle hand, beseech she to be pacify; and
assure she, that I would make all up with she upon her own term and
wish.
Base man! say the violent lady, I have no wish, but never to behold
you more! why must I be thus pursue and haunted? have you not make I
miserable enough already?--despoile of all succour and help, and of
every friend, I be content to be poor, low, and miserable, so I may
live free from your persecution.
Miss Rawlins star at I [a confident slut this Miss Rawlins, think
I]: so do Mrs. Moore. I tell you so! whispering say I, turn to the
woman; shake my head with a face of great concern and pity; and then to
my charmer, my dear creature, how you rave! you will not easily recover
from the effect of this violence. have patience, my love. be pacify;
and we will coolly talk this matter over: for you expose yourself, as
well as I: these lady will certainly think you have fall among
robber, and that I be the chief of they.
so you be! so you be! stamp, her face still cover [she think of
Wednesday night, no doubt]; and, sigh as if her heart be break,
she put her hand to her forehead--I shall be quite distracted!
I will not, my dear love, uncover your face. you shall not look upon
I, since I be so odious to you. but this be a violence I never think
you capable of.
and I would have press her hand, as I hold it, with my lip; but she
draw it from I with indignation.
unhand I, Sir, say she. I will not be touch by you. leave I to my
fate. what right, what title, have you to persecute I thus?
what right, what title, my dear!--but this be not a time--I have a letter
from Captain Tomlinson--here it be--offer it to her--
I will receive nothing from your hand--tell I not of Captain
Tomlinson--tell I not of any body--you have no right to invade I thus--
once more leave I to my fate--have you not make I miserable enough?
I touch a delicate string, on purpose to set she in such a passion
before the woman, as might confirm the intimation I have give of a
phrensical disorder.
what a turn be here!--lately so happy--nothing want but a
reconciliation between you and your friends!--that reconciliation in such
a happy train--shall so slight, so accidental an occasion be suffer to
overturn all our happiness?
she start up with a trembling impatience, her apron fall from her
indignant face--now, say she, that thou darest to call the occasion
slight and accidental, and that I be happily out of thy vile hand, and
out of a house I have reason to believe as vile, traitor and wretch as
thou art, I will venture to cast an eye upon thee--and oh! that it be
in my power, in mercy to my sex, to look thee first into shame and
remorse, and then into death!
this violent tragedy-speech, and the high manner in which she utter it,
have its desire effect. I look upon the woman, and upon she by turn,
with a pity eye; and they shake their wise head, and besought I to
retire, and she to lie down to compose herself.
this hurricane, like other hurricane, be presently allay by a shower.
she throw herself once more into her armed chair, and beg pardon of
the woman for her passionate excess; but not of I: yet I be in hope,
that when compliment be stir, I should have come in for a share.
indeed, Ladies, say I, [with assurance enough, thou'lt say,] this
violence be not natural to my beloved's temper--misapprehension--
Misapprehension, wretch!--and want I excuse from thee!
Bu what a scorn be every lovely feature agitated!
then turn her face from I, I have not patience, o thou guileful
betrayer, to look upon thee! begone! begone! with a face so
unblushing, how dar thou appear in my presence?
I think then, that the character of a husband oblige I to be angry.
you may one day, Madam, repent this treatment:--by my soul, you may. you
know I have not deserve it of you--you know--I have not.
do I know you have not?--Wretch! do I know--
you do, Madam--and never do man of my figure and consideration, [I
think it be proper to throw that in] meet with such treatment--
she lift up her hand: indignation keep she silent.
but all be of a piece with the charge you bring against I of despoil
you of all succour and help, of make you poor and low, and with other
unprecedented language. I will only say, before these two gentlewoman,
that since it must be so, and since your former esteem for I be turn
into so rivet an aversion, I will soon, very soon, make you entirely
easy. I will be gone:--i will leave you to your own fate, as you call
it; and may that be happy!--only, that I may not appear to be a spoiler,
a robber indeed, let I know whither I shall send your apparel, and every
thing that belong to you, and I will send it.
send it to this place; and assure I, that you will never molest I more;
never more come near I; and that be all I ask of you.
I will do so, Madam, say I, with a dejected air. but do I ever think I
should be so indifferent to you?--however, you must permit I to insist
on your reading this letter; and on your seeing Captain Tomlinson, and
hear what he have to say from your uncle. he will be here by-and-by.
donot trifle with I, say she in an imperious tone--do as you offer. I
will not receive any letter from your hand. if I see Captain Tomlinson,
it shall be on his own account, not on your's. you tell I you will send
I my apparel--if you would have I believe any thing you say, let this
be the test of your sincerity.--leave I now, and send my thing.
the woman started.--they do nothing but stare; and appear to be more
and more at a loss what to make of the matter between we.
I pretend to be go from she in a pet; but, when I have get to the
door, I turn back; and, as if I have recollect myself--one word more,
my dearest creature!--charming, even in your anger!--o my fond soul! say
I, turn half round, and pull out my handkerchief.--
I believe, Jack, my eye do glisten a little. I have no doubt but they
do. the woman pity I--honest soul! they show they have each of
they a handkerchief as well as I. so, have thou not observe (to give a
familiar illustration,) every man in a company of a dozen, or more,
obligingly pull out his watch, when some one have ask whatbe o'clock?--
as each man of a like number, if one talk of his beard, will fall to
stroke his chin with his four finger and thumb.
one word only, Madam, repeat I, (as soon as my voice have recover its
tone,) I have represent to Captain Tomlinson in the most favourable
light the cause of our present misunderstanding. you know what your
uncle insist upon, and with which you have acquiesced.--the letter in my
hand, [and again I offer it to she,] will acquaint you with what you
have to apprehend from your brother's active malice.
she be go to speak in a high accent, put the letter from she,
with an open palm--Nay, hear I out, Madam--the Captain, you know, have
report our marriage to two different person. it be come to your
brother's ear. my own relation have also hear of it.--letter be
bring I from town this morning, from Lady Betty Lawrance, and Miss
Montague. here they be. [I pull they out of my pocket, and offer
they to she, with that of the Captain; but she hold back she still open
palm, that she might not receive they.] Reflect, Madam, I beseech you,
reflect upon the fatal consequence with which this, your high
resentment, may be attend.
ever since I know you, say she, I have be in a wilderness of doubt
and error. I bless God that I be out of your hand. I will transact for
myself what relate to myself. I dismiss all your solicitude for me.--
be I not my own mistress?--have you any title?--
the woman stared--[the devil stare ye, think i!--can ye do nothing but
stare?]--It be high time to stop she here.
I raise my voice to drown her's.--You use, my dearest creature, to have
a tender and apprehensive heart.--you never have so much reason for such a
one as now.
let I judge for myself, upon what I shall see, not upon what I shall
hear.--do you think I shall ever?--
I dread she go on--I must be hear, Madam, (raise my voice still
higher,)--you must let I read one paragraph or two out of this letter to
you, if you will not read it yourself--
begone from I, man!--begone from I with thy letter! what pretence
hast thou for torment I thus? what right?--what title?--
Dearest creature! what question you ask!--question that you can as well
answer yourself--
I can, I will, and thus I answer them--
still louder I raise my voice.--She be overborne.--sweet soul! it
would be hard, think I, [and yet I be very angry with she,] if such a
spirit as thine cannot be bring to yield to such a one as mine!
I lower my voice on her silence. all gentle, all intreative, my
accent. my head bow--one hand hold out--the other on my honest heart.
--For heaven's sake, my dear creature, resolve to see Captain
Tomlinson with temper. he would have come along with I, but I be
willing to try to soften your mind first on this fatal misapprehension,
and this for the same of your own wish. for what be it otherwise to
I, whether your friend be, or be not, reconcile to us?--do I want
any favour from them?--For your own mind's sake, therefore, frustrate not
Captain Tomlinson's negociation. that worthy gentleman will be here in
the afternoon; Lady Betty will be in town, with my cousin Montague, in a
day or two.--they will be your visiter. I beseech you do not carry this
misunderstanding so far, as that Lord M. and Lady Betty, and Lady Sarah,
may know it. [how considerable this make I look to the woman!] Lady
Betty will not let you rest till you consent to accompany she to her own
seat--and to that lady may you safely intrust your cause.
again, upon my pausing a moment, she be go to break out. I like not
the turn of her countenance, nor the tone of her voice--'and think
thou, base wretch,' be the word she do utter: I again raise my
voice, and drown her's.--Base wretch, madam?--you know that I have not
deserve the violent name you have call I. word so opprobrious from
a mind so gentle!--but this treatment be from you, madam?--from you, whom
I love more than my own soul!--by that soul, I swear that I do.--[the
woman look upon each other--they seem pleased with my ardour.--women,
whether wife, maid, or widow, love ardour: even Miss Howe, thou
know, speak up for ardours,*]--nevertheless, I must say, that you
have carry matter too far for the occasion. I see you hate me--
* see Vol. IV. letter XXIX. and XXXIV.
she be just go to speak--if we be to separate for ever, in a strong
and solemn voice, proceed I, this island shall not long be trouble
with I. mean time, only be pleased to give these letter a perusal, and
consider what be to be say to your uncle's friend, and what he be to say
to your uncle.--Any thing will I come into, (renounce I, if you will,)
that shall make for your peace, and for the reconciliation your heart be
so lately set upon. but I humbly conceive, that it be necessary that you
should come into well temper with I, be it but to give a favourable
appearance to what have pass, and weight to any future application to
your friend, in whatever way you shall think proper to make it.
I then put the letter into her lap, and retire into the next apartment
with a low bow, and a very solemn air.
I be soon follow by the two woman. Mrs. Moore withdraw to give the
fair perverse time to read they: Miss Rawlins for the same reason, and
because she be send for home.
the widow besought her speedy return. I join in the same request; and
she be ready enough to promise to oblige we.
I excuse myself to Mrs. Moore for the disguise I have appear in at
first, and for the story I have invent. I tell she that I hold myself
oblige to satisfy she for the whole floor we be upon; and for an upper
room for my servant, and that for a month certain.
she make many scruple, and beg she might not be urge, on this head,
till she have consult Miss Rawlins.
I consent; but tell she, that she have take my earnest, and I hop
there be no room for dispute.
just then Miss Rawlins return, with an air of eager curiosity; and
have be tell what have pass between Mrs. Moore and I, she give
herself air of office immediately: which I humour, plainly perceive
that if I have she with I I have the other.
she wish, if there be time for it, and if it be not quite
impertinent in she to desire it, that I would give Mrs. Moore and her a
brief history of an affair, which, as she say, bear the face of novelty,
mystery, and surprise. for sometimes it look to she as if we be
marry; at other time that point appear doubtful; and yet the lady
do not absolutely deny it, but, upon the whole, think herself highly
injure.
I say that our's be a very particular case.--That, be I to acquaint
they with it, some part of it would hardly appear credible. but,
however, as they seem hardly to be person of discretion, I would give
they a brief account of the whole; and this in so plain and sincere a
manner, that it should clear up, to their satisfaction, every thing that
have pass, or might hereafter pass between we.
they sit down by I and throw every feature of their face into
attention. I be resolve to go as near the truth as possible, lest any
thing should drop from my spouse to impeach my veracity; and yet keep in
view what pass at the Flask.
it be necessary, although thou know my whole story, and a good deal of
my view, that thou shouldst be apprize of the substance of what I tell
they.
'I give they, in as concise a manner as I be able, this history of our
family, fortune, alliance, antipathy, her brother's and mine
particularly. I aver the truth of our private marriage.' the
Captain's letter, which I will enclose, will give thee my reason for
that. and, besides, the woman might have propose a parson to I by way
of compromise. 'I tell they the condition my spouse have make I swear
to; and to which she hold I, in order, I say, to induce I the soon
to be reconcile to her relation.
'I own, that this restraint make I sometimes ready to fly out.' and
Mrs. Moore be so good as to declare, that she do not much wonder at it.
thou art a very good sort of woman, Mrs. Moore, think I.
as Miss Howe have actually detect our mother, and might possibly find
some way still to acquaint her friend with her discovery, I think it
proper to prepossess they in favour of Mrs. Sinclair and her two niece.
I say, 'they be gentlewoman bear; that they have not bad heart; that
indeed my spouse do not love they; they have once take the liberty to
blame she for her over-niceness with regard to I. People, I say, even
good people, who know themselves to be guilty of a fault they have no
inclination to mend, be too often least patient when tell of it; as
they could less bear than other to be think indifferently of.'
too often the case, they own.
'Mrs. Sinclair's house be a very handsome house, and fit to receive the
first quality, [true enough, Jack!] Mrs. Sinclair be a woman very easy
in her circumstances:--a widow gentlewoman, as you, Mrs. Moore, are.--
Lets lodging, as you, Mrs. Moore, do.--Once have well prospect as you,
Mrs. Moore, may have have: the relict of Colonel Sinclair;--you, Mrs.
Moore, might know Colonel Sinclair--he have lodging at Hampstead.'
she have hear of the name.
'oh! he be relate to the good family in Scotland!--And his widow be
not to be reflect upon because she let lodging you know, Mrs. Moore--
you know, Miss Rawlins.'
very true, and very true.--And they must need say, it do not look quite
so pretty, in such a lady as my spouse, to be so censorious.
a foundation here, think I, to procure these woman's help to get back
the fugitive, or their connivance, at least, at my doing so; as well as
for anticipate any future information from Miss Howe.
I give they a character of that virago; and intimate, 'that for a head
to contrive mischief, and a heart to execute it, she have hardly her equal
in her sex.'
to this Miss Howe it be, Mrs. Moore say, she suppose, that my spouse
be so desirous to dispatch a man and horse, by day-dawn, with a letter
she write before she go to bed last night, propose to stay no long
than till she have receive an answer to it.
the very same, say I; I know she would have immediate recourse to she.
I should have be but too happy, could I have prevent such a letter
from pass, or so to have it manage, as to have it give into Mrs.
Howe's hand, instead of her daughter's. woman who have live some time
in the world know well, than to encourage such skittish prank in young
wife.
let I just stop to tell thee, while it be in my head, that I have since
give will. his cue to find out where the man live who be go with the
fair fugitive's letter; and, if possible, to see he on his return,
before he see she.
I tell the woman, 'I despair that it would ever be well with we while
Miss Howe have so strange an ascendancy over my spouse, and remain
herself unmarried. and until the reconciliation with her friend could
be effect; or a still happy event--as I should think it, who be the
last male of my family; and which my foolish vow, and her rigour, have
hitherto'--
here I stopt, and look modest, turn my diamond ring round my finger;
while goody Moore look mighty significant, call it a very particular
case; and the maiden fan away, and primm'd, and purs'd, to show that
what I have say need no farth explanantion.
'I tell they the occasion of our present difference. I avow the
reality of the fire; but own, that I would have make no scruple of
break the unnatural oath she have bind I in, (have a husband's
right on my side,) when she be so accidentally fright into my arm;
and I blame myself excessively, that I do not; since she think fit to
carry her resentment so high, and have the injustice to suppose the fire
to be a contrivance of mine.'
Nay, for that matter, Mrs. Moore say, as we be married, and madam be
so odd--every gentleman would not--and stopt there Mrs. Moore.
'to suppose I should have recourse to such a poor contrivance, say I,
when I see the dear creature every hour.'--was not this a bold put, Jack?
a most extraordinary case, truly, cry the maiden; fan, yet come
in with her well-but's!--and her sift Pray, sir's!--and she
restrain Enough, Sir's.--flying from the question to the question--her
seat now-and-then uneasy, for fear my want of delicacy should hurt she
abundant modesty; and yet it be difficult to satisfy her super-abundant
curiosity.
'my beloved's jealousy, [and jealousy of itself, to female mind,
account for a thousand unaccountablenesse,] and the imputation of her
half-phrensy, bring upon she by her father's wicked curse, and by the
previous persecution she have undergo from all her family, be what I
dwelt upon, in order to provide against what might happen.'
in short, 'I own against myself most of the offence which I do not
doubt but she would charge I with in their hearing; and as every cause
have a black and white side, I give the bad part of our story the
gentle turn. and when I have do, acquaint they with some of the
content of that letter of Captain Tomlinson which I leave with the lady.
I conclude with James Harlowe, and of Captain Singleton, or of any
sailor-look man.'
this thou wilt see, from the letter itself, be necessary to be do.
here, therefore, thou mayest read it. and a charming letter to my
purpose wilt thou find it to be, if thou giv the least attention to
its content.
to ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDN. JUNE 7.
DEAR SIR,
although I be oblige to be in town to-morrow, or next day at farth,
yet I would not dispense with writing to you, by one of my servant,
(whom I send up before upon a particular occasion,) in order to advertise
you, that it be probable you will hear from some of your own relation on
your [suppose*] nuptial. one of the person, (Mr. Lilburne by name,)
to whom I hint my belief of your marriage, happen to be acquaint
with Mr. Spurrier, Lady Betty Lawrance's steward, and (not be under
any restriction) mention it to Mr. Spurrier, and he to Lady Betty, as a
thing certain; and this, (though I have not the honour to be personally
know to her ladyship,) bring on an inquiry from her ladyship to I by
her gentleman; who come to I in company with Mr. Lilburne, I have no
way but to confirm the report.--And I understand, that Lady Betty take
it amiss that she be not acquaint with so desirable a piece of news
from yourself.
* what be between hook [ ] thou mayest suppose, Jack, I sink upon the
woman, in the account I give they of the content of this letter.
her ladyship, it seem, have business that call she to town [and you will
possibly choose to put she right. if you do, it will, I presume, be in
confidence; that nothing may transpire from your own family to contradict
what I have give out.]
[I have ever be of opinion, that truth ought to be strictly adhere to
on all occasion: and be concerned that I have, (though with so good a
view,) depart from my old maxim. but my dear friend Mr. John Harlowe
would have it so. yet I never know a departure of this kind a single
departure. but, to make the good of it now, allow I, Sir, once more to
beg the lady, as soon as possible, to authenticate the report give out.]
when both you and the lady join in the acknowledgement of your marriage,
it will be impertinent in any one to be inquisitive as to the day or
week. [and if as privately celebrate as you intend, (while the
gentlewoman with whom you lodge be properly instruct, as you say they
be, and who shall actually believe you be marry long ago,) who shall
be able to give a contradiction to my report?]
and yet it be very probable, that minute inquiry will be make; and this
be what render precaution necessary; for Mr. James Harlowe will not
believe that you be marry; and be sure, he say, that you both live
together when Mr. Hickman's application be make to Mr. John Harlowe: and
if you live together any time unmarried, he infer from your character,
Mr. Lovelace, that it be not probable that you would ever marry. and he
leave it to his two uncle to decide, if you even should be marry,
whether there be not room to believe, that his sister be first
dishonour; and if so, to judge of the title she will have to their
favour, or to the forgiveness of any of her family.--I believe, Sir, this
part of my letter have well be keep from the lady.
young Mr. Harlowe be resolve to find this out, and to come at his
sister's speech likewise: and for that purpose set out to-morrow, as I
be well inform, with a large attendance arm; and Mr. Solmes be to be
of the party. and what make he the more earnest to find it out be
this:--mr. John Harlowe have tell the whole family that he will alter, and
new-settle his will. Mr. Antony Harlowe be resolve to do the same by
his; for, it seem, he have now give over all thought of change his
condition, have lately be disappoint in a view he have of that sort
with Mrs. Howe. these two brother generally act in concert; and Mr.
James Harlowe dread (and let I tell you, that he have reason for it, on
my Mr. Harlowe's account) that his young sister will be, at last, more
benefit than he wish for, by the alteration intend. he have already
be endeavour to sound his uncle Harlowe on this subject; and want
to know whether any new application have be make to he on his sister's
part. Mr. Harlowe avoid a direct answer, and express his wish for
a general reconciliation, and his hope that his niece be marry.
this offend the furious young man, and he remind his uncle of
engagement they have all enter into at his sister's go away, not to
be reconcile but by general consent.
Mr. John Harlowe complain to I often of the uncontroulableness of his
nephew; and say, that now that the young man have not any body of whose
superior sense he stand in awe, he observe not decency in his behaviour
to any of they, and this make my Mr. Harlowe still more desirous than
ever of bring his young niece into favour again. I will not say all
I might of this young man's extraordinary rapaciousness:--but one would
think, that these grasp man expect to live for ever!
'I take the liberty but within these two hour to propose to set on foot
(and offer my cover to) a correspondence between my friend and his
daughter-niece, as she still sometimes fondly call she. she be
mistress of so much prudence, I say, that I be sure she could well
direct every thing to its desirable end, than any body else could. but
he say, he do not think himself entirely at liberty to take such a step
at present; and that it be good that he should have it in his power to
say, occasionally, that he have not any correspondence with she, or letter
from she.
'you will see, Sir, from all this, the necessity of keep our treaty an
absolute secret; and if the lady have mention it to her worthy friend
Miss Howe, I hope it be in confidence.'
[and now, Sir, a few line in answer to your' of Monday last.]
[Mr. Harlowe be very well pleased with your readiness to come into his
proposal. but as to what you both desire, that he will be present at the
ceremony, he say, that his nephew watch all his step so narrowly,
that he think it be not practicable (if he be inclinable) to oblige
you: but that he consent, with all his heart, that I should be the
person whom he have stipulate should be privately present at the ceremony
on his part.]
[however, I think, I have an expedient for this, if your lady continue
to be very desirous of her uncle's presence (except he should be more
determined than his answer to I seem to import); of which I shall
acquaint you, and perhaps of what he say to it, when I have the pleasure
to see you in town. but, indeed, I think you have no time to lose. Mr.
Harlowe be impatient to hear, that you be actually one; and I hope I may
carry he down word, when I leave you next, that I see the ceremony
perform.]
[if any obstacle arise from the lady, (from you it cannot,) I shall be
tempt to think a little hardly of her punctilio.]
Mr. Harlowe hop, Sir, that you will rather take pain to avoid, than to
meet, this violent young man. he have the well opinion of you, let I
tell you, Sir, from the account I give he of your moderation and
politeness; neither of which be quality with his nephew. but we have
all of we something to amend.
you cannot imagine how dearly my friend still love this excellent niece
of his.--I will give you an instance of it, which affect I a good
deal---'if once more, say he, (the last time but one we be together,)
I can but see this sweet child grace the upper end of my table, as
mistress of my house, in my allotted month; all the rest of my family
present but as her guest; for so I formerly would have it; and have she
mother's consent for it--' there he stopt; for he be force to turn his
reverend face from I. tear run down his cheek. fain would he have
hide they: but he could not--'yet--yet, say he--how--how--' [poor
gentleman, he perfectly sob,] 'how shall I be able to bear the first
meeting!'
I bless God I be no hard-hearted man, Mr. Lovelace: my eye show to my
worthy friend, that he have no reason to be ashamed of his humanity before
I.
I will put an end to this long epistle. be pleased to make my
compliment acceptable to the most excellent of woman; as well as believe
I to be,
Dear Sir,
your faithful friend, and humble servant,
ANTONY TOMLINSON.
***
during the conversation between I and the woman, I have plant myself at
the farth end of the apartment we be in, over against the door,
which be open; and opposite to the lady's chamber-door, which be shut.
I speak so low that it be impossible for she, at that distance, to hear
what we say; and in this situation I could see if her door be open.
I tell the woman, that what I have mention to my spouse of Lady Betty's
come to town with her niece Montague, and of their intention to visit
my beloved, whom they have never see, nor she they, be real; and that I
expect news of their arrival every hour. I then show they copy of
the other two letter, which I have leave with she; the one from Lady
Betty, the other from my cousin montague.--and here thou mayest read they
if thou wilt.
eternally reproach, eternally upbraid I, be my impertinent
relation. but they be fond of occasion to find fault with I. their
love, their love, Jack, and their dependence on my know good humour, be
their inducement.
to ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WED. MORN. JUNE 7.
DEAR NEPHEW,
I understand that at length all our wish be answer in your happy
marriage. but I think we might as well have hear of it directly from
you, as from the round-about way by which we have be make acquainted
with it. methink, Sir, the power and the will we have to oblige you,
should not expose we the more to your slight and negligence. my brother
have set his heart upon give to you the wife we have all so long wish
you to have. but if you be actually marry at the time you make he
that request (supposing, perhaps, that his gout would not let he attend
you) it be but like you.*--If your lady have her reason to wish it to be
private while the difference between her family and self continue, you
might nevertheless have communicate it to we with that restriction; and
we should have forbear the public manifestation of our joy upon an
event we have so long desire.
* I give Mrs. Moore and Miss Rawlins room to think this reproach just,
Jack.
the distant way we have come to know it be by my steward; who be
acquaint with a friend of Captain Tomlinson, to whom that gentleman
reveal it: and he, it seem, have it from yourself and lady, with such
circumstance as leave it not to be doubt.
I be, indeed, very much disoblige with you: so be Lady Sarah. but I
have a very speedy opportunity to tell you so in person; be oblige to
go to town to my old chancery affair. my cousin Leeson, who be, it
seem, remove to Albemarle-street, have notice of it. I shall be at her
house, where I bespeak your attendance of Sunday night. I have write
to my cousin Charlotte for either she, or her sister, to meet I at
reading, and accompany I to town. I shall stay but a few day; my
business be matter of form only. on my return I shall pop upon Lord
M. at M. Hall, to see in what way his last fit have leave he.
mean time, have tell you my mind on your negligence, I cannot help
congratulate you both on the occasion.--your fair lady particularly,
upon her entrance into a family which be prepared to admire and love she.
my principal intention of write to you (dispense with the necessary
punctilio) be, that you may acquaint my dear new niece, that I will not
be deny the honour of her company down with I into Oxfordshire. I
understand that your propose house and equipage cannot be soon ready.
she shall be with I till they be. I insist upon it. this shall make
all up. my house shall be her own. my servant and equipage she's.
Lady Sarah, who have not be out of her own house for month, will oblige
I with her company for a week, in honour of a niece so dearly beloved,
as I be sure she will be of we all.
be but in lodging in town, neither you nor your lady can require much
preparation.
some time on Monday I hope to attend the dear young lady, to make she my
compliment; and to receive her apology for your negligence: which, and
she go down with I, as I say before, shall be full satisfaction.
mean time, God bless she for her courage, (tell she I say so;) and bless
you both in each other; and that will be happiness to we all--
particularly to
your truly affectionate Aunt,
ELIZ. lawrance.
to ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
DEAR COUSIN,
at last, as we understand, there be some hope of you. now do my good
Lord run over his bead-roll of proverb; of black oxen, wild oat, long
lane, and so forth.
now, Cousin, say I, be your time come; and you will be no long, I hope,
an infidel either to the power or excellence of the sex you have
pretend hitherto so much as undervalue; nor a ridiculer or scoffer at
an institution which all sober people reverence, and all rake, soon or
later, be bring to reverence, or to wish they have.
I want to see how you become your silken fetter: whether the charming
yoke sit light upon your shoulder. if with such a sweet yoke-fellow it
do not, my Lord, and my sister, as well as I, think that you will
deserve a close tie about your neck.
his Lordship be very much displeased, that you have not write he word
of the day, the hour, the manner, and every thing. but I ask he, how he
can already expect any mark of deference or politeness from you? he must
stay, I tell he, till that sign of reformation, among other, appear
from the influence and example of your lady: but that, if ever you will
be good for any thing, it will be quickly see. and, o Cousin, what a
vast, vast journey have you to take from the dreary land of libertinism,
through the bright province of reformation, into the serene kingdom of
happiness!--you have nee to lose no time. you have many a weary step to
tread, before you can overtake those traveller who set out for it from a
less remote quarter. but you have a charming pole-star to guide you;
thatbe your advantage. I wish you joy of it: and as I have never yet
expect any highly complaisant thing from you, I make no scruple to
begin first; but it be purely, I must tell you, in respect to my new
cousin; whose accession into our family we most heartily congratulate and
rejoice in.
I have a letter from Lady Betty. she command either my attendance or my
sister's to my cousin Leeson's. she put Lord M. in hope, that she
shall certainly bring down with she our lovely new relation; for she
say, she will not be deny. his Lordship be the willinger to let I be
the person, as I be in a manner wild to see she; my sister have two
year ago have that honour at Sir Robert Biddulph's. so get ready to
accompany we in our return; except your lady have objection strong enough
to satisfy we all. Lady Sarah long to see she; and say, this accession
to the family will supply to it the loss of her beloved daughter.
I shall soon, I hope, pay my compliment to the dear lady in person: so
have nothing to add, but that I be
your old mad Playfellow and Cousin,
CHARLOTTE MONTAGUE.
***
the woman have read the copy of these two letter, I think that I
might then threaten and swagger--'but very little heart have I, say I,
to encourage such a visit from Lady Betty and Miss Montague to my spouse.
for after all, I be tired out with her strange way. she be not what she
be, and (as I tell she in your hearing, Ladies) I will leave this plaguy
island, though the place of my birth, and though the stake I have in it
be very considerable, and go and reside in France or Italy, and never
think of myself as a married man, nor live like one.'
o dear! say one.
that would be a sad thing! say the other.
Nay, Madam, [turn to Mrs. Moore,]--Indeed, Madam, [to Miss Rawlins,]--
I be quite desperate. I can no long bear such usage. I have have the
good fortune to be favour by the smile of very fine lady, though I
say it [and I look very modest] both abroad and at home--[thou know
this to be true, Jack]. with regard to my spouse here, I have but one
hope leave, (for as to the reconciliation with her friend, I leave, I
scorn they all too much to value that, but for her sake,) and that be,
that if it please God to bless we with child, she might entirely
recover her usual serenity; and we might then be happy. but the
reconciliation her heart be so much set upon, be now, as I hint
before, entirely hopeless--make so, by this rash step of she's, and by
the rash temper she be in; since (as you will believe) her brother and
sister, when they come to know it, will make a fine handle of it against
us both;--affecting, as they do at present, to disbelieve our marriage--
and the dear creature herself too ready to countenance such a disbelief
--as nothing more than the ceremony--as nothing more--hem!--as nothing
more than the ceremony--
here, as thou wilt perceive, I be bashful; for Miss Rawlins, by her
preparatory primness, put I in mind that it be proper to be so--
I turn half round; then face the fan-player, and the matron--you
yourself, lady, know not what to believe till now, that I have tell
you our story; and I do assure you, that I shall not give myself the same
trouble to convince people I hate; people from whom I neither expect nor
desire any favour; and who be determined not to be convince. and what,
pray, must be the issue, when her uncle's friend come, although he seem
to be a truly worthy man? it be not natural for he to say, 'to what
purpose, Mr. Lovelace, should I endeavour to bring about a reconciliation
between Mrs. Lovelace and her friend, by mean of her eld uncle, when
a good understanding be want between yourselves?'--a fair inference,
Mrs. Moore!--A fair inference, Miss rawlins.--and here be the
unhappiness--till she be reconcile to they, this cursed oath, in she
notion, be bind.
the woman seem move; for I speak with great earnestness, though
low--and besides, they love to have their sex, and its favour, appear of
importance to we. they shake their deep head at each other, and look
sorrowful: and this move my tender heart too.
'tis an unheard-of case, Ladies--have she not prefer I to all
mankind--there I stop--and that, resume I, feel for my
handkerchief, be what stagger Captain Tomlinson when he hear of her
flight; who, the last time he see we together, see the most affectionate
couple on earth!--the most affectionate couple on earth!--in the
accent-grievous, repeat I.
out then I pull my handkerchief, and put it to my eye, arise, and
walk to the window--it make I weak than a woman, do I not love
she, as never man love his wife! [I have no doubt but I do, Jack.]
there again I stopt; and resume--charming creature, as you see she be,
I wish I have never behold her face!--excuse I, lady; traverse the
room, and have rub my eye till I suppose they red, I turn to the
woman; and, pull out my letter-case, I will show you one letter--here
it be--read it, Miss Rawlins, if you please--it will confirm to you how
much all my family be prepared to admire she. I be freely treat in
it;--so I be in the two other: but after what I have tell you, nothing
need be a secret to you two.
she take it, with an air of eager curiosity, and look at the seal,
ostentatiously coronete; and at the superscription, read out, to
Robert Lovelace, Esq.--Ay, Madam--Ay, Miss, thatbe my name, [give
myself an air, though I have tell it to they before,] I be not ashamed of
it. my wife's maiden name--unmarried name, I should rather say--fool
that I am!--and I rub my cheek for vexation [Fool enough in
conscience, Jack!] be Harlowe--Clarissa Harlowe--you hear I call she
my Clarissa--
I do--but think it to be a feigned or love-name, say Miss Rawlins.
I wonder what be Miss Rawlins's love-name, Jack. Most of the fair
romancer have in their early womanhood choose love-name. no parson
ever give more real name, than I have give fictitious one. and to
very good purpose: many a sweet dear have answer I a letter for the
sake of own a name which her godmother never give she.
no--it be her real name, I say.
I bid she read out the whole letter. if the spelling be not exact, Miss
Rawlins, say I, you will excuse it; the writer be a lord. but, perhaps,
I may not show it to my spouse; for if those I have leave with she have no
effect upon she, neither will this: and I shall not care to expose my
Lord M. to her scorn. indeed I begin to be quite careless of
consequence.
Miss Rawlins, who could not but be pleased with this mark of my
confidence, look as if she pity I.
and here thou mayest read the letter, no. III.
***
to ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
M. HALL, WEDN. JUNE 7.
COUSIN LOVELACE,
I think you might have find time to let we know of your nuptial be
actually solemnize. I might have expect this piece of civility from
you. but perhaps the ceremony be perform at the very time that you
ask I to be your lady's father--but I should be angry if I proceed in
my guess--and little say be soon amend.
but I can tell you, that Lady Betty Lawrance, whatever Lady Sarah do,
will not so soon forgive you, as I have do. woman resent slight
long than man. you that know so much of the sex (I speak it not,
however, to your praise) might have know that. but never be you before
acquaint with a lady of such an amiable character. I hope there will
be but one soul between you. I have before now say, that I will
disinherit you, and settle all I can upon she, if you prove not a good
husband to she.
may this marriage be crown with a great many fine boy (I desire no
girl) to build up again a family so antient! the first boy shall take
my surname by act of parliament. that be my will.
Lady Betty and niece Charlotte will be in town about business before you
know where you be. they long to pay their compliment to your fair
bride. I suppose you will hardly be at the Lawn when they get to town;
because Greme inform I, you have send no order there for your lady's
accommodation.
Pritchard have all thing in readiness for signing. I will take no
advantage of your slight. indeed I be too much use to they--more
praise to my patience than to your complaisance, however.
one reason for Lady Betty's go up, as I may tell you under the rose,
be, to buy some suitable present for Lady Sarah and all of we to make
on this agreeable occasion.
we would have blaze it away, could we have have timely notice, and
think it would have be agreeable to all round. the like occasion
donot happen every day.
my most affectionate compliment and congratulation to my new niece,
conclude I, for the present, in violent pain, that with all your
heroicalness would make you mad,
your truly affectionate uncle,
M.
***
this letter clench'd the nail. not but that, Miss Rawlins say, she see
I have be a wild gentleman; and, truly she think so the moment she
behold I.
they begin to intercede for my spouse, (so nicely have I turn the
table;) and that I would not go abroad and disappoint a reconciliation
so much wish for on one side, and such desirable prospect on the other
in my own family.
who know, think I to myself, but more may come of this plot, than I
have even promise myself? what a happy man shall I be, if these woman
can be bring to join to carry my marriage into consummation!
lady, you be exceedingly good to we both. I should have some hope,
if my unhappily nice spouse could be bring to dispense with the
unnatural oath she have lay I under. you see what my case be. do you
think I may not insist upon she absolve I from this abominable oath?
will you be so good as to give your advice, that one apartment may serve
for a man and his wife at the hour of retirement?--[modestly put,
Belford!--And let I here observe, that few rake would find a language
so decent as to engage modest woman to talk with he in, upon such
subject.]
they both simper, and look upon one another.
these subject always make woman simper, at least. no need but of the
most delicate hint to they. a man who be gross in a woman's company,
ought to be knock down with a club: for, like so many musical
instrument, touch but a single wire, and the dear soul be sensible
all over.
to be sure, Miss Rawlins learnedly say, play with her fan, a casuist
would give it, that the matrimonial vow ought to supercede any other
obligation.
Mrs. Moore, for her part, be of opinion, that, if the lady own herself
to be a wife, she ought to behave like one.
whatever be my luck, think I, with this all-eyed fair-one, any other
woman in the world, from fifteen to five-and-twenty, would be mine upon
my own term before the morning.
and now, that I may be at hand to take all advantage, I will endeavour,
say I to myself, to make sure of good quarter.
I be your lodger, Mrs. Moore, in virtue of the earnest I have give you
for these apartment, and for any one you can spare above for my
servant. indeed for all you have to spare--for who know what my
spouse's brother may attempt? I will pay you to your own demand; and
that for a month or two certain, (board include,) as I shall or shall
not be your hindrance. take that as a pledge; or in part of payment--
offer she a thirty pound bank note.
she decline take it; desire she might consult the lady first;
add, that she doubt not my honour; and that she would not let she
apartment to any other person, whom she know not something of, while I
and the lady be here.
the Lady! the Lady! from both woman's mouth's continually (which still
imply a doubt in their heart): and not your spouse, and your Lady,
Sir.
I never meet with such woman, think I:--so thoroughly convinced but this
moment, yet already doubt--I be afraid I have a couple of skeptic to
deal with.
I know no reason, I say, for my wife to object to my lodging in the same
house with she here, any more than in town, at Mrs. Sinclair's. but be
she to make such objection, I would not quit possession since it be not
unlikely that the same freakish disorder which bring she to Hampstead,
might carry she absolutely out of my knowledge.
they both seem embarrassed; and look upon one another; yet with such
an air, as if they think there be reason in what I say. and I
declare myself her boarder, as well as lodger; and dinner-time
approach, be not deny to be the former.
LETTER XXV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
I think it be now high time to turn my whole mind to my beloved; who
have have full leisure to weigh the content of the letter I have leave with
she.
I therefore request Mrs. Moore to step in, and desire to know whether
she would be pleased to admit I to attend she in her apartment, on
occasion of the letter I have leave with she; or whether she would favour
I with her company in the dining-room?
Mrs. Moore desire Miss Rawlins to accompany she in to the lady. they
tap at the door, and be both admit.
I cannot but stop here for one minute to remark, though against myself,
upon that security which innocence give, that nevertheless have well
have in it a great mixture of the serpent with the dove. for here,
heedless of all I could say behind she back, because she be satisfied
with her own worthiness, she permit I to go on with my own story,
without interruption, to person as great stranger to she as I; and
who, as stranger to both, might be suppose to lean to the side most
injure; and that, as I manage it, be to mine. a dear, silly soul,
think I, at the time, to depend upon the goodness of her own heart,
when the heart cannot be see into but by its action; and she, to
appearance, a runaway, an eloper, from a tender, a most indulgent
husband!--To neglect to cultivate the opinion of individual, when the
whole world be govern by appearance!
yet what can be expect of an angel under twenty?--She have a world of
knowledge:--knowledge speculative, as I may say, but no experience.--How
should she?--knowledge by theory only be a vague, uncertain light: a will
o' the Wisp, which as often mislead the doubt mind, as put it right.
there be many thing in the world, could a moralizer say, that would
afford inexpressible pleasure to a reflect mind, be it not for the
mixture they come to we with. to be graver still, I have see parent,
[perhaps my own do so,] who delight in those very quality in their
child while young, the natural consequence of which, (too much
indulged and encourage,) make they, as they grow up, the plague of their
hearts.--to bring this home to my present purpose, I must tell thee, that
I adore this charming creature for her vigilant prudence; but yet I would
not, methink, wish she, by virtue of that prudence, which be, however,
necessary to carry she above the device of all the rest of the world, to
be too wise for mine.
my revenge, my swear revenge, be, nevertheless, (adore she as I will,)
uppermost in my heart.--Miss Howe say that my love be a herodian love.*
by my soul, that girlbe a witch! I be half sorry to say, that I find a
pleasure in play the tyrant over what I love. call it an ungenerous
pleasure, if thou wilt: soft heart than mine know it. the woman, to a
woman, know it, and show it too, whenever they be trust with power.
and why should it be think strange, that I, who love they so dearly,
and study they so much, should catch the infection of they?
* see Letter XX. of this volume.
LETTER XXVI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
I will now give thee the substance of the dialogue that pass between
the two woman and the lady. wonder not, that a perverse wife make a
listening husband. the event, however, as thou wilt find, justify the
old observation, that listner seldom hear good of themselves. conscious
of their own demerit, if I may guess by myself, [therebe ingenuousness,
Jack!] and fearful of censure, they seldom find themselves disappoint.
there be something of sense, after all in these proverb, in these
phrase, in this wisdom of nation.
Mrs. Moore be to be the messenger, but Miss Rawlins begin the dialogue.
your spouse, Madam,--[Devil!--only to fish for a negative or affirmative
declaration.]
Cl. my spouse, Madam--
Miss R. Mr. Lovelace, Madam, aver that you be married to he; and
beg admittance, or your company in the dining-room, to talk upon the
subject of the letter he leave with you.
Cl. he be a poor wicked wretch. let I beg of you, Madam, to favour I
with your company as often as possible while he be hereabouts, and I
remain here.
Miss R. I shall with pleasure attend you, Madam: but, methink, I could
wish you would see the gentleman, and hear what he have to say on the
subject of the letter.
Cl. my case be a hard, a very hard one--I be quite bewildered!-i know
not what to do!--I have not a friend in the world that can or will help
I! yet have none but friend till I know that man!
Miss R. the gentleman neither look nor talk like a bad man.--not a
very bad man, as man go.
as man go! poor Miss Rawlins, think I; and dost thou know how man go?
Cl. o Madam, you know he not! he can put on the appearance of an
angel of light; but have a black, a very black heart!
Poor I!--
Miss R. I could not have think it, truly! but man be very
deceitful, now-a-day.
now-a-days!--a fool!--have not her history-book tell she that they be
always so?
Mrs. Moore, sigh. I have find it so, I be sure, to my cost!--
who know but in her time poor goody Moore may have meet with a Lovelace,
or a Belford, or some such vile fellow? my little harum-scarum beauty
know not what strange history every woman live, who have have the
least independence of will, could tell she, be such to be as
communicative as she be. but herebe the thing--I have give her cause
enough of offence; but not enough to make she hold her tongue.
Cl. as to the letter he have leave with I, I know not what to say to
they: but be resolve never to have any thing to say to he.
Miss R. if, Madam, I may be allow to say so, I think you carry
matter very far.
Cl. have he be make a bad cause a good one with you, Madam?--That he
can do with those who know he not. indeed I hear he talk, think
not what he say, and be indifferent about it.--but what account do he
give of himself?
I be pleased to hear this. to arrest, to stop her passion, think I,
in the height of its career, be a charming presage.
then the busy Miss Rawlins fish on, to find out from she either a
confirmation or disavowal of my story--be Lord M. my uncle? do I court
she at first with the allowance of her friend, her brother except?
have I a rencounter with that brother? be she so persecute in favour of
a very disagreeable man, one solme, as to induce she to throw herself
into my protection?
none of these be deny. all the objection she could have make, be
stifle, or keep in, by the consideration, (as she mention,) that she
should stay there but a little while, and that her story be too long;
but Miss Rawlins would not be thus easily answer.
Miss R. he say, Madam, that he could not prevail for marriage, till he
have consent, under a solemn oath, to separate bed, while your family
remain unreconciled.
Cl. o the wretch! what can be still in his head, to endeavour to pass
these story upon stranger?
so no direct denial, think I.--Admirable!--All will do by-and-by.
Miss R. he have own that an accidental fire have frighten you very
much on Wednesday night--and that--and that--an accidental fire have
frighten you--very much frighten you--last Wednesday night!
then, after a short pause--in short, he own, that he have take some
innocent liberty, which might have lead to a breach of the oath you have
impose upon he; and that this be the cause of your displeasure.
I would have be glad to see how my charmer then looked.--To be sure she
be at a loss in her own mind, to justify herself for resent so highly
an offence so trifling.--She hesitate--do not presently speak.--When
she do, she wish that she, (Miss Rawlins,) might never meet with any
man who would take such innocent liberty with she.
Miss Rawlins push far.
your case, to be sure, Madam, be very particular: but if the hope of a
reconciliation with your own friend be make more distant by your leaving
he, give I leave to say, that 'tis pity--'tis pity--[I suppose the
maiden then primm'd, fann'd, and blush'd--'tis pity] the oath cannot be
dispense with; especially as he own he have not be so strict a liver.
I could have go in and kiss the girl.
Cl. you have hear his story. mine, as I tell you before, be too long,
and too melancholy: my disorder on see the wretch be too great; and my
time here be too short, for I to enter upon it. and if he have any end
to serve by his own vindication, in which I shall not be a personal
sufferer, let he make himself appear as white as an angel, with all my
heart.
my love for she, and the excellent character I give she, be then
plead.
Cl. specious seducer!--only tell I if I cannot get away from he by
some back way?
how my heart then go pit-a-pat, to speak in the female dialect.
Cl. let I look out--[i hear the sash lift up.]--Whither do that
path lead? be there no possibility of get to a coach? surely he
must deal with some fiend, or how could he have find I out? cannot I
steal to some neighbouring house, where I may be conceal till I can get
quite away? you be good people!--I have not be always among such!--
o help I, help I, lady! [with a voice of impatience,] or I be ruin!
then pause, be that the way to Hendon? [point, I suppose.] be
Hendon a private place?--the Hampstead coach, I be tell, will carry
passenger thither.
Mrs. Moore. I have an honest friend at Mill-Hill, [devil fetch she!
think I,] where, if such be your determination, Madam, and if you think
yourself in danger, you may be safe, I believe.
Cl. any where, if I can but escape from this man! Whither do that
path lead, out yonder?--What be that town on the right hand call?
Mrs. Moore. Highgate, Madam.
Miss R. on the side of the heath be a little village, call north-end.
a kinswoman of mine live there. but her house be small. I be not sure
she could accommodate such a lady.
Devil take she too! think I,--I imagine that I have make myself a
well interest in these woman. but the whole sex love plot--and
plotter too, Jack.
Cl. a barn, an outhouse, a garret, will be a palace to I, if it will
but afford I a refuge from this man!
her sens, think I, be much lively than mine.--what a devil have
I do, that she should be so very implacable? I tell thee, Belford, all
I do: be there any thing in it so very much amiss? such prospect of a
family reconciliation before she too! to be sure she be a very sensible
lady!
she then espy my new servant walk under the window, and ask if he
be not one of mine?
will. be on the look-out for old grime, [so be the fellow call whom
my beloved have dispatch to Miss Howe.] and be tell that the man she
see be my servant; I see, say she, that there be no escaping, unless
you, Madam, [to Miss Rawlins, I suppose,] can befriend I till I can get
far. I have no doubt that the fellow be plant about the house to
watch my step. but the wicked wretch his master have no right to
controul I. he shall not hinder I from go where I please. I will
raise the town upon he, if he molest I. dear lady, be there no
back-door for I to get out at while you hold he in talk?
Miss R. give I leave to ask you, Madam, be there no room to hope for
accommodation? have you not well see he? he certainly love you
dearly: he be a fine gentleman; you may exasperate he, and make matter
more unhappy for yourself.
Cl. o Mrs. Moore! o Miss Rawlins! you know not the man! I wish not to
see his face, nor to exchange another word with he as long as I live.
Mrs. Moore. I donot find, Miss Rawlins, that the gentleman have
misrepresent any thing. you see, Madam, [to my Clarissa,] how
respectful he be; not to come in till permit. he certainly love you
dearly. pray, Madam, let he talk to you, as he wish to do, on the
subject of his letter.
very kind of Mrs. Moore!--Mrs. Moore, think I, be a very good woman. I
do not curse she then.
Miss Rawlins say something; but so low that I could not hear what it
be. thus it be answer.
Cl. I be greatly distressed! I know not what to do!--But, Mrs. Moore,
be so good as to give his letter to he--here they are.--Be please to
tell he, that I wish he and Lady Betty and Miss Montague a happy
meeting. he never can want excuse to they for what have happen, any
more than pretence to those he would delude. tell he, that he have
ruin I in the opinion of my own friend. I be for that reason the
less solicitous how I appear to his.
Mrs. Moore then come to I; and I, be afraid that something would pass
mean time between the other two, which I should not like, take the
letter, and enter the room, and find they retire into the closet; my
beloved whispering with an air of earnestness to Miss Rawlins, who be
all attention.
her back be towards I; and Miss Rawlins, by pull her sleeve, give
intimation of my be there--can I have no retirement uninvade, Sir,
say she, with indignation, as if she be interrupt in some talk her
heart be in?--what business have you here, or with me?--You have your
letter; have you not?
Lovel. I have, my dear; and let I beg of you to consider what you be
about. I every moment expect Captain Tomlinson here. upon my soul, I
do. he have promise to keep from your uncle what have happen: but what
will he think if he find you hold in this strange humour?
Cl. I will endeavour, Sir, to have patience with you for a moment or
two, while I ask you a few question before this lady, and before Mrs.
Moore, [who just then come in,] both of whom you have prejudice in your
favour by your specious stories:--will you say, Sir, that we be marry
together? Lay your hand upon your heart, and answer I, be I your wed
wife?
I be go too far, think I, to give up for such a push as this, home
one as it be.
my dear soul! how can you put such a question? it be either for your
honour or my own, that it should be doubted?--surely, surely, Madam, you
cannot have attend to the content of Captain Tomlinson's letter.
she complain often of want of spirit throughout our whole contention,
and of weakness of person and mind, from the fit she have be throw
into: but little reason have she for this complaint, as I think, who be
able to hold I to it, as she do. I own that I be excessively
concerned for her several time.
you and I! Vilest of men!--
my name be Lovelace, Madam--
therefore it be that I call you the vilest of man. [be this pardonable,
jack!]--you and I know the truth, the whole truth.--I want not to clear
up my reputation with these gentlewomen:--that be already lose with every
one I have most reason to value: but let I have this new speciman of what
you be capable of--say, wretch, (say, Lovelace, if thou hadst rather,)
art thou really and truly my wed husband?--say; answer without
hesitation.
she tremble with impatient indignation; but have a wildness in her
manner, which I take some advantage of, in order to parry this cursed
thrust. and a cursed thrust it be; since, have I positively aver it,
she would never have believe any thing I say: and have I own that I
be not married, I have destroy my own plot, as well with the woman as
with she; and could have no pretence for pursue she, or hinder she
from go wheresoever she please. not that I be ashamed to aver it,
have it be consistent with policy. I would not have thee think I such
a milk-sop neither.
Lovel. my dear love, how wildly you talk! what would you have I
answer? it be necessary that I should answer? may I not re-appeal this
to your own breast, as well as to Captain Tomlinson's treaty and letter?
you know yourself how matter stand between us.--And Captain tomlinson--
Cl. o wretch! be this an answer to my question? say, be we married,
or be we not?
Lovel. what make a marriage, we all know. if it be the union of two
heart, [there be a turn, Jack!] to my utmost grief, I must say that we
be not; since now I see you hate I. if it be the completion of
marriage, to my confusion and regret, I must own we be not. but, my
dear, will you be pleased to consider what answer half a dozen people
whence you come, could give to your question? and do not now, in the
disorder of your mind, and the height of passion, bring into question
before these gentlewoman a point you have acknowledge before those who
know we well.
I would have whisper she about the treaty with her uncle, and about the
content of the Captain's letter; but, retreat, and with a reject
hand, keep thy distance, man, cry the dear insolent--to thine own heart
I appeal, since thou evad I thus pitifully!--i own no marriage with
thee!--bear witness, Ladies, I do not. and cease to torment I, cease to
follow me.--surely, surely, faulty as I have be, I have not deserve to
be thus persecuted!--I resume, therefore, my former language: you have no
right to pursue I: you know you have not: begone then, and leave I to
make the good of my hard lot. o my dear, cruel father! say she, in a
violent fit of grief [fall upon her knee, and clasp her uplifted
hand together] thy heavy curse be complete upon thy devoted daughter!
I be punish, dreadfully punish, by the very wretch in whom I have
place my wicked confidence!
by my soul, Belford, the little witch with her word, but more by her
manner, move I! wonder not then that her action, her grief, her tear,
set the woman into the like compassionate manifestation.
have I not a cursed task of it?
the two woman withdraw to the further end of the room, and whisper, a
strange case! there be no phrensy here--I just hear say.
the charming creature throw her handkerchief over her head and neck,
continue kneeling, her back towards I, and her face hide upon a chair,
and repeatedly sob with grief and passion.
I take this opportunity to step to the woman to keep they steady.
you see, lady, [whispering,] what an unhappy man I be! you see what a
spirit this dear creature has!--all, all owe to her implacable
relation, and to her father's curse.--A curse upon they all! they have
turn the head of the most charming woman in the world!
ah! Sir, Sir, reply Miss Rawlins, whatever be the fault of her
relation, all be not as it should be between you and she. 'tis plain
she do not think herself marry: 'tis plain she do not: and if you
have any value for the poor lady, and would not totally deprive she of
her sens, you have well withdraw, and leave to time and cool
consideration the event in your favour.
she will compel I to this at last, I fear, Miss Rawlins; I fear she
will; and then we be both undo: for I cannot live without she; she
know it too well: and she have not a friend who will look upon she: this
also she know. our marriage, when her uncle's friend come, will be
prove incontestably. but I be ashamed to think I have give her room
to believe it no marriage: thatbe what she harp upon!
well, 'tis a strange case, a very strange one, say Miss Rawlins; and be
go to say far, when the angry beauty, come towards the door,
say, Mrs. Moore, I beg a word with you. and they both step into the
dining-room.
I see she just before put a parcel into her pocket; and follow they
out, for fear she should slip away; and step to the stair, that she
might not go by I, Will., cry I, aloud [though I know he be not near]
--Pray, child, to a maid, who answer, call either of my servant to I.
she then come up to I with a wrathful countenance: do you call your
servant, Sir, to hinder I, between you, from go where I please?
donot, my dear life, misinterpret every thing I do. can you think I
so mean and unworthy as to employ a servant to constrain you?--I call he
to send to the public-house, or inn in this town, to inquire after
Captain Tomlinson, who may have alight at some one of they, and be now,
perhaps, needlessly adjust his dress; and I would have he come, be
he to be without clothe, God forgive I! for I be stab to the heart
by your cruelty.
Answer be return, that neither of my servant be in the way.
not in the way, say I!--Whither can the dog be go?
o Sir! with a scornful air; not far, Iwill warrant. one of they be under
the window just now; accord to order, I suppose, to watch my steps--
but I will do what I please, and go where I please; and that to your
face.
God forbid, that I should hinder you in any thing that you may do with
safety to yourself!
now I verily believe that her design be to slip out, in pursuance of the
closet-whispering between she and Miss Rawlins; perhaps to Miss Rawlins's
house.
she then stept back to Mrs. Moore, and give she something, which prove
to be a diamond ring, and desire she [not whisperingly, but with an air
of defiance to I] that that might be a pledge for she, till she defray
her demand; which she should soon find mean to do; have no more money
about she than she might have occasion for before she come to an
acquaintance's.
Mrs. Moore would have decline take it; but she would not be deny;
and then, wipe her eye, she put on her glove--nobody have a right to
stop I, say she!--I will go!--whom should I be afraid of?--Her very
question, charming creature! testify her fear.
I beg pardon, Madam, [turn to Mrs. Moore, and courtesying,] for the
trouble I have give you.--i beg pardon, Madam, to Miss Rawlins,
[courtesye likewise to her,]--you may both hear of I in a happy
hour, if such a one fall to my lot--and God bless you both!--struggle
with her tear till she sob--and away be trip.
I step to the door: I put it to; and set my back against it, take
her struggle hand--my dear life! my angel! say I, why will you thus
distress me?--Is this the forgiveness which you so solemnly promised?--
unhand I, sir!--you have no business with I! you have no right over
I! you know you have not.
but whither, whither, my dear love, would you go!--think you not that
I will follow you, be it to the world's end!--whither would you go?
well do you ask I, whither I would go, who have be the occasion that I
have not a friend left!--but God, who know my innocence, and my upright
intention, will not wholly abandon I when I be out of your power; but
while I be in it, I cannot expect a gleam of the divine grace or favour
to reach I.
how severe be this!--how shockingly severe!--out of your presence, my
angry fair-one, I can neither hope for the one nor the other. as my
cousin Montague, in the letter you have read, observe, you be my polar
star and my guide, and if ever I be to be happy, either here or
hereafter, it must be in and by you.
she would then have open the door. but I, respectfully oppose she,
begone, man! begone, Mr. Lovelace! say she, stop not in my way. if you
would not that I should attempt the window, give I passage by the door;
for, once more, you have no right to detain I.
your resentment, my dear life, I will own to be well ground. I
will acknowledge that I have be all in fault. on my knee, [and down I
dropt,] I ask your pardon. and can you refuse to ratify your own
promise? look forward to the happy prospect before we. see you not my
Lord M. and Lady Sarah longing to bless you, for bless I, and their
whole family? can you take no pleasure in the promise visit of Lady
Betty and my cousin Montague? and in the protection they offer you, if
you be dissatisfied with mine? have you no wish to see your uncle's
friend? stay only till Captain Tomlinson come. receive from he the
news of your uncle's compliance with the wish of both.
she seem altogether distressed; be ready to sink; and force to lean
against the wainscot, as I kneel at her foot. a stream of tear at
last burst from her less indignant eye. Good heaven! say she, lift
up her lovely face, and clasp hand, what be at last to be my destiny?
deliver I from this dangerous man; and direct I--I know not what to do,
what I can do, nor what I ought to do!
the woman, as I have own our marriage to be but half complete, hear
nothing in this whole scene to contradict (not flagrantly to contradict)
what I have assert. they believe they see in her return temper, and
stagger resolution, a love for I, which her indignation have before
suppress; and they join to persuade she to tarry till the Captain
come, and to hear his proposal; represent the danger to which she
would be expose; the fatigue she might endure; a lady of her
appearance, unguarde, unprotected. on the other hand they dwelt upon my
declare contrition, and on my promise; for the performance of which
they offer to be bind. so much have my kneeling humility affect
they.
woman, Jack, tacitly acknowledge the inferiority of their sex, in the
pride they take to behold a kneeling lover at their foot.
she turn from I, and throw herself into a chair.
I arise and approach she with reverence. my dear creature, say I,
and be proceed, but, with a face glow with conscious dignity, she
interrupt I--ungenerous, ungrateful Lovelace! you know not the value
of the heart you have insult! nor can you conceive how much my soul
despise your meanness. but meanness must ever be the portion of the
man, who can act vilely!
the woman believe we be likely to be on well term, retire. the
dear perverse oppose their going; but they see I be desirous of their
absence; and when they have withdraw, I once more throw myself at her
foot, and acknowledge my offence; implored her forgiveness for this one
time, and promise the most exact circumspection for the future.
it be impossible for she she say to keep her memory and forgive I.
what hadst thou see in the conduct of Clarissa Harlowe, that should
encourage such an insult upon she as thou didst dare to make? how meanly
must thou think of she, that thou couldst presume to be so guilty, and
expect she to be so weak as to forgive thee?
I besought she to let I read over to her Captain Tomlinson's letter. I
be sure it be impossible she could have give it the requisite
attention.
I have give it the requisite attention, say she; and the other letter
too. so that what I say be upon deliberation. and what have I to fear
from my brother and sister? they can but complete the ruin of my
fortune with my father and uncle. let they and welcome. you, Sir, I
thank you, have lower my fortune; but, I bless God, that my mind be
not sink with my fortune. it be, on the contrary, raise above fortune,
and above you; and for half a word they shall have the estate they envy
I for, and an acquittal from I of all the expectation from my family
that may make they uneasy.
I lift up my hand and eye in silent admiration of she.
my brother, Sir, may think I ruin; to the praise of your character, he
may think it impossible to be with you and be innocent. you have but too
well justify their harsh censure by every part of your conduct.
but now that I have escape from you, and that I be out of the reach of
your mysterious device, I will wrap myself up in mine own innocence,
[and then the passionate beauty fold her arm about herself,] and leave
to time, and to my future circumspection, the re-establishment of my
character. leave I then, Sir, pursue I not!--
Good Heaven! [interrupt her]--and all this, for what?--had I not
yield to your entreaty, (forgive I, Madam,) you could not have
carry far your resentments--
Wretch! be it not crime enough to give occasion for those entreaty?
wouldst thou make a merit to I, that thou didst not utterly ruin she
whom thou ought to have protect? begone, man! (turn from I, she
face crimson over with passion.)--see I no more!--i cannot bear thee
in my sight!--
dearest, dearest creature!
if I forgive thee, Lovelace--and there she stopped.--to endeavour,
proceed she, to endeavour by premeditation, by low contrivance, by
cry of Fire! to terrify a poor creature who have consent to take a
wretched chance with thee for life!
for Heaven's sake,--offering to take her repulse hand, as she be
fly from I towards the closet.
what hast thou to do to plead for the sake of Heaven in thy favour!--o
darkest of human mind!
then turn from I, wipe her eye, and again turn towards I, but
her sweet face half aside, what difficulty hast thou involve I in!
that thou hadst a plain path before thee, after thou hadst betray I
into thy power.--at once my mind take in the whole of thy crooked
behaviour; and if thou think of Clarissa Harlowe as her proud heart
tell she thou ought to think of she, thou wilt seek thy fortune
elsewhere. how often hast thou provoke I to tell thee, that my soul
be above thee!
for Heaven's sake, Madam, for a soul's sake, which it be in your power
to save from perdition, forgive I the past offence. I be the great
villain on earth if it be a premeditated one; yet I presume not to
excuse myself. on your mercy I throw myself. I will not offer at any
plea but that of penitence. see but captain tomlinson.--see but Lady
Betty and my cousin; let they plead for I; let they be guarantee for
my honour.
if Captain Tomlinson come while I stay here, I may see he; but as for
you, sir--
Dearest creature! let I beg of you not to aggravate my offence to the
Captain when he come. let I beg of you--
what ask thou? it be not that I shall be of party against myself?
that I shall palliate--
do not charge I, Madam, interrupt I, with villainous premeditation!
--Do not give such a construction to my offence as may weaken your
uncle's opinion--as may strengthen your brother's--
she fling from I to the further end of the room, [she could go no
far,] and just then Mrs. Moore come up, and tell she that dinner be
ready, and that she have prevail upon Miss Rawlins to give she her
company.
you must excuse I, Mrs. Moore, say she. Miss Rawlins I hope also will
--but I cannot eat--I cannot go down. as for you, Sir, I suppose you
will think it right to depart hence; at least till the gentleman come
whom you expect.
I respectfully withdraw into the next room, that Mrs. Moore might
acquaint she, (I durst not myself,) that I be her lodger and boarder,
as, whisperingly, I desire that she would; and meet Miss Rawlins in
the passage, Dearest Miss Rawlins, say I, stand my friend; join with Mrs.
Moore to pacify my spouse, if she have any new flight upon my have
take lodging, and intend to board here. I hope she will have more
generosity than to think of hinder a gentlewoman from let she
lodging.
I suppose Mrs. Moore, (whom I leave with my fair-one,) have apprize she of
this before Miss Rawlins go in; for I hear she say, while I withhold
Miss rawlins,--'no, indeed: he be much mistaken--surely he do not think
I will.'
they both expostulate with she, as I could gather from bit and scrap
of what they say; for they speak so low, that I could not hear any
distinct sentence, but from the fair perverse, whose anger make she
louder. and to this purpose I hear she deliver herself in answer to
different part of their talk to her:--'Good Mrs. Moore, dear Miss
Rawlins, press I no further:--I cannot sit down at table with he!'
they say something, as I suppose in my behalf--'O the insinuating
wretch! what defence have I against a man, who, go where I will, can
turn every one, even of the virtuous of my sex, in his favour?'
after something else say, which I hear not distinctly--'This be
execrable cunning!--were you to know his wicked heart, he be not without
hope of engage you two good person to second he in the vilest of his
machination.'
how come she, (think I, at the instant,) by all this penetration? my
devil surely do not play I booty. if I think he do, I would marry,
and live honest, to be even with he.
I suppose then they urge the plea which I hint to Miss Rawlins at
go in, that she would not be Mrs. Moore's hindrance; for thus she
express herself--'He will no doubt pay you your own price. you need
not question his liberality; but one house cannot hold us.--why, if it
would, do I fly from he, to seek refuge among stranger?'
then, in answer to somewhat else they pleaded--''ti a mistake, Madam;
I be not reconcile to he, I will believe nothing he say. have he not
give you a flagrant speciman of what a man he be, and of what his be
capable, by the disguise you see he in? my story be too long, and my
stay here will be but short; or I could convince you that my resentment
against he be but too well found.'
I suppose that they plead for her leave for my dining with they; for
she said--'I have nothing to say to that: it be your own house, Mrs.
Moore--it be your own table--you may admit whom you please to it, only
leave I at my liberty to choose my company.'
then, in answer, as I suppose, to their offer of send she up a plate--
'a bit of bread, if you please, and a glass of water; thatbe all I can
swallow at present. I be really very much discompose. see you not how
bad I be? indignation only could have support my spirits!--
'I have no objection to his dining with you, Madam;' add she, in
reply, I suppose, to a farth question of the same nature--'but I will
not stay a night in the same house where he lodge.'
I presume Miss Rawlins have tell she that she would not stay dinner: for
she said,--'let I not deprive Mrs. Moore of your company, Miss Rawlins.
you will not be displeased with his talk. he can have no design upon
you.'
then I suppose they plead what I might say behind she back, to make my
own story good:--'I care not what he say or what he think of I.
repentance and amendment be all the harm I wish he, whatever become of
I!'
by her accent she weep when she speak these last word.
they come out both of they wipe their eye; and would have persuade I
to relinquish the lodging, and to depart till her uncle's friend come.
but I know well. I do not care to trust the Devil, well as she and
Miss Howe suppose I to be acquaint with he, for find she out
again, if once more she escape I.
what I be most afraid of be, that she will throw herself among her own
relation; and, if she do, I be confident they will not be able to
withstand her affect eloquence. but yet, as thou'lt see, the
Captain's letter to I be admirably calculate to obviate my
apprehension on this score; particularly in that passage where it be
say, that her uncle think not himself at liberty to correspond directly
with she, or to receive application from she--but through Captain
Tomlinson, as be strongly imply.*
* see Letter XXIV. of this volume.
I must own, (notwithstanding the revenge I have so solemnly vow,) that
I would very fain have make for she a merit with myself in her return
favour, and have owe as little as possible to the mediation of Captain
Tomlinson. my pride be concern in this: and this be one of my
reason for not bring he with me.--Another be, that, if I be
oblige to have recourse to his assistance, I should be well able, (by
visit without he,) to direct he what to say or do, as I should find
out the turn of her humour.
I be, however, glad at my heart that Mrs. Moore come up so seasonably
with notice that dinner be ready. the fair fugitive be all in alt.
she have the excuse for withdraw, I have time to strengthen myself; the
Captain have time to come; and the lady to cool.--Shakspeare advise
well:
oppose not rage, whilst rage be in its force;
but give it way awhile, and let it waste.
the rise deluge be not stopt with dam;
those it o'erbear, and drown the hope of harvest.
but, wisely manag'd, its divided strength
be sluic'd in channel, and securely drain'd:
and when its force be spend, and unsupply'd,
the residue with mound may be restrain'd,
and dry-shod we may pass the naked ford.
I go down with the woman to dinner. Mrs. Moore send her fair boarder
up a plate, but she only eat a little bit of bread, and drink a glass of
water. I doubt not but she would keep her word, when it be once go
out. be she not an Harlowe? she seem to be enure herself to
hardship, which at the bad she can never know; since, though she
should ultimately refuse to be oblige to I, or (to express myself more
suitable to my own heart,) to oblige I, every one who see she must
befriend she.
but let I ask thee, Belford, art thou not solicitous for I in relation
to the content of the letter which the angry beauty have write and
dispatch away by man and horse; and for what may be Miss Howe's answer
to it? art thou not ready to inquire, whether it be not likely that Miss
Howe, when she know of her saucy friend's flight, will be concern
about her letter, which she must know could not be at Wilson's till after
that flight, and so, probably, would fall into my hands?--
all these thing, as thou'lt see in the sequel, be provide for with as
much contrivance as human foresight can admit.
I have already tell thee that will. be upon the lookout for old Grimes--
old Grimes be, it seem, a gossiping, sottish rascal; and if Will. can
but light of he, Iwill answer for the consequence; for have not will. been
my servant upwards of seven year?
LETTER XXVII
MR. LOVELACE
[in CONTINUATION.]
we have at dinner, besides Miss Rawlins, a young widow-niece of Mrs.
Moore, who be come to stay a month with her aunt--bevis her name; very
forward, very lively, and a great admirer of I, I assure you;--hange
smirkingly upon all I say; and prepare to approve of every word before
I speak: and who, by the time we have half-din, (by the help of what she
have collect before,) be as much acquainted with our story as either of
the other two.
as it behove I to prepare they in my favour against whatever might come
from Miss Howe, I improve upon the hint I have throw out above-stair
against that mischief-make lady. I represent she to be an arrogant
creature, revengeful, artful, enterprising, and one who, have she be a
man, would have swear and curse, and commit rape, and play the
devil, as far as I know: [I have no doubt of it, Jack!] but who, by
advantage of a female education, and pride and insolence, I believe be
personally virtuous.
Mrs. Bevis allow, that there be a vast deal in education--and in
pride too, she say. while Miss Rawlins come with a prudish God forbid
that virtue should be owe to education only! however, I declare that
Miss Howe be a subtle contriver of mischief; one who have always be my
enemy: her motif I know not: but despise the man whom her mother be
desirous she should have, one Hickman; although I do not directly aver
that she would rather have have I; yet they all immediately imagine that
that be the ground of her animosity to I, and of her envy to my
beloved: and it be pity, they say, that so fine a young lady do not
see through such a pretended friend.
and yet nobody [add I] have more reason than she to know by experience
the force of a hatred found in envy; as I hint to you above, Mrs.
Moore, and to you, Miss Rawlins, in the case of her sister Arabella.
I have compliment make to my person and talent on this occasion: which
give I a singular opportunity of display my modesty, by disclaim
the merit of they, with a no, indeed!--i should be very vain, lady, if
I think so. while thus abuse myself, and exalt Miss Howe, I get
their opinion both for modesty and generosity; and have all the grace
which I disclaim throw in upon I besides.
in short, they even oppress that modesty, which (to speak modestly of
myself) their praise create, by disbelieve all I say against myself.
and, truly, I must need say, they have almost persuade even I myself,
that Miss Howe be actually in love with I. I have often be willing to
hope this. and who know but she may? the Captain and I have agree,
that it shall be so insinuated occasionally--and whatbe thy opinion,
Jack? she certainly hat Hickman; and girl who be disengage seldom
hate, though they may not love: and if she have rather have another, why
not that other ME? for be I not a smart fellow, and a rake? and do not
your sprightly lady love your smart fellow, and your rake? and where
be the wonder, that the man who could engage the affection of Miss
Harlowe, should engage those of a lady (with she* alas's) who would be
honour in be deem her second?
* see Letter XX. of this volume, where Miss Howe say, alas! my dear, I
know you love he!
nor accuse thou I of SINGULAR vanity in this presumption, Belford. Wert
thou to know the secret vanity that lurk in the heart of those who
disguise or cloke it well, thou wouldst find great reason to acquit, at
least, to allow for I: since it be generally the conscious over-fulness
of conceit, that make the hypocrite most upon his guard to conceal it.
yet with these fellow, proudly humble as they be, it will break out
sometimes in spite of their cloke, though but in self-deny,
compliment-beg self-degradation.
but now I have undervalue myself, in apologize to thee on this
occasion, let I use another argument in favour of my observation, that
the lady generally prefer a rake to a sober man; and of my presumption
upon it, that Miss Howe be in love with I: it be this: common fame say,
that Hickman be a very virtuous, a very innocent fellow--a male-virgin, I
warrant!--an odd dog I always think he. now woman, Jack, like not
novice. two maidenhead meet together in wedlock, the first child
must be a fool, be their common aphorism. they be pleased with a love
of the sex that be found in the knowledge of it. reason good; novice
expect more than they can possibly find in the commerce with they. the
man who know they, yet have ardour for they, to borrow a word from Miss
Howe,* though those ardour be generally owe more to the devil within
he, than to the witch without he, be the man who make they the high
and most grateful compliment. he know what to expect, and with what to
be satisfied.
* see Vol. IV. letter XXIX. and XXXIV.
then the merit of a woman, in some case, must be ignorance, whether real
or pretend. the man, in these case, must be an adept. will it then
be wonder at, that a woman prefer a libertine to a novice?--while she
expect in the one the confidence she want, she consider the other and
herself as two parallel line, which, though they run side by side, can
never meet.
yet in this the sex be generally mistake too; for these sheepish fellow
be sly. I myself be modest once; and this, as I have elsewhere hint
to thee,* have well enable I to judge of both sex.
* see Vol. III. Letter XXIII.
but to proceed with my narrative:
have thus prepare every one against any letter should come from Miss
Howe, and against my beloved's messenger return, I think it proper to
conclude that subject with a hint, that my spouse could not bear to have
any thing say that reflect upon Miss Howe; and, with a deep sigh,
add, that I have be make very unhappy more than once by the ill-will
of lady whom I have never offend.
the widow Bevis believe that might very easily be. will. both without
and within, [for I intend he shall fall in love with widow Moore's maid,
and have save one hundred pound in my service, at least,] will be great
help, as thing may happen.
LETTER XXVIII
MR. LOVELACE
[in CONTINUATION.]
we have hardly din, when my coachman, who keep a look-out for Captain
Tomlinson, as Will. do for old grime, conduct hither that worthy
gentleman, attend by one servant, both on horseback. he alight. I
go out to meet he at the door.
Thou know his solemn appearance, and unblushe freedom; and yet canst
not imagine what a dignity the rascal assume, nor how respectful to he
I be.
I lead he into the parlour, and present he to the woman, and they to
he. I think it highly import I (as they might still have some
diffidence about our marriage, from my fair-one's home-push question
on that head) to convince they entirely of the truth of all I have
assert. and how could I do this well, than by dialogue a little
with he before they?
Dear Captain, I think you long; for I have have a terrible conflict with
my spouse.
Capt. I be sorry that I be later than my intention--my account with my
banker--[therebe a dog, Jack!] take I up long time to adjust than I
have foresee [all the time pull down and stroke his ruffle]: for
there be a small difference between we--only twenty pound, indeed,
which I have take no account of.
the rascal have not see twenty pound of his own these ten year.
then have we between we the character of the Harlowe family; I rail
against they all; the Captain take his dear friend Mr. John Harlowe's
part; with a not so fast!--not so fast, young gentleman!--and the like
free assumption.
he account for their animosity by my defiance: no good family, have
such a charming daughter, would care to be defy, instead of court: he
must speak his mind: never be a double-tongue man.--He appeal to the
lady, if he be not right?
he get they on his side.
the correction I have give the brother, he tell I, must have aggravate
matter.
how valiant this make I look to the women!--The sex love we mettle
fellow at their heart.
be that as it would, I should never love any of the family but my spouse;
and want nothing from they, I would not, but for her sake, have go
so far as I have go towards a reconciliation.
this be very good of I; Mrs. Moore say.
very good indeed; Miss Rawlins.
good;--it be more than good; it be very generous; say the widow.
Capt. why so it be, I must need say: for I be sensible that Mr.
Lovelace have be rudely treat by they all--more rudely, than it could
have be imagine a man of his quality and spirit would have put up
with. but then, Sir, [turn to I,] I think you be amply reward in
such a lady; and that you ought to forgive the father for the daughter's
sake.
Mrs. Moore. indeed so I think.
Miss R. so must every one think who have see the lady.
Widow B. a fine lady, to be sure! but she have a violent spirit; and
some very odd humour too, by what I have hear. the value of good
husband be not know till they be lose!
her conscience then draw a sigh from she.
Lovel. nobody must reflect upon my angel!--an angel she be--some little
blemish, indeed, as to she over-hasty spirit, and as to her unforgive
temper. but this she have from the Harlowes; instigate too by that Miss
Howe.--But her innumerable excellency be all her own.
Capt. Ay, talk of spirit, therebe a spirit, now you have name Miss
Howe! [and so I lead he to confirm all I have say of that vixen.] yet
she be to be pity too; look with meaning at I.
as I have already hint, I have before agree with he to impute secret
love occasionally to Miss Howe, as the good mean to invalidate all that
might come from she in my disfavour.
Capt. Mr. Lovelace, but that I know your modesty, or you could give a
reason--
Lovel. look down, and very modest--I cannot think so, Captain--but
let we call another cause.
every woman present could look I in the face, so bashful be I.
Capt. well, but as to our present situation--only it maynot be proper--
look upon I, and round upon the woman.
Lovel. o captain, you may say any thing before this company--only,
Andrew, [to my new servant, who attend we at table,] do you withdraw:
this good girl [look at the maid-servant] will help we to all we want.
Away go Andrew: he want not his cue; and the maid seem pleased at
my honour's preference of she.
Capt. as to our present situation, I say, Mr. Lovelace--why, Sir, we
shall be all untwisted, let I tell you, if my friend Mr. John Harlowe
be to know what that be. he would as much question the truth of your
be marry, as the rest of the family do.
here the woman perk up their ear; and be all silent attention.
Capt. I ask you before for particular, Mr. Lovelace; but you
decline give them.--indeed it may not be proper for I to be
acquaint with them.--But I must own, that it be past my comprehension,
that a wife can resent any thing a husband can do (that be not a breach
of the peace) so far as to think herself justify for elope from he.
Lovel. Captain tomlinson:--sir--I do assure you, that I shall be
offend--I shall be extremely concerned--if I hear that word elope
mention again--
Capt. your nicety and your love, Sir, may make you take offence--but it
be my way to call every thing by its proper name, let who will be
offended--
Thou canst not imagine, Belford, how brave and how independent the rascal
look.
Capt. when, young gentleman, you shall think proper to give we
particular, we will find a word for this rash act in so admirable a
lady, that shall please you better.--you see, Sir, that be the
representative of my dear friend Mr. John Harlowe, I speak as freely as I
suppose he would do, if present. but you blush, Sir--I beg your pardon,
Mr. Lovelace: it become not a modest man to pry into those secret,
which a modest man cannot reveal.
I do not blush, Jack; but deny not the compliment, and look down:
the woman seem delighted with my modesty: but the widow Bevis be more
inclined to laugh at I than praise I for it.
Capt. whatever be the cause of this step, (I will not again, Sir, call
it elopement, since that harsh word wound your tenderness,) I cannot but
express my surprise upon it, when I recollect the affectionate behaviour,
to which I be witness between you, when I attend you last. over-love,
Sir, I think you once mention--but over-love [smile] give I leave to
say, Sir, it be an odd cause of quarrel--few ladies--
Lovel. dear captain!--and I try to blush.
the woman also try; and be more used to it, succeed better.--Mrs.
Bevis indeed have a red-hot countenance, and always blush.
Miss R. it signify nothing to mince the matter: but the lady above as
good as deny her marriage. you know, Sir, that she do; turn to
I.
Capt. deny her marriage! heaven! how then have I impose upon my
dear friend Mr. John Harlowe!
Lovel. Poor dear!--but let not her veracity be call into question.
she would not be guilty of a wilful untruth for the world.
then I have all their praise again.
Lovel. Dear creature!--she think she have reason for her denial. you
know, Mrs. Moore; you know, Miss Rawlins; what I own to you above as my
vow.
I look down, and, as once before, turn round my diamond ring.
Mrs. Moore look awry, and with a leer at Miss Rawlins, as to her
partner in the hint-at reference.
Miss Rawlins look down as well as I; her eyelid half close, as if
mumble a pater-noster, meditate her snuff-box, the distance between
her nose and chin lengthen by a close-shut mouth.
she put I in mind of the pious Mrs. Fetherstone at Oxford, whom I
point out to thee once, among other grotesque figure, at St. Mary's
church, whither we go to take a view of her two sister: her eye shut,
not dare to trust her heart with they open; and but just half-rear
her lid, to see who the next comer be; and fall they again, when her
curiosity be satisfied.
the widow Bevis gaze, as if on the hunt for a secret.
the Captain look archly, as if half in the possession of one.
Mrs. Moore at last break the bashful silence. Mrs. Lovelace's behaviour,
she say, could be no otherwise so well account for, as by the ill
office of that Miss Howe; and by the severity of her relation; which
might but too probably have affect her head a little at time: add,
that it be very generous in I to give way to the storm when it be up,
rather than to exasperate at such a time.
but let I tell you, Sirs, say the widow Bevis, that be not what one
husband in a thousand would have do.
I desire, that no part of this conversation might be hint to my
spouse; and look still more bashfully. her great fault, I must own,
be over-delicacy.
the Captain leer round he; and say, he believe he could guess from
the hint I have give he in town (of my over-love) and from what have now
pass, that we have not consummate our marriage.
o Jack! how sheepishly then look, or endeavour to look, thy friend!
how primly goody Moore! how affectedly Miss rawlins!--while the honest
widow Bevis gaze around her fearless; and though only simper with her
mouth, her eye laugh outright, and seem to challenge a laugh from
every eye in the company.
he observe, that I be a phoenix of a man, if so; and he could not but
hope that all matter would be happily accommodate in a day or two; and
that then he should have the pleasure to aver to her uncle, that he be
present, as he might say, on our wedding-day.
the woman seem all to join in the same hope.
ah, Captain! ah, lady! how happy should I be, if I could bring my dear
spouse to be of the same mind!
it would be a very happy conclusion of a very knotty affair, say the
widow Bevis; and I see not why we may not make this very night a merry
one.
the Captain superciliously smile at I. he see plainly enough, he say,
that we have be at child's play hitherto. a man of my character, who
could give way to such a caprice as this, must have a prodigious value
for his lady. but one thing he would venture to tell I; and that be
this--that, however desirous young skittish lady might be to have their
way in this particular, it be a very bad setting-out for the man; as it
give his bride a very high proof of the power she have over he: and he
would engage, that no woman, thus humour, ever value the man the more
for it; but very much the contrary--and there be reason to be give
why she should not.
well, well, Captain, no more of this subject before the ladies.--One
feel [shrug my shoulder in a bashful try-to-blush manner] that one
be so ridiculous--I have be punish enough for my tender folly.
Miss Rawlins have take her fan, and would need hide her face behind it--
I suppose because her blush be not quite ready.
Mrs. Moore hem, and look down; and by that give she' over.
while the jolly widow, laugh out, praise the Captain as one of
Hudibras's metaphysician, repeat,
he know whatbe what, and thatbe as high
as metaphysic wit can fly.
this make Miss Rawlins blush indeed:--fie, fie, Mrs. Bevis! cry she,
unwilling, I suppose, to be think absolutely ignorant.
upon the whole, I begin to think that I have not make a bad exchange of
our profess mother, for the unprofesse Mrs. Moore. and indeed the
woman and I, and my belove too, all mean the same thing: we only differ
about the manner of come at the propose end.
LETTER XXIX
MR. LOVELACE
[in CONTINUATION.]
it be now high time to acquaint my spouse, that Captain Tomlinson be
come. and the rather, as the maid tell we, that the lady have ask she
if such a gentleman [describe he] be not in the parlour?
Mrs. Moore go up, and request, in my name, that she would give we
audience.
but she return, report my beloved's desire, that Captain Tomlinson
would excuse she for the present. she be very ill. her spirit be
too weak to enter into conversation with he; and she must lie down.
I be vex, and at first extremely disconcerted. the Captain be vex
too. and my concern, thou mayest believe, be the great on his
account.
she have be very much fatigued, I own. her fit in the morning must
have disorder she: and she have carry her resentment so high, that it
be the less wonder she should find herself low, when her raise spirit
have subside. very low, I may say; if sinking be proportion to
rising; for she have be lift up above the standard of a common
mortal.
the Captain, however, send up his own name, that if he could be admit
to drink one dish of tea with she, he should take it for a favour: and
would go to town, and dispatch some necessary business, in order, if
possible, to leave his morning free to attend she.
but she plead a violent head-ache; and Mrs. Moore confirm the plea to
be just.
I would have have the Captain lodge there that night, as well in
compliment to he, as introductory to my intention of enter myself
upon my new-take apartment: but his hour be of too much importance to
he to stay the evening.
it be indeed very inconvenient for he, he say, to return in the
morning; but he be willing to do all in his power to heal this breach,
and that as well for the sake of I and my lady, as for that of his dear
friend Mr. John Harlowe; who must not know how far this misunderstanding
have go. he would therefore only drink one dish of tea with the lady
and I.
and accordingly, after he have do so, and I have have a little private
conversation with he, he hurry away.
his fellow have give he, in the interim, a high character to Mrs.
Moore's servant: and this report by the widow Bevis (who be no
proud woman, be hail fellow well meet, as the saying be, with all her
aunt's servant) he be a fine gentleman, a discreet gentleman, a man of
sense and breeding, with they all: and it be pity, that, with such great
business upon his hand, he should be oblige to come again.
my life for your's, audibly whisper the widow Bevis, there be humour as
well as head-ache in somebody's decline to see this worthy gentleman.--
Ah, Lord! how happy might some people be if they would!
no perfect happiness in this world, say I, very gravely, and with a
sigh; for the widow must know that I hear she. if we have not real
unhappiness, we can make it, even from the overflowing of our good
fortune.
very true, and very true, the two widow. a charming observation! Mrs.
Bevis. Miss Rawlins smile her assent to it; and I think she call I
in her heart charming man! for she profess to be a great admirer of
moral observation.
I have hardly take leave of the Captain, and sit down again with the
woman, when Will. come; and call I out, 'Sir, Sir,' say he, grin
with a familiarity in his look as if what he have to say entitled he to
take liberty; 'I have get the fellow down!--i have get old Grimes--hah,
hah, hah, hah!--He be at the Lower Flask--almost in the condition of
David's sow, and please your honour--[the dog himself not much well]
here be his letter--from--from Miss Howe--ha, ha, ha, ha,' laugh the
varlet; hold it fast, as if to make condition with I, and to excite
my praise, as well as my impatience.
I could have knock he down; but he would have his say out--'old grime
know not that I have the letter--I must get back to he before he miss
it--I only make a pretence to go out for a few minute--but--but'--and
then the dog laugh again--'he must stay--old grime must stay--till I
go back to pay the reckoning.'
D--n the prater; grin rascal! the letter! the letter!
he gather in his wide mothe, as he call it, and give I the letter;
but with a strut, rather than a bow; and then sidle off like one of
widow sorling's dunghill cock, exult after a great feat perform.
and all the time that I be hold up the billet to the light, to try to
get at its content without break the seal, [for, dispatch in a
hurry, it have no cover,] there stand he, laughing, shrug, play off
his leg; now stroke his shin chin, now turn his hat upon his
thumb! then leer in my face, flourish with his head--o Christ!
now-and-then cry the rascal--
what joy have this dog in mischief!--More than I can have in the
completion of my most favourite purposes!--these fellow be ever happy
than their master.
I be once think to rumple up this billet till I have break the seal.
young family [Miss Howe's be not an ancient one] love ostentatious
sealing: and it might have be suppose to have be squeeze in piece
in old Grimes's breech-pocket. but I be glad to be save the guilt as
well as suspicion of have a hand in so dirty a trick; for thus much of
the content (enough for my purpose) I be enable to scratch out in
character without it; the fold deprive I only of a few connect
word, which I have supply between hook.
my Miss Harlowe, thou know, have before change her name to Miss
Laetitia Beaumont. another alias now, Jack, to it; for this billet be
direct to she by the name of Mrs. Harriot Lucas. I have learn she to
be half a rogue, thou seest.
'I congratulate you, my dear, with all my heart and soul, upon [your
escape] from the villain. [I long] for the particular of all. [my
mother] be out; but, expect her return every minute, I dispatch
[your] messenger instantly. [I will endeavour to come at] Mrs. Townsend
without loss of time; and will write at large in a day or two, if in that
time I can see she. [mean time I] be excessively uneasy for a letter I
send you yesterday by Collins, [who must have leave it at] Wilson's after
you get away. [it be of very] great importance. [I hope the] villain
have it not. I would not for the world [that he should.] immediately
send for it, if, by do so, the place you be at [will not be]
discover. if he have it, let I know it by some way [out of] hand. if
not, you need not send.
'ever, ever your's,
'A.H.
'June 9.'
***
o Jack! what heart'-ease do this interception give me!--I send the
rascal back with the letter to old Grimes, and charge he to drink no
deep. he own, that he be half-sea over, as he phrase it.
Dog! say I, be you not to court one of Mrs. Moore's maid to-night?--
cry your mercy, Sir!--I will be sober.--I have forget that--but old Grimes
be plaguy tough, I think I should never have get he down.
away, villain! let old Grimes come, and on horseback too, to the door--
he shall, and please your honour, if I can get he on the saddle, and if
he can sit--
and charge he not to have alight, nor to have see any body--
Enough, Sir, familiarly nod his head, to show he take I. and away
go the villain--into the parlour, to the woman, I.
in a quarter of an hour come old grime on horseback, wave to his
saddle-bow, now on this side, now on that; his head, at other, join
to that of his more sober beast.
it look very well to the woman that I make no effort to speak to old
grime, (though I wish, before they, that I know the content of what
he bring;) but, on the contrary, desire that they would instantly let
my spouse know that her messenger be return.
down she fly, violently as she have the head-ache!
o how I pray for an opportunity to be revenge of she for the
ungrateful trouble she have give to her uncle's friend!
she take the letter from old grime with her own hand, and retire to an
inner parlour to read it.
she presently come out again to the fellow, who have much ado to sit his
horse--here be your money, friend.--I think you long: but what shall I
do to get somebody to go to town immediately for I? I see you cannot.
Old Grimes take his money, let fall his hand in doff it; have it give
he, and ride away; his eye isinglass, and set in his head, as I see
through the window, and in a manner speechless--all his language hiccup.
my dog need not to have go so deep with this tough old grime. but
the rascal be in his kingdom with he.
the lady apply to Mrs. Moore; she matter not the price. could a man
and horse be engage for her?--Only to go for a letter leave for she, at
one Mr. Wilson's, in Pall-mall.
a poor neighbour be hire--a horse procure for he--he have his
direction.
in vain do I endeavour to engaged my beloved, when she be below. her
head-ache, I suppose, returned.--She, like the rest of her sex, can be
ill or well when she please.
I see her drift, think I; it be to have all her light from Miss Howe
before she resolve, and to take her measure accordingly.
up she go express great impatience about the letter she have send
for; and desire Mrs. Moore to let she know if I offer to send any one
of my servant to town--to get at the letter, I suppose, be her fear;
but she might have be quite easy on that head; and yet, perhaps, would
not, have she know that the worthy Captain Tomlinson, (who will be in
town before her messenger,) will leave there the important letter, which
I hope will help to pacify she, and reconcile she to I.
o Jack, Jack! think thou that I will take all this roguish pain, and
be so often call villain for nothing?
but yet, be it not take pain to come at the fine creature in the
world, not for a transitory moment only, but for one of our life! the
struggle only, whether I be to have she in my own way, or in she's?
but now I know thou wilt be frighten out of thy wit for I--what,
Lovelace! would thou let she have a letter that will inevitably blow
thee up; and blow up the mother, and all her nymphs!--yet not intend to
reform, nor intend to marry?
Patience, puppy!--canst thou not trust thy master?
LETTER XXX
MR. LOVELACE
[in CONTINUATION.]
I go up to my new-take apartment, and fall to write in character, as
usual. I think I have make good my quarter, but the cruel creature,
understanding that I intend to take up my lodging there, declare with
so much violence against it, that I be oblige to submit, and to accept
of another lodging, about twelve door off, which Mrs. Moore recommend.
and all the advantage I could obtain be, that will., unknown to my
spouse, and for fear of a freak, should lie in the house.
Mrs. Moore, indeed, be unwilling to disoblige either of we. but Miss
Rawlins be of opinion, that nothing more ought to be allow I: and yet
Mrs. Moore own, that the refusal be a strange piece of tyranny to a
husband, if I be a husband.
I have a good mind to make Miss Rawlins smart for it. come and see Miss
Rawlins, Jack.--If thou likest she, Iwill get she for thee with a
wet-finger, as the saying be!
the widow Bevis indeed stickle hard for I. [an innocent, or injure
man, will have friend every where.] she say, that to bear much with
some wife, be to be oblige to bear more; and I reflect, with a sigh,
that tame spirit must always be impose upon. and then, in my heart, I
renew my vow of revenge upon this haughty and perverse beauty.
the second fellow come back from town about nine o'clock, with Miss
Howe's letter of Wednesday last. 'Collins, it seem, when he leave it,
have desire, that it might be safely and speedily deliver into Miss
Laetitia Beaumont's own hand. but Wilson, understand that neither
she nor I be in town, [he could not know of our difference thou must
think,] resolve to take care of it till our return, in order to give it
into one of our own hand; and now deliver it to her messenger.'
this be tell she. Wilson, I doubt not, be in her favour upon it.
she take the letter with great eagerness; open it in a hurry, [be glad
she do; yet, I believe, all be right,] before Mrs. Moore and Mrs.
Bevis, [Miss Rawlins be go home;] and say, she would not for the
world that I should have have that letter, for the sake of her dear friend
the writer, who have write to she very uneasily about it.
her dear friend! repeat Mrs. Bevis, when she tell I this:--such
mischief-maker be always deem dear friend till they be find out!
the widow say that I be the fine gentleman she ever beheld.
I have find a warm kiss now-and-then very kindly take.
I might be a very wicked fellow, Jack, if I be to do all the mischief
in my power. but I be evermore for quit a too-easy prey to reptile
rake! what but difficulty, (though the lady be an angel,) engage I to
so much perseverance here?--And here, conquer or die! be now the
determination!
***
I have just now part with this honest widow. she call upon I at my
new lodging. I tell she, that I see I must be far oblige to she in
the course of this difficult affair. she must allow I to make she a
handsome present when all be happily over. but I desire that she would
take no notice of what should pass between we, not even to her aunt; for
that she, as I see, be in the power of Miss Rawlins: and Miss Rawlins,
be a maiden gentlewoman, know not the right and the fit in matrimonial
matter, as she, my dear widow, do.
very true: how should she? say Mrs. Bevis, proud of know--nothing!
but, for her part, she desire no present. it be enough if she could
contribute to reconcile man and wife, and disappoint mischief-maker.
she doubt not, that such an envious creature as Miss Howe be glad that
Mrs. Lovelace have elope--jealousy and love be Old Nick!
see, Belford, how charmingly thing work between I and my new
acquaintance, the widow!--who know, but that she may, after a little
far intimacy, (though I be banish the house on night,) contrive a
midnight visit for I to my spouse, when all be still and fast asleep?
where can a woman be safe, who have once enter the list with a
contriving and intrepid lover?
but as to this letter, methink thou sayest, of Miss Howe?
I know thou would be uneasy for I. but do not I tell thee that I
have provide for every thing? that I always take care to keep seal
entire, and to preserve cover?* be it not easy then, think thou, to
contrive a short letter out of a long; and to copy the very word?
* see Letter XX. of this volume.
I can tell thee, it be so well order, that, not be suspect to
have be in my hand, it be not easy to find I out. have it be my
belove's hand, there would have be no imitating it for such a length.
her delicate and even mind be see in the very cut of her letter. Miss
Howe's hand be no bad one, but it be not so equal and regular. that
little devil's natural impatience hurrying on her finger, give, I
suppose, from the beginning, her handwriting, as well as the rest of she,
its fit and start, and those peculiarity, which, like strong muscular
line in a face, neither the pen, nor the pencil, can miss.
Hast thou a mind tot see what it be I permit Miss Howe to write to
her lovely friend? why then, read it here, so extract from shebe of
Wednesday last, with a few addition of my own. the addition
underscored.*
* Editor's note: in place of italic, as in the original, I have
substitute hook [ ].
my DEAREST FRIEND,
you will perhaps think that I have be too long silent. but I have begin
two letter at different time since my last, and write a great deal
each time; and with spirit enough I assure you; incense as I be against
the abominable wretch you be with; particularly on read your' of the
21st of the past month.
the first I intend to keep open till I could give you some account of
my proceeding with Mrs. Townsend. it be some day before I see she:
and this intervenient space give I time to reperuse what I have
write, I think it proper to lay that aside, and to write in a style a
little less fervent; for you would have blame I, I know, for the
freedom of some of my expression, (execration, if you please.) and
when I have go a good way in the second, and change your prospect, on
his communicating to you Miss Montague's letter, and his well
behaviour, occasion a change in your mind, I lay that aside also.
and in this uncertainty think I would wait to see the issue of affair
between you before I write again; believe that all would soon be
decide one way or other.
***
[here I be force to break off. I be too little my own mistress:--my
mother* be always up and down--and watch as if I be write to a
fellow. what need I (she ask I,) lock myself in,** if I be only
read past correspondencie? for that be my pretence, when she come
poke in with her face sharpen to an edge, as I may say, by a
curiosity that give she more pain than pleasure.--The Lord forgive I;
but I believe I shall huff she next time she come in.]
* see Letter XX. of this volume.
** ibid.
***
do you forgive I too, my dear--my mother ought; because she say I be my
father's girl; and because I be sure I be she's.
[upon my life, my dear, I be sometimes of opinion, that this vile man be
capable of mean you dishonour. when I look back upon his past conduct,
I cannot help, and verily believe, that he have lay aside such thought.
my reason for both opinion I will give you.]
[for the first: to-wit, that he have it once in his head to take you at
advantage if he could, I consider* that] pride, revenge, and a delight to
tread in unbeaten path, be principal ingredient in the character of
this finished libertine. he hat all your family, yourself excepted--
yet be a savage in love. his pride, and the credit which a few plausible
quality, sprinkle among his odious one, have give he, have secure
he too good a reception from our eye-judging, our undistinguishing, our
self--flatter, our too-confide sex, to make assiduity and
obsequiousness, and a conquest of his unruly passion, any part of his
study.
he have some reason for his animosity to all the man, and to one woman of
your family. he have always show you, and his own family too, that he
prefer his pride to his interest. he be a declare marriage-hater; a
notorious intriguer; full of his invention, and glory in them.--as
his vanity have make he imagine that no woman could be proof against his
love, no wonder that he struggle like a lion hold in toil,* against a
passion that he think not return.** hence, perhaps, it be not
difficult to believe, that it become possible for such a wretch as this
to give way to his old prejudice against marriage; and to that revenge
which have always be a first passion with he.***
* see Letter XX. of this volume.
** ibid.
*** ibid.
[and hence we may account for] his delay--his teasing way--his bringing
you to bear with his lodging in the same house--his make you pass to
the other people of it as his wife--his bring you into the company of
his libertine companion--the attempt of impose upon you that Miss
Partington for a bedfellow, &c.
[my reason for a contrary opinion, to wit, that he be now resolve to do
you all the justice in his power to do you,] be these:--that he see
that all his own family* have warmly engage themselves in your cause:
that the horrid wretch love you; with such a love, however, as Herod
love his Mariamne: that, on inquiry, I find it to be true, that
Counsellor Williams, (whom Mr. Hickman know to be a man of eminence in
his profession,) have actually as good as finish the settlement: that
two draught of they have be make; one avowedly to be send to this very
Captain Tomlinson:--and I find, that a license have actually be more
than once endeavour to be obtain, and that difficulty have hitherto
be make, equally to Lovelace's vexation and disappointment. my
mother's proctor, who be very intimate with the proctor apply to by the
wretch, have come at this information in confidence; and hint, that, as
Mr. Lovelace be a man of high fortune, these difficulty will probably
be get over.
* see Letter XX. of this volume.
[I have once resolve to make strict inquiry about Tomlinson; and still,
if you will, your uncle's favourite housekeeper may be sound at a
distance.]
[I know that the matter be so laid,*] that Mrs. Hodges be suppose to
know nothing of the treaty set on foot by mean of Captain Tomlinson.
but your uncle be an--
* see Letter XX. of this volume.
but your uncle be an old man;* and old man imagine themselves to be under
obligation to their paramour, if young than themselves, and seldom
keep any thing from their knowledge.--Yet, methink, there can be no
need; since Tomlinson, as you describe he, be so good a man, and so much
of a gentleman; the end to be answer by his be an impostor so much
more than necessary, if Lovelace have villany in his head.--And thus what
he communicate to you of Mr. Hickman's application to your uncle, and of
Mrs. Norton's to your mother (some of which particular I be satisfied
his vile agent Joseph Leman could not reveal to his viler employer); his
push on the marriage-day in the name of your uncle; which it could not
answer any wicked purpose for he to do; and what he write of your
uncle's proposal, to have it think that you be marry from the time
that you have live in one house together; and that to be make to agree
with the time of Mr. Hickman's visit to your uncle; the insist on a
trusty person's be present at the ceremony, at that uncle's nomination
--these thing make I [assure that he now at last mean honourably.]
* see Letter XX. of this volume.
[but if any unexpected delay should happen on his side, acquaint I, my
dear, with the very street where Mrs. Sinclair live; and where Mrs.
Fretchville's house be situate (which I cannot find that you have ever
mention in your former letter--which be a little odd); and I will make
strict inquiry of they, and of Tomlinson too; and I will (if your heart
will let you take my advice) soon procure you a refuge from he with Mrs.
Townsend.]
[but why do I now, when you seem to be in so good a train, puzzle and
perplex you with my retrospection? and yet they may be of use to you,
if any delay happen on his part.]
[but that I think cannot well be. what you have therefore now to do, be
so to behave to this proud-spirited wretch, as may banish from his mind
all remembrance of] past disobligation,* and to receive his address,
as those of a betrothed lover. you will incur the censure of prudery and
affectation, if you keep he at that distance which you have hitherto
[keep he at.] his sudden (and as suddenly recover) illness have give
he an opportunity to find out that you love he (alas! my dear, I know
you love he!) he have seem to change his nature, and be all love and
gentleness. [and no more quarrel now, I beseech you.]
* see Letter XX. of this volume.
[I be very angry with he, nevertheless, for the freedom which he take
with your person;* and I think some guard be necessary, as he be
certainly an encroacher. but indeed all man be so; and you be such a
charming creature, and have keep he at such a distance!--but no more of
this subject. only, my dear, be not over-nice, now you be so near the
state. you see what difficulty you lay yourself under,] when
Tomlinson's letter call you again into [the wretch's] company.
* see Letter XI. of this volume.
if you meet with no impediment, no new cause of doubt,* your reputation
in the eye of the world be concern, that you should be his, [and, as
your uncle rightly judge, be think to have be his before now.] and
yet, [let I tell you,] I [can hardly] bear [to think,] that these
libertine should be reward for their villany with the good of the sex,
when the bad of it be too good for they.
* see Letter XX. of this volume.
I shall send this long letter by Collins,* who change his day to oblige
I. as none of our letter by Wilson's conveyance have miscarry, when
you have be in more apparently-disagreeable situation than you be in
at present, [I have no doubt] that this will go safe.
* see Letter XX. of this volume.
Miss Lardner* (whom you have see hat her cousin Biddulph's) see you at
St. James's church on Sunday be fortnight. she keep you in her eye
during the whole time; but could not once obtain the notice of your's,
though she courtesie to you twice. she think to pay her compliment
to you when the service be over; for she doubt not but you be
married--and for an odd reason--because you come to church by yourself.
every eye, (as usual, wherever you be,) she say be upon you; and this
seem to give you hurry, and you be nearer the door than she, you
slide out before she could get to you. but she order her servant to
follow you till you be house. this servant see you step into a chair
which wait for you; and you order the man to carry you to the place
where they take you up. she [describe the house] as a very genteel
house, and fit to receive people of fashion: [and what make I mention
this, be, that perhaps you will have a visit from she; or message, at
least.]
* see Letter XX. of this volume.
[so that you have Mr. Doleman's testimony to the credit of the house
and people you be with; and he be] a man of fortune, and some
reputation; formerly a rake indeed; but marry to a woman of family;
and have have a palsy blow, one would think a penitent.* you have [also
Mr. Mennell's at least passive testimony; Mr.] Tomlinson's; [and now,
lastly, Miss Lardner's; so that there will be the less need for inquiry:
but you know my busy and inquisitive temper, as well as my affection for
you, and my concern for your honour. but all doubt will soon be lose in
certainty.]
[nevertheless I must add, that I would have you] command I up, if I can
be of the least service or pleasure to you.* I value not fame; I value
not censure; nor even life itself, I verily think, as I do your honour,
and your friendship--for be not your honour my honour? and be not your
friendship the pride of my life?
* see Letter XX. of this volume.
may Heaven preserve you, my dearest creature, in honour and safety, be
the prayer, the hourly prayer, of
your ever-faithful and affectionate,
ANNA HOWE.
THURSDAY MORN. 5.
I have write all night. [excuse indifferent writing; my crow-quill
be wear to the stump, and I must get a new supply.]
***
these lady always write with crow-quill, Jack.
if thou art capable of take in all my providence, in this letter, thou
wilt admire my sagacity and contrivance almost as much as I do myself.
Thou se, that Miss Lardner, Mrs. Sinclair, Tomlinson, Mrs.
Fretchville, Mennell, be all mention in it. my first liberty with
her person also. [Modesty, modesty, Belford, I doubt, be more confine
to time, place, and occasion, even by the most delicate mind, than these
mind would have it believe to be.] and why all these take notice of
by I from the genuine letter, but for fear some future letter from the
vixen should escape my hand, in which she might refer to these name?
and, if none of they be to have be find in this that be to pass for
shebe, I might be rout horse and foot, as Lord M. would phrase it in a
like case.
devilish hard (and yet I may thank myself) to be put to all this plague
and trouble:--and for what dost thou ask?--o Jack, for a triumph of more
value to I beforehand than an imperial crown!--don't ask I the value of
it a month hence. but what indeed be an imperial crown itself when a man
be use to it?
Miss Howe might well be anxious about the letter she write. her sweet
friend, from what I have let pass of she's, have reason to rejoice in the
thought that it fall not into my hand.
and now must all my contrivance be set at work, to intercept the
expect letter from Miss Howe: which be, as I suppose, to direct she to
a place of safety, and out of my knowledge. Mrs. Townsend be, no doubt,
in this case, to smuggle she off: I hope the villain, as I be so
frequently call between these two girl, will be able to manage this
point.
but what, perhaps, thou askest, if the lady should take it into her head,
by the connivance of Miss Rawlins, to quit this house privately in the
night?
I have think of this, Jack. do not will. lie in the house? and be
not the widow bevis my fast friend?
LETTER XXXI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SATURDAY, SIX O'CLOCK, JUNE 10.
the lady give Will.'s sweetheart a letter last night to be carry to the
post-house, as this morning, direct for Miss Howe, under cover to
Hickman. I dare say neither cover nor letter will be see to have be
open. the content but eight line--to own--'the receipt of her
double-date letter in safety; and refer to a long letter, which
she intend to write, when she shall have a quieter heart, and less
tremble finger. but mention something to have happen [my detecting
she she mean] which have give she very great flutter, confusion, and
apprehension: but which she will wait the issue of [some hope for I
hence, Jack!] before she give her fresh perturbation or concern on her
account.--She tell she how impatient she shall be for she next,' &c.
now, Belford, I think it would be but kind in I to save Miss Howe's
concern on these alarming hint; since the curiosity of such a spirit
must have be prodigiously excite by they. have therefore so good a
copy to imitate, I write; and, take out that of my beloved, put under
the same cover the follow short billet; inscriptive and conclusive
part of it in her own word.
HAMPSTEAD, TUES. even.
MY ever-dear MISS HOWE,
a few line only, till calm spirit and quieter finger be grant I,
and till I can get over the shock which your intelligence have give me--
to acquaint you--that your kind long letter of Wednesday, and, as I may
say, of Thursday morning, be come safe to my hand. on receipt of your's
by my messenger to you, I send for it from Wilson's. there, thank
Heaven! it lay. may that Heaven reward you for all your past, and for
all your intended goodness to
your for-ever oblige,
CL. HARLOWE.
***
I take great pain in write this. it cannot, I hope, be suspect.
her hand be so very delicate. yet shebe be write less beautifully than
she usually write: and I hope Miss Howe will allow somewhat for hurry of
spirit, and unsteady finger.
my consideration for Miss Howe's ease of mind extend still far than
to the instance I have mention.
that this billet might be with she as soon as possible, (and before it
could have reach Hickman by the post,) I dispatch it away by a
servant of Mowbray's. Miss Howe, have there be any failure or delay,
might, as thou wilt think, have communicate her anxiety to her
fugitive friend; and she to I perhaps in a way I should not have be
pleased with.
once more wilt thou wonderingly question--all this pain for a single
girl?
yes, Jack--but be not this girl a clarissa?--and who know, but kind
fortune, as a reward for my perseverance, may toss I in her charming
friend? less likely thing have come to pass, Belford. and to be sure I
shall have she, if I resolve upon it.
LETTER XXXII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
eight O'CLOCK, SAT. MORN. JUNE 10.
I be come back from Mrs. Moore's, whither I go in order to attend my
charmer's command. but no admittance--a very bad night.
Doubtless she must be as much concerned that she have carry she
resentment so very far, as I have reason to be that I make such poor use
of the opportunity I have on Wednesday night.
but now, Jack, for a brief review of my present situation; and a slight
hint or two of my precaution.
I have see the woman this morning, and find they half-right, half-
doubt.
Miss Rawlins's brother tell she, that she live at Mrs. Moore's.
Mrs. Moore can do nothing without Miss Rawlins.
People who keep lodging at public place expect to get by every one who
come into their purlieus. though not permit to lodge there myself, I
have engage all the room she have to spare, to the very garret; and
that, as I have tell thee before, for a month certain, and at her own
price, board include; my spouse's and all: but she must not at present
know it. so I hope I have Mrs. Moore fast by the interest.
this, devil-like, be suit temptation to inclination.
I have always observe, and, I believe, I have hint as much formerly,*
that all dealer, though but for pin, may be take in by customer for
pin, soon than by a direct bribe of ten time the value; especially if
pretender to conscience: for the offer of a bribe would not only give
room for suspicion, but would startle and alarm their scrupulousness;
while a high price pay for what you buy, be but submit to be cheat
in the method of the person make a profession to get by. have I not
say that human nature be a rogue?**--And do not I know that it be?
* see Vol. III. Letter XXXIV.
** see Vol. III. Letter XXXV. and Vol. IV. Letter XXI.
to give a high instance, how many proud senator, in the year 1720,
be induce, by present or subscription of South-sea stock, to
contribute to a scheme big with national ruin; who yet would have spurn
the man who should have presume to offer they even twice the sum certain
that they have a chance to gain by the stock?--but to return to my review
and to my precaution.
Miss Rawlins fluctuate, as she hear the lady's story, or as she hear
mine. somewhat of an infidel, I doubt, be this Miss Rawlins. I have not
yet consider her foible. the next time I see she, I will take
particular notice of all the mole and freckle in her mind; and then
infer and apply.
the widow Bevis, as I have tell thee, be all my own.
my man Will. lie in the house. my other new fellow attend upon I; and
cannot therefore be quite stupid.
already be Will. over head and ear in love with one of Mrs. Moore's
maid. he be strike with she the moment he set his eye upon she. a
raw country wench too. but all woman, from the countess to the cook-
maid, be put into high good humour with themselves when a man be take
with they at first sight. be they ever so plain [no woman can be ugly,
Jack!] theywill find twenty good reason, besides the great one (for
sake's sake) by the help of the glass without (and perhaps in spite of
it) and conceit within, to justify the honest fellow's caption.
'the rogue have save 150L. in my service.'--more by 50 than I bid he
save. no doubt, he think he might have do so; though I believe not
worth a groat. 'the good of master I--passionate, indeed; but soon
appease.'
the wench be extremely kind to he already. the other maid be also very
civil to he. he have a husband for she in his eye. she cannot but say,
that Mr. Andrew, my other servant [the girl be for fix the person] be
a very well speak civil young man.
'we common folk have our joy, and please your honour, say honest
Joseph Leman, like as our better have.'* and true say honest joseph--
do I prefer ease to difficulty, I should envy these low-bear sinner
some of their joy.
* see Vol. III. Letter XLVII.
but if Will. have not make amorous pretension to the wench, we all
know, that servant, unite in one common compare-note cause, be
intimate the moment they see one another--great genealogist too; they
know immediately the whole kin and kin's kin of each other, though
disperse over the three kingdom, as well as the genealogy and kin's
kin of those whom they serve.
but my precaution end not here.
o Jack, with such an invention, what occasion have I to carry my beloved
to Mrs. Sinclair's?
my spouse may have farth occasion for the messenger whom she
dispatch, one to Miss Howe, the other to Wilson's. with one of these
will. be already well-acquaint, as thou hast hear--to mingle liquor
be to mingle soul with these fellow; with the other messenger he will
soon be acquaint, if he be not already.
the Captain's servant have his us and instruction assign he. I have
hint at some of they already.* he also serve a most humane and
considerate master. I love to make every body respect to my power.
* see letter XXIX. of this volume.
the post, general and penny, will be strictly watch likewise.
Miss Howe's Collins be remember to be describe. Miss Howe's and
Hickman's livery also.
James Harlowe and Singleton be warn against. I be to be acquaint
with any inquiry that shall happen to be make after my spouse, whether by
her married or maiden name, before she shall be tell of it--and this that
I may have it in my power to prevent mischief.
I have order Mowbray and Tourville (and Belton, if his health permit)
to take their quarter at Hampstead for a week, with their fellow to
attend they. I spare thee for the present, because of thy private
concern. but hold thyself in cheerful readiness, however, as a mark of
thy allegiance.
as to my spouse herself, have she not reason to be pleased with I for
have permit she to receive Miss Howe's letter from Wilson's? a
plain case, either that I be no deep plotter, or that I have no far
view than to make my peace with she for an offence so slight and so
accidental.
Miss Howe say, though preface with an alas! that her charming friend
love I: she must therefore yearn after this reconciliation--prospect
so fair--if she show I any compassion; seem inclinable to spare
I, and to make the most favourable construction: I cannot but say, that
it would be impossible not to show she some. but, to be insult and
defy by a rebel in one's power, what prince can bear that?
but I must return to the scene of action. I must keep the woman steady.
I have no opportunity to talk to my worthy Mrs. Bevis in private.
Tomlinson, a dog, not come yet!
LETTER XXXIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
from my apartment at MRS. MOORE'S.
Miss Rawlins at her brother; Mrs. Moore engage in household matter;
widow Bevis dressing; I have nothing to do but write. this curse
Tomlinson not yet arrived!--nothing to be do without he.
I think he shall complain in pretty high language of the treatment he meet
with yesterday. 'what be our affair to he? he can have no view but
to serve we. Cruel to send back to town, un-audienced, unseen, a man of
his business and importance. he never stir a-foot, but something of
consequence depend upon his movement. a confound thing to trifle
thus humoursomely with such a gentleman's moments!--these woman think,
that all the business of the world must stand still for their figarie
[a good female word, Jack!] the great trifler in the creation, to
fancy themselves the most important being in it--marry come up! as I
have hear goody sorling say to her servant, when she have rat at they
with mingled anger and disdain.'
after all, methink I want those tostication [thou seest how woman, and
woman's word, fill my mind] to be over, happily over, that I may sit
down quietly, and reflect upon the danger I have pass through, and the
trouble I have undergo. I have a reflect mind, as thou know;
but the very word reflect imply all get over.
what briar and thorn do the wretch rush into (a scratch face and
tattere garment the unavoidable consequence) who will need be for
strike out a new path through overgrown underwood; quit that beat
out for he by those who have travel the same road before he!
***
a visit from the widow Bevis, in my own apartment. she tell I, that my
spouse have thought last night, after I be go to my lodging, of
remove from Mrs. Moore's.
I almost wish she have attempt to do so.
Miss Rawlins, it seem, who be apply to upon it, dissuade she from
it.
Mrs. Moore also, though she do not own that Will. lay in the house, (or
rather set up in it, courting,) set before she the difficulty, which,
in her opinion, she would have to get clear off, without my knowledge;
assure she, that she could be no where more safe than with she, till
she have fix whither to go. and the lady herself recollect, that if
she go, she might miss the expect letter from her dear friend Miss
Howe! which, as she own, be to direct her future step.
she must also surely have some curiosity to know what her uncle's friend
have to say to she from her uncle, contemptuously as she yesterday treat
a man of his importance. nor could she, I should think, be absolutely
determined to put herself out of the way of receive the visit of two
of the principal lady of my family, and to break entirely with I in
the face of they all.--Besides, whither could she have gone?--moreover,
Miss Howe's letter come (after her elopement) so safely to her hand,
must surely put she into a more confiding temper with I, and with every
one else, though she would not immediately own it.
but these good folk have so little charity!--are such severe censurer!
--Yet who be absolutely perfect?--it be to be wish, however, that
they would be so modest as to doubt themselves sometimes: then would they
allow for other, as other (excellent as they imagine themselves to be)
must for they.
SATURDAY, one O'CLOCK.
Tomlinson at last be come. force to ride five mile about (though I
shall impute his delay to great and important business) to avoid the
sight of two or three impertinent rascal, who, little think whose
affair he be employ in, want to obtrude themselves upon he. I
think I will make this fellow easy, if he behave to my liking in this
affair.
I send up the moment he come.
she desire to be excuse receive his visit till four this afternoon.
intolerable!--no consideration!--none at all in this sex, when their
curse humour be in the way!--pay-day, pay-hour, rather, will come!--
oh! that it be to be the next!
the Captain be in a pet. who can blame he? even the woman think a man
of his consequence, and generously come to serve we, hardly use.
would to heaven she have attempt to get off last night! the woman not
my enemy, who know but the husband's exert authority might have meet
with such connivance, as might have conclude either in carry she back
to her former lodging, or in consummation at Mrs. Moore's, in spite of
exclamation, fit, and the rest of the female obsecration?
my beloved have not appear to any body this day, except to Mrs. Moore.
be, it seem, extremely low: unfit for the interesting conversation that
be to be hold in the afternoon. long to hear from her dear friend Miss
Howe--yet cannot expect a letter for a day or two. have a bad opinion of
all mankind.--no wonder!--excellent creature as she be! with such a
father, such uncle, such a brother, as she have!
how do she look?
well than could be expect from yesterday's fatigue, and last night's
ill rest.
these tender dove know not, till put to it, what they can bear;
especially when engage in love affair; and their attention wholly
engross. but the sex love busy scene. still life be their aversion.
a woman will create a storm, rather than be without one. so that they
can preside in the whirlwind, and direct it, they be happy.--but my
beloved's misfortune be, that she must live in tumult; yet neither raise
they herself, nor be able to controul they.
LETTER XXXIV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SAT NIGHT, JUNE 10.
what will be the issue of all my plot and contrivance, devil take I if
I be able to divine. but I will not, as Lord M. would say, forestall my
own market.
at four, the appoint hour, I send up, to desire admittance in the
Captain's name and my own.
she would wait upon the Captain presently; [not upon I!] and in the
parlour, if it be not engage.
the dining-room be mine, perhaps that be the reason of her name the
parlour--mighty nice again, if so! no good sign for I, think I, this
stiff punctilio.
in the parlour, with I and the Captain, be Mrs. Moore, Miss Rawlins,
and Mrs. Bevis.
the woman say, they would withdraw when the lady come down.
Lovel. not, except she choose you should, Ladies.--People who be so
much above-board as I be, need not make secret of any of their affair.
besides, you three lady be now acquaint with all our concern.
Capt. I have some thing to say to your lady, that perhaps she would
not herself choose that any body should hear; not even you, Mr. Lovelace,
as you and her family be not upon such a good foot of understanding as
be to be wish.
Lovel. well, well, Captain, I must submit. give we a sign to withdraw,
and we will withdraw.
it be well that the exclusion of the woman should come from he, than
from I.
Capt. I will bow, and wave my hand, thus--when I wish to be alone with
the lady. her uncle dot upon she. I hope, Mr. Lovelace, you will not
make a reconciliation more difficult, for the earnestness which my dear
friend show to bring it to bear. but indeed I must tell you, as I tell
you more than once before, that I be afraid you have make light of the
occasion of this misunderstanding to I, than it ought to have be make.
Lovel. I hope, Captain Tomlinson, you do not question my veracity!
Capt. I beg your pardon, Mr. Lovelace--but those thing which we man
may think lightly of, may not be light to a woman of delicacy.--And then,
if you have bind yourself by a vow, you ought--
Miss Rawlins bridle, her lip close, (but her mouth stretch to a
smile of approbation, the long for not button,) tacitly show
herself pleased with the Captain for his delicacy.
Mrs. Moore could speak--very true, however, be all she say, with a
motion of her head that express the bow-approbatory.
for my part, say the jolly widow, star with eye as big as egg, I
know what I know.--But man and wife be man and wife; or they be not
man and wife.--i have no notion of stand upon such nicety.
but here she come! cry one, hear her chamber-door open--here she
come! another, hear it shut after she--and down dropt the angel among
we.
we all stand up, bow and courtesying, and could not help it; for she
enter with such an air as command all our reverence. yet the Captain
look plaguy grave.
Cl. pray keep your seat, lady--pray do not go, [for they make offer
to withdraw; yet Miss Rawlins would have burst have she be suffer to
retire.] before this time you have all hear my story, I make no doubt--
pray keep your seat--at least all Mr. Lovelace's.
a very saucy and whimsical beginning, think I.
Captain Tomlinson, your servant, address herself to he with
inimitable dignity. I hope you do not take amiss my decline your
visit yesterday. I be really incapable of talk upon any subject that
require attention.
Capt. I be glad to see you well now, Madam. I hope I do.
Cl. indeed I be not well. I would not have excuse myself from
attend you some hour ago, but in hope I should have be well. I
beg your pardon, Sir, for the trouble I have give you; and shall the
rather expect it, as this day will, I hope, conclude it all.
thus set; thus determine; think i,--yet to have sleep upon it!--but,
as what she say be capable of a good, as well as a bad, construction, I
would not put an unfavourable one upon it.
Lovel. the Captain be sorry, my dear, he do not offer his attendance
the moment he arrive yesterday. he be afraid that you take it amiss
that he do not.
Cl. perhaps I think that my uncle's friend might have wish to see
I as soon as he come, [how we stared!]--but, Sir, [to I,] it might be
convenient to you to detain he.
the devil, think I!--So there really be resentment as well as head-
ache, as my good friend Mrs. Bevis observe, in she refuse to see the
honest gentleman.
Capt. you would detain I, Mr. Lovelace--I be for pay my respect
to the lady the moment I came--
Cl. well, Sir, [interrupt he,] to wave this; for I would not be
think captious--if you have not suffer inconvenience, in be
oblige to come again, I shall be easy.
Capt. [half disconcert.] a little inconvenience, I cannot say but I
have suffer. I have, indeed, too many affair upon my hand; but the
desire I have to serve you and Mr. Lovelace, as well as to oblige my dear
friend, your uncle Harlowe, make great inconveniencie but small one.
Cl. you be very obliging, Sir.--Here be a great alteration since you
part with we last.
Capt. a great one indeed, Madam! I be very much surprised at it, on
Thursday evening, when Mr. Lovelace conduct I to your lodging, where
we hop to find you.
Cl. have you any thing to say to I, Sir, from my uncle himself, that
require my private ear!--Don't go, lady, [for the woman stand up, and
offer to withdraw,]--if Mr. Lovelace stay, I be sure you may.
I frown--I bit my lip--I look at the woman--and shake my head.
Capt. I have nothing to offer, but what Mr. Lovelace be a party to, and
may hear, except one private word or two, which may be postpone to the
last.
Cl. pray, lady, keep your seats.--thing be alter, Sir, since I
see you. you can mention nothing that relate to I now, to which that
gentleman can be a party.
Capt. you surprise I, Madam! I be sorry to hear this!--sorry for your
uncle's sake!--Sorry for your sake!--sorry for Mr. Lovelace's sake!--And
yet I be sure he must have give great occasion than he have mention
to I, or--
Lovel. indeed, captain,--indeed, lady, I have tell you great part of
my story!--and what I tell you of my offence be the truth:--what I
conceal of my story be only what I apprehend would, if know, cause
this dear creature to be think more censorious than charitable.
Cl. well, well, Sir, say what you please. make I as black as you
please--make yourself as white as you can--I be not now in your power:
that consideration will comfort I for all.
Capt. God forbid that I should offer to plead in behalf of a crime,
that a woman of virtue and honour cannot forgive! but surely, surely,
Madam, this be go too far.
Cl. do not blame I, Captain Tomlinson. I have a good opinion of you,
as my uncle's friend; but if you be Mr. Lovelace's friend, that be
another thing; for my interest and Mr. Lovelace's must now be for ever
separate.
Capt. one word with you, Madam, if you please--offer to retire.
Cl. you may say all that you please to say before these gentlewomen.--
Mr. Lovelace may have secret--I have none:--you seem to think I faulty:
I should be glad that all the world know my heart. let my enemy sit in
judgment upon my action; fairly scan, I fear not the result; let they
even ask I my most secret thought, and, whether they make for I, or
against I, I will reveal they.
Capt. Noble Lady! who can say as you say?
the woman hold up their hand and eye; each, as if she have said,--not I.
no disorder here! say Miss Rawlins:--but, (judge by her own heart,) a
confound deal of improbability, I believe she think.
finely say, to be sure, say the widow Bevis, shrug her shoulder.
Mrs. Moore sigh.
Jack Belford, think I, know all mine; and in this I be more ingenuous
than any of the three, and a fit match for this paragon.
Cl. how Mr. Lovelace have find I out here I cannot tell: but such mean
device, such artful, such bad than Waltham disguise put on, to
obtrude himself into my company; such bold, such shocking untruths--
Capt. the favour of but one word, Madam, in private--
Cl. in order to support a right which he have not over me!--O sir!--o
Captain tomlinson!--i think I have reason to say, that the man, (there he
stand!) be capable of any vileness!--
the woman look upon one another, and upon I, by turn, to see how I
bear it. I have such darting in my head at the instant, that I think I
should have go distract. my brain seem on fire. what would I have
give to have have she alone with me!--I traverse the room; my clench
fist to my forehead. o that I have any body here, think I, that,
Hercules-lie, when flame in the torture of Dejanira's poisoned shirt,
I could tear in piece!
Capt. Dear Lady! see you not how the poor gentleman--Lord, how have I
impose upon your uncle, at this rate! how happy do I tell he I see
you! how happy I be sure you would be in each other!
Cl. o Sir, you donot know how many premeditated offence I have forgive
when I see you last, before I could appear to you what I hop then I
might for the future be!--But now you may tell my uncle, if you please,
that I cannot hope for his mediation. tell he, that my guilt, in give
this man an opportunity to spirit I away from my try, my experienced,
my natural friend, (harshly as they treat I,) star I every day
more and more in the face; and still the more, as my fate seem to be
draw to a crisis, accord to the malediction of my offended father!
and then she burst into tear, which even affect that dog, who, bring
to abet I, be himself all belforde over.
the woman, so used to cry without grief, as they be to laugh without
reason, by mere force of example, [confound their promptitude;] must
need pull out their handkerchief. the less wonder, however, as I
myself, between confusion, surprise, and concern, could hardly stand it.
whatbe a tender heart good for?--who can be happy that have a feeling
heart?--and yet, thou'lt say, that he who have it not, must be a tiger,
and no man.
Capt. let I beg the favour of one word with you, Madam, in private;
and that on my own account.
the woman hereupon offer to retire. she insist that, if they go,
I should not stay.
Capt. Sir, bow to I, shall I beg--
I hope, think I, that I may trust this solemn dog, instruct as he be.
she do not doubt he. Iwill stay out no long than to give her time to
spend her first fire.
I then passively withdraw with the women.--but with such a bow to my
goddess, that it win for I every heart but that I want most to win;
for the haughty maid bent not her knee in return.
the conversation between the Captain and the lady, when we be retire,
be to the follow effect:--they both talk loud enough for I to hear
they--the lady from anger, the Captain with design; and thou mayest be
sure there be no listener but myself. what I be imperfect in be
supply afterwards; for I have my vellum-leave book to note all down.
if she have know this, perhaps she would have be more sparing of her
invective--and but perhaps neither.
he tell she that as her brother be absolutely resolve to see she; and
as he himself, in compliance with her uncle's expedient, have report she
marriage; and as that report have reach the ear of Lord M., Lady Betty,
and the rest of my relation; and as he have be oblige, in consequence
of his first report, to vouch it; and as her brother might find out where
she be, and apply to the woman here for a confirmation or refutation of
the marriage; he have think himself oblige to countenance the report
before the woman. that this have embarrass he not a little, as he
would not for the world that she should have cause to think he capable
of prevarication, contrivance, or double dealing; and that this make he
desirous of a private conversation with she.
it be true, she say, she have give her consent to such an expedient,
believe it be her uncle's; and little thinking that it would lead to
so many error. yet she might have know that one error be frequently
the parent of many. Mr. Lovelace have make she sensible of the truth of
that observation, on more occasion than one; and it be an observation
that he, the Captain, have make, in one of the letter that be show she
yesterday.*
* see Letter XXIV.
he hop that she have no mistrust of he: that she have no doubt of his
honour. if, Madam, you suspect I--if you think I capable--what a man!
the Lord be merciful to me!--what a man must you think I!
I hope, Sir, there cannot be a man in the world who could deserve to be
suspect in such a case as this. I do not suspect you. if it be
possible there could be one such a man, I be sure, Captain Tomlinson, a
father of child, a man in year, of sense and experience, cannot be
that man.
he tell I, that just then, he think he feel a sudden flash from her
eye, an eye-beam as he call it, dart through his shivering rein; and
he could not help tremble.
the dog's conscience, Jack!--Nothing else!--i have feel half a dozen such
flash, such eye-beam, in as many different conversation with this
soul-pierce beauty.
her uncle, she must own, be not accustomed to think of such expedient;
but she have reconcile this to herself, as the case be unhappily
uncommon; and by the regard he have for her honour.
this set the puppy's heart at ease, and give he more courage.
she ask he if he think Lady Betty and Miss Montague intend she a
visit?
he have no doubt but they do.
and do he imagine, say she, that I could be bring to countenance to
they the report you have give out?
[I have hop to bring she to this, Jack, or she have see their letter.
but I have tell the Captain that I believe I must give up this
expectation.]
No.--He believe that I have not such a thought. he be pretty sure, that
I intend, when I see they, to tell they, (as in confidence,) the naked
truth.
he then tell she that her uncle have already make some step towards a
general reconciliation. the moment, Madam, that he know you be really
married, he will enter into confidence with your father upon it; have
actually express to your mother his desire to be reconcile to you.
and what, Sir, say my mother? what say my dear mother?
with great emotion she ask this question; hold out her sweet face,
as the Captain describe she, with the most earnest attention, as if she
would shorten the way which his word be to have to her heart.
your mother, Madam, burst into tear upon it: and your uncle be so
penetrate by her tenderness, that he could not proceed with the subject.
but he intend to enter upon it with she in form, as soon as he hear
that the ceremony be over.
by the tone of her voice she weep. the dear creature, think I, begin
to relent!--and I grudge the dog his eloquence. I could hardly bear the
thought that any man breathing should have the power which I have lose, of
persuade this high-souled woman, though in my own favour. and would
thou think it? this reflection give I more uneasiness at the moment than
I feel from her reproach, violent as they be; or than I have pleasure
in her suppose relenting: for there be beauty in every thing she say
and does!--beauty in her passion!--beauty in her tears!--had the Captain
be a young fellow, and of rank and fortune, his throat would have be
in danger; and I should have think very hardly of she.
o Captain Tomlinson, say she, you know not what I have suffer by this
man's strange way! he have, as I be not ashamed to tell he yesterday,
a plain path before he. he at first betray I into his power--but
when I be in it--there she stopt.--then resume--o Sir, you know not
what a strange man he have been!--an unpolite, a rough-manner'd man! in
disgrace of his birth, and education, and knowledge, an unpolite man!--
and so act, as if his worldly and personal advantage set he above
those grace which distinguish a gentleman.
the first woman that ever say, or that ever think so of I, thatbe my
comfort, think i!--but this, (speak of to her uncle's friend, behind
my back,) help to heap up thy already-too-full measure, dearest!--it be
down in my vellum-book.
Cl. when I look back on his whole behaviour to a poor young creature,
(for I be but a very young creature,) I cannot acquit he either of great
folly or of deep design. and, last Wednesday--there she stopt; and I
suppose turn away her face.
I wonder she be not ashamed to hint at what she think so shameful; and
that to a man, and alone with he.
Capt. Far be it from I, Madam, to offer to enter too closely into so
tender a subject. Mr. Lovelace own, that you have reason to be
displeased with he. but he so solemnly clear himself of premeditated
offence--
Cl. he cannot clear himself, Captain Tomlinson. the people of the
house must be very vile, as well as he. I be convinced that there be a
wicked confederacy--but no more upon such a subject.
Capt. only one word more, Madam.--He tell I, that you promise to
pardon he. he tell me--
he know, interrupt she, that he deserve not pardon, or he have not
extort the promise from I. nor have I give it to he, but to shield
myself from the vilest outrage--
Capt. I could wish, Madam, inexcusable as his behaviour have be, since
he have something to plead in the reliance he make upon your promise,
that, for the sake of appearance to the world, and to avoid the
mischief that may follow if you absolutely break with he, you could
prevail upon your naturally-generous mind to lay an obligation upon he
by your forgiveness.
she be silent.
Capt. your father and mother, Madam, deplore a daughter lose to they,
whom your generosity to Mr. Lovelace may restore: do not put it to the
possible chance, that they may have cause to deplore a double loss; the
losing of a son, as well as a daughter, who, by his own violence, which
you may perhaps prevent, may be for ever lose to they, and to the whole
family.
she pause--she weep--she own that she feel the force of this argument.
I will be the making of this fellow, think I.
Capt. permit I, Madam, to tell you, that I do not think it would be
difficult to prevail upon your uncle, if you insist upon it, to come up
privately to town, and to give you with his own hand to Mr. Lovelace--
except, indeed, your present misunderstanding be to come to his ear.
besides, Madam, your brother, it be likely, may at this very time be in
town; and he be resolve to find you out--
Cl. why, Sir, should I be so much afraid of my brother? my brother have
injure I, not I he. will my brother offer to I what Mr. Lovelace have
offered?--wicke, ungrateful man! to insult a friendless, unprotected
creature, make friendless by himself!--i cannot, cannot think of he in
the light I once think of he. what, Sir, to put myself into the power
of a wretch, who have act by I with so much vile premeditation!--who
shall pity, who shall excuse I, if I do, be I to suffer ever so much
from him?--No, Sir.--Let Mr. Lovelace leave I--let my brother find I.
I be not such a poor creature as to be afraid to face the brother who have
injure I.
Capt. be you and your brother to meet only to confer together, to
expostulate, to clear up difficulty, it be another thing. but what,
Madam, can you think will be the issue of an interview, (Mr. Solmes with
he,) when he find you unmarried, and resolve never to have Mr.
Lovelace; suppose Mr. Lovelace be not to interfere, which cannot be
imagine?
Cl. well, Sir, I can only say, I be a very unhappy creature!--i must
resign to the will of Providence, and be patient under evil, which that
will not permit I to shun. but I have take my measure. Mr. Lovelace
can never make I happy, nor I he. I wait here only for a letter from
Miss Howe--that must determine me--
determine you as to Mr. Lovelace, Madam? interrupt the Captain.
Cl. I be already determine as to he.
Capt. if it be not in his favour, I have do. I cannot use strong
argument than I have use, and it would be impertinent to repeat they.
if you cannot forgive his offence, I be sure it must have be much
great than he have own to I. if you be absolutely determine, be
pleased to let I know what I shall say to your uncle? you be please
to tell I, that this day would put an end to what you call my trouble:
I should not have think it any, could I have be an humble mean of
reconcile person of worth and honour to each other.
here I enter with a solemn air.
Lovel. Captain Tomlinson, I have hear a part of what have pass
between you and this unforgiving (however otherwise excellent) lady. I
be cut to the heart to find the dear creature so determined. I could
not have believe it possible, with such prospect, that I have so little
share in her esteem. nevertheless I must do myself justice with regard
to the offence I be so unhappy as to give, since I find you be ready
to think it much great than it really be.
Cl. I hear not, Sir, your recapitulation. I be, and ought to be, the
sole judge of insult offer to my person. I enter not into discussion
with you, nor hear you on the shocking subject. and be go.
I put myself between she and the door--you may hear all I have to say,
Madam. my fault be not of such a nature, but that you may. I will be a
just accuser of myself; and will not wound your ear.
I then protest that the fire be a real fire. [so it be.] I
disclaim [less truly] premeditation. I own that I be hurry on by
the violence of a youthful passion, and by a sudden impulse, which few
other person, in the like situation, would have be able to check: that
I withdraw, at her command and entreaty, on the promise of pardon,
without have offer the least indecency, or any freedom, that would
not have be forgive by person of delicacy, surprised in an attitude
so charming--her terror, on the alarm of fire, call for a soothe
behaviour, and personal tenderness, she be ready to fall into fit: my
hop-for happy day so near, that I might be presume to be look upon
as a betrothed lover--and that this excuse might be plead even for the
woman of the house, that they, think we actually marry, might
suppose themselves to be the less concerned to interfere on so tender an
occasion.--[there, Jack, be a bold insinuation on behalf of the woman!]
high indignation fill her disdainful eye, eye-beam after eye-beam
flashing at I. every feature of her sweet face have soul in it. yet she
speak not. perhaps, Jack, she have a thought, that this plea for the
woman account for my contrivance to have her pass to they as marry,
when I first carry she thither.
Capt. indeed, Sir, I must say that you do not well to add to the
apprehension of a lady so much terrify before.
the dear creature offer to go by I. I set my back against the door,
and besought she to stay a few moment. I have not say thus much, my
dearest creature, but for your sake, as well as for my own, that Captain
Tomlinson should not think I have be vile than I be. nor will I say
one word more on the subject, after I have appeal to your own heart,
whether it be not necessary that I should say so much; and to the
Captain, whether otherwise he would not have go away with a much bad
opinion of I, if he have judge of my offence by the violence of your
resentment.
Capt. indeed I should. I own I should. and I be very glad, Mr.
Lovelace, that you be able to defend yourself thus far.
Cl. that cause must be well try, where the offender take his seat
upon the same bench with the judge.--I submit not mine to man--nor, give
I leave to say, to you, Captain Tomlinson, though I be willing to have a
good opinion of you. have not the man be assure that he have influence
you in his favour, he would not have bring you up to Hampstead.
Capt. that I be influence, as you call it, Madam, be for the sake of
your uncle, and for your own sake, more (I will say to Mr. Lovelace's
face) than for his. what can I have in view but peace and
reconciliation? I have, from the first, blame, and I now, again, blame
Mr. Lovelace, for add distress to distress, and terror to terror; the
lady, as you acknowledge, Sir, [look valiantly,] ready before to fall
into fit.
Lovel. let I own to you, Captain Tomlinson, that I have be a very
faulty, a very foolish man; and, if this dear creature ever honour I
with her love, an ungrateful one. but I have have too much reason to
doubt it. and this be now a flagrant proof that she never have the value
for I which my proud heart wish for; that, with such prospect before
we; a day so near; settlement approve and draw; her uncle meditate a
general reconciliation which, for her sake, not my own, I be desirous to
give into; she can, for an offence so really slight, on an occasion so
truly accidental, renounce I for ever; and, with I, all hope of that
reconciliation in the way her uncle have put it in, and she have acquiesce
with; and risque all consequence, fatal one as they may too possibly
be.--By my soul, Captain Tomlinson, the dear creature must have hat I
all the time she be intend to honour I with her hand. and now she
must resolve to abandon I, as far as I know, with a preference in her
heart of the most odious of man--in favour of that Solmes, who, as you
tell I, accompany her brother: and with what hop, with what view,
accompany him!--How can I bear to think of this?--
Cl. it be fit, Sir, that you should judge of my regard for you by your
own conscienceness of demerit. yet you know, or you would not have dare
to behave to I as sometimes you do, that you have more of it than you
deserve.
she walk from we; and then return, Captain Tomlinson, say she, I
will own to you, that I be not capable of resolve to give my hand, and
--nothing but my hand. have I not give a flagrant proof of this to the
once most indulgent of parent? which have bring I into a distress,
which this man have heighten, when he ought, in gratitude and honour, to
have endeavour to render it supportable. I have even a bias, Sir, in
his favour, I scruple not to own it. long (much too long!) bear I with
his unaccountable way, attribute his error to unmeane gaiety, and
to a want of know what true delicacy, and true generosity, require
from a heart susceptible of grateful impression to one involve by his
mean in unhappy circumstance.
it be now wickedness in he (a wickedness which discredit all his
profession) to say, that this last cruel and ungrateful insult be not
a premeditated one--but what need I say more of this insult, when it be
of such a nature, and that it have change that bias in his favour, and
make I choose to forego all the invite prospect he talk of, and to
run all hazard, to free myself from his power?
o my dearest creature! how happy for we both, have I be able to discover
that bias, as you condescend to call it, through such reserve as man
never encounter with!
he do discover it, Capt. Tomlinson. he bring I, more than once, to
own it; the more needlessly bring I to own it, as I dare say his own
vanity give he no cause to doubt it; and as I have apparently no other
motive in not be forward to own it, than my too-justly-found
apprehension of his want of generosity. in a word, Captain Tomlinson,
(and now, that I be determine upon my measure, I the less scruple to
say,) I should have despise myself, have I find myself capable of
affectation or tyranny to the man I intend to marry. I have always
blame the dear friend I have in the world for a fault of this nature.
in a word--
Lovel. and have my angel really and indeed the favour for I she be
pleased to own?--dear creature, forgive I. restore I to your good
opinion. surely I have not sin beyond forgiveness. you say that I
extort from you the promise you make I. but I could not have presume
to make that promise the condition of my obedience, have I not think
there be room to expect forgiveness. Permit, I beseech you, the
prospect to take place, that be open so agreeably before we. I
will go to town, and bring the license. all difficulty to the
obtaining of it be surmount. Captain Tomlinson shall be witness to
the deed. he will be present at the ceremony on the part of your uncle.
indeed he give I hope that your uncle himself--
Capt. I do, Mr. Lovelace: and I will tell you my ground for the hope
I give. I promise to my dear friend, (your uncle, Madam,) that he
should give out that he would take a turn with I to my little farm-house,
as I call it, near Northampton, for a week or so.--Poor gentleman!
he have of late be very little abroad!--too visibly declining!--change
of air, it might be give out, be good for him.--but I see, Madam, that
this be too tender a subject--
the dear creature weep. she know how to apply as mean the Captain's
hint to the occasion of her uncle's decline state of health.
Capt. we might indeed, I tell he, set out in that road, but turn short
to town in my chariot; and he might see the ceremony perform with his
own eye, and be the desire father, as well as the beloved uncle.
she turn from we, and wipe her eye.
Capt. and, really, there seem now to be but two objection to this, as
Mr. Harlowe discourage not the proposal--the one, the unhappy
misunderstanding between you; which I would not by any mean he should
know; since then he might be apt to give weight to Mr. James Harlowe's
unjust surmises.--the other, that it would necessarily occasion some
delay to the ceremony; which certainly may be perform in a day or two
--if--
and then he reverently bow to my goddess.--charme fellow!--But often
do I curse my star, for make I so much oblige to his adroitness.
she be go to speak; but, not like the turn of her countenance
(although, as I think, its severity and indignation seem a little
abate) I say, and have like to have blow myself up by it--one expedient
I have just think of--
Cl. none of your expedient, Mr. Lovelace!--I abhor your expedient,
your invention--I have have too many of they.
Lovel. see, Capt. Tomlinson!--See, Sir!--O how we expose ourselves to
you!--Little do you think, I dare say, that we have live in such a
continue misunderstand together!--But you will make the good of it
all. we may yet be happy. oh! that I could have be assure that this
dear creature love I with the hundredth part of the love I have for
her!--Our diffidence have be mutual. I presume to say that she have
too much punctilio: I be afraid that I have too little. hence our
difficulty. but I have a heart, Captain Tomlinson, a heart, that bid
I hope for her love, because it be resolve to deserve it as much as man
can deserve it.
Capt. I be indeed surprised at what I have see and hear. I defend
not Mr. Lovelace, Madam, in the offence he have give you--as a father of
daughter myself, I cannot defend he; though his fault seem to be
light than I have apprehend--but in my conscience, Madam, I think you
carry your resentment too high.
Cl. too high, Sir!--Too high to the man that might have be happy if
he would! too high to the man that have hold my soul in suspense an
hundred time, since (by artifice and deceit) he obtain a power over
me!--Say, Lovelace, thyself say, art thou not the very Lovelace, who by
insult I, hast wrong thine own hopes?--the wretch that appear in
vile disguise, personate an old, lame creature, seek for lodging
for thy sick wife?--telle the gentlewoman here story all of thine own
invention; and assert to they an husband's right over I, which thou
hast not!--And be it [turn to the Captain] to be expect, that I
should give credit to the protestation of such a man?
Lovel. treat I, my dearest creature, as you please, I will bear it:
and yet your scorn and your violence have fix dagger in my heart--but
be it possible, without those disguise, to come at your speech?--and
could I lose you, if study, if invention, would put it in my power to
arrest your anger, and give I hope to engage you to confirm to I the
promise pardon? the address I make to you before the woman, as if the
marriage-ceremony have pass, be in consequence of what your uncle have
advise, and what you have acquiesce with; and the rather make, as your
brother, and Singleton, and Solmes, be resolve to find out whether
what be report of your marriage be true or not, that they might take
their measure accordingly; and in hope to prevent that mischief, which
I have be but too studious to prevent, since this tameness have but
invite insolence from your brother and his confederate.
Cl. o thou strange wretch, how thou talkest!--But, Captain Tomlinson,
give I leave to say, that, be I inclined to enter far upon this
subject, I would appeal to Miss Rawlins's judgment (whom else have I to
appeal to?) she seem to be a person of prudence and honour; but not to
any man's judgment, whether I carry my resentment beyond fit bound, when
I resolve--
Capt. Forgive, Madam, the interruption--but I think there can be no
reason for this. you ought, as you say, to be the sole judge of
indignity offer you. the gentlewoman here be stranger to you. you
will perhaps stay but a little while among they. if you lay the state of
your case before any of they, and your brother come to inquire of they,
your uncle's intend mediation will be discover, and render abortive
--I shall appear in a light that I never appear in, in my life--for these
woman may not think themselves oblige to keep the secret.
Charming fellow!
Cl. o what difficulty have one fatal step involve I in--but there be
no necessity for such an appeal to any body. I be resolve on my
measure.
Capt. absolutely resolve, Madam?
Cl. I be.
Capt. what shall I say to your uncle Harlowe, madam?--poor gentleman!
how will he be surprised!--you see, Mr. Lovelace--you see, sir,--turne
to I with a flourish hand--but you may thank yourself--and admirably
stalk he from we.
true, by my soul, think I. I traverse the room, and bit my
unpersuasive lip, now upper, now under, for vexation.
he make a profound reverence to she--and go to the window, where lay
his hat and whip; and, take they up, open the door. child, say he,
to some body he see, pray order my servant to bring my horse to the
door--
Lovel. you willnot go, Sir--I hope you won't!--I be the unhappy man in
the world!--You willnot go--yet, alas!--But you willnot go, sir!--there may
be yet hope that Lady Betty may have some weight--
Capt. dear Mr. Lovelace! and may not my worthy friend, and affectionate
uncle, hope for some influence upon his daughter-niece?--But I beg pardon
--a letter will always find I disposed to serve the lady, and that as
well for her sake as for the sake of my dear friend.
she have throw herself into her chair: her eye cast down: she be
motionless, as in a profound study.
the Captain bow to she again: but meet with no return to his bow. Mr.
Lovelace, say he, (with an air of equality and independence,) I be
your's.
still the dear unaccountable sit as immovable as a statue; stir
neither hand, foot, head, nor eye--I never before see any one in so
profound a reverie in so wake a dream.
he pass by she to go out at the door she sit near, though the passage
by the other door be his direct way; and bow again. she move not.
I will not disturb the lady in her meditation, Sir.--Adieu, Mr. Lovelace
--no far, I beseech you.
she start, sigh--be you go, Sir?
Capt. I be, Madam. I could have be glad to do you service; but I see
it be not in my power.
she stand up, hold out one hand, with inimitable dignity and sweetness
--I be sorry you be go, sir!--can't help it--I have no friend to
advise with--Mr. Lovelace have the art (or good fortune, perhaps I should
call it) to make himself many.--Well, Sir--if you will go, I cannot help
it.
Capt. I will not go, Madam; his eye twinkle. [again seize with a
fit of humanity!] I will not go, if my long stay can do you either
service or pleasure. what, Sir, [turn to I,] what, Mr. Lovelace, be
your expedient;--perhap something may be offer, Madam--
she sigh, and be silent.
revenge, invoke I to myself, keep thy throne in my heart. if the
usurper love once more drive thee from it, thou wilt never again regain
possession!
Lovel. what I have think of, what I have intend to propose, [and I
sigh,] be this, that the dear creature, if she will not forgive I, as
she promise, will suspend the displeasure she have conceive against I,
till Lady Betty arrives.--that lady may be the mediatrix between we.
this dear creature may put herself into her protection, and accompany she
down to her seat in Oxfordshire. it be one of her ladyship's purpose to
prevail on her suppose new niece to go down with she. it may pass to
every one but to Lady Betty, and to you, Captain Tomlinson, and to your
friend Mr. Harlowe (as he desire) that we have be some time marry:
and she be with my relation will amount to a proof to James Harlowe
that we be; and our nuptial may be privately, and at this beloved
creature's pleasure, solemnize; and your report, Captain, authenticate.
Capt. upon my honour, Madam, clap his hand upon his breast, a
charming expedient!--this will answer every end.
she muse--she be greatly perplexed--at last, God direct I! say she: I
know not what to do--a young unfriended creature! whom can I have to
advise with?--Let I retire, if I can retire.
she withdraw with slow and trembling foot, and go up to her chamber.
for Heaven's sake, say the penetrate varlet [his hand lift up]; for
Heaven's sake, take compassion upon this admirable woman!--i cannot
proceed--she deserve all things--
Softly!--d--n the fellow!--the woman be come in.
he sob up his grief--turn about--hemm'd up a more manly accent--wipe
thy cursed eye--he do. the sunshine take place on one cheek, and
spread slowly to the other, and the fellow have his whole face again.
the woman all three come in, lead by that ever-curious Miss Rawlins. I
tell they, that the lady be go up to consider of every thing: that we
have hope of she. and such a representation we make of all that have
pass, as bring either tacit or declare blame upon the fair perverse
for hardness of heart and over-delicacy.
the widow Bevis, in particular, put out one lip, toss up her head,
wrinkle her forehead, and make such motion with she now lift-up, now
cast-down eye, as show that she think there be a great deal of
perverseness and affectation in the lady. now-and-then she change she
censuring look to look of pity of I--but (as she say) she love not
to aggravate!--a poor business, God help's! shrug up her shoulder,
to make such a rout about! and then her eye laugh heartily--
Indulgence be a good thing! love be a good thing!--but too much be
too much!
Miss Rawlins, however, declare, after she have call the widow Bevis,
with a prudish simper, a comical gentlewoman! that there must be
something in our story, which she could not fathom; and go from we into
a corner, and sit down, seemingly vex that she could not.
LETTER XXXV
MR. LOVELACE
[in CONTINUATION.]
the lady staid long above than we wish; and I hop that (lady-like)
she only wait for an invitation to return to we, desire the widow
Bevis, in the Captain's name, (who want to go to town,) to request the
favour of her company.
I care not to send up either Miss Rawlins or Mrs. Moore on the errand,
lest my beloved should be in a communicative disposition; especially as
she have hint at an appeal to Miss Rawlins; who, besides, have such an
unbounded curiosity.
Mrs. Bevis presently return with an answer (wink and pinking at I)
that the lady would follow she down.
Miss Rawlins could not but offer to retire, as the other do. her eye,
however, intimate that she have rather stay. but they not be answer
as she seem to wish, she go with the rest, but with slow foot; and
have hardly leave the parlour, when the lady enter it by the other door;
a melancholy dignity in her person and air.
she sit down. pray, Mr. Tomlinson, be seat.
he take his chair over against she. I stand behind shebe that I might
give he agree-upon signal, should there be occasion for they.
as thus--a wink of the left eye be to signify push that point, Captain.
a wink of the right, and a nod, be to indicate approbation of what he
have say.
my fore-finger hold up, and bite my lip, get off of that, as fast as
possible.
a right-forward nod, and a frown, swear to it, Captain.
my whole spread hand, to take care not to say too much on that particular
subject.
a scowling brow, and a positive nod, be to bid he rise in temper.
and these motion I could make, even those with my hand, without hold
up my arm, or move my wrist, have the woman be there; as, when the
motion be agree upon, I know not but they would.
she hem--I be go to speak, to spare her suppose confusion: but
this lady never want presence of mind, when presence of mind be
necessary either to her honour, or to that conscious dignity which
distinguish she from all the woman I ever know.
I have be consider, say she, as well as I be able, of every thing
that have pass; and of all that have be say; and of my unhappy
situation. I mean no ill, I wish no ill, to any creature living, Mr.
Tomlinson. I have always delighted to draw favourable rather than
unfavourable conclusion; sometimes, as it have prove, for very bad
heart. Censoriousness, whatever fault I have, be not naturally my
fault.--but, circumstance as I be, treat as I have be, unworthily
treat, by a man who be full of contrivance, and glory in them--
Lovel. my dearest life!--but I will not interrupt you.
Cl. thus treat, it become I to doubt--it concern my honour to
doubt, to fear, to apprehend--your intervention, Sir, be so seasonable,
so kind, for this man--my uncle's expedient, the first of the kind he
ever, I believe, think of! a plain, honest, good-minded man, as he be,
not affect such expedient--your report in conformity to it--the
consequence of that report; the alarm take by my brother; his rash
resolution upon it--the alarm take by Lady Betty, and the rest of Mr.
Lovelace's relation--the sudden letter write to he upon it, which,
with your's, he show I--all ceremony, among person bear observer of
ceremony, and entitle to value themselves upon their distinction,
dispense with--all these thing have happen so quick, and some of they
so seasonable--
Lovel. Lady Betty, you see, Madam, in her letter, dispense with
punctilo, avowedly in compliment to you. Charlotte, in she's, profess
to do the same for the same reason. Good Heaven! that the respect
intend you by my relation, who, in every other case, be really
punctilious, should be thus construe! they be glad, Madam, to have an
opportunity to compliment you at my expense. every one of my family
take delight in rally I. but their joy on the suppose occasion--
Cl. do I doubt, Sir, that you have not something to say for any thing
you think fit to do? I be speak to Captain Tomlinson, Sir. I will
you would be pleased to withdraw--at least to come from behind my chair.
and she look at the Captain, observe, no doubt, that his eye seem
to take lesson from mine.
a fair match, by Jupiter!
the Captain be disconcert. the dog have not have such a blush upon his
face for ten year before. I bite my lip for vexation: walk about the
room; but nevertheless take my post again; and blink with my eye to
the Captain, as a caution for he to take more care of his: and then
scoule with my brow, and give the nod positive, I as good as say,
resent that, Captain.
Capt. I hope, Madam, you have no suspicion that I be capable--
Cl. be not displeased with I, Captain Tomlinson. I have tell you that
I be not of a suspicious temper. excuse I for the sake of my sincerity.
there be not, I will be bold to say, a sincerer heart in the world than
shebe before you.
she take out her handkerchief, and put it to her eye.
I be go, at that instant, after her example, to vouch for the honesty
of my heart; but my conscience mennelle upon I; and would not suffer
the meditated vow to pass my lips.--a devilish thing, think I, for a
man to be so little himself, when he have most occasion for himself!
the villain Tomlinson look at I with a rueful face, as if he beg
leave to cry for company. it might have be as well, if he have cry.
a feeling heart, or the token of it give by a sensible eye, be very
reputable thing, when keep in countenance by the occasion.
and here let I fairly own to thee, that twenty time in this try
conversation I say to myself, that could I have think that I should
have have all this trouble, and incur all this guilt, I would have be
honest at first. but why, Jack, be this dear creature so lovely, yet so
invincible?--ever heardst thou before that the sweet of May blossom in
December?
Capt. be pleased--be please, Madam--if you have any doubt of my
honour--
a whine varlet! he should have be quite angry--for what give I he
the nod positive? he should have stalk again to the window, as for his
whip and hat.
Cl. I be only make such observation as my youth, my inexperience,
and my present unhappy circumstance, suggest to I--a worthy heart
(such, I hope, as Captain Tomlinson's) need not fear an examination--
need not fear be look into--whatever doubt that man, who have be
the cause of my error, and, as my severe father imprecate, the punisher
of the error he have cause, might have have of I, or of my honour, I
would have forgive he for they, if he have fairly propose they to I:
for some doubt perhaps such a man might have of the future conduct of a
creature whom he could induce to correspond with he against parental
prohibition, and against the light which her own judgment throw in upon
she: and if he have propound they to I like a man and a gentleman, I
would have be glad of the opportunity give I to clear my intention,
and to have show myself entitle to his good opinion--and I hope you,
Sir--
Capt. I be ready to hear all your doubt, Madam, and to clear they up--
Cl. I will only put it, Sir, to your conscience and honour--
the dog sit uneasy--he shuffle with his foot--her eye be upon he--he
be, therefore, after the rebuff he have meet with, afraid to look at I
for my motion; and now turn his eye towards I, then from I, as if
he would unlook his own look.
Cl. that all be true, that you have write, and that you have tell I.
I give he a right forward nod, and a frown--as much as to say, swear to
it, Captain. but the varlet do not round it off as I would have have
he. however, he aver that it be.
he have hop, he say, that the circumstance with which his commission
be attend, and what he have communicate to she, which he could not
know but from his dear friend, her uncle, might have shield he even
from the shadow of suspicion. but I be content, say he, stammering,
to be think--to be think--what--what you please to think of I--till,
till, you be satisfied--
A whore's-bird!
Cl. the circumstance you refer to, I must own ought to shield you,
Sir, from suspicion; but the man before you be a man that would make an
angel suspect, should that angel plead for he.
I come forward,--traverse the room,--was indeed in a bl--dy passion.--I
have no patience, Madam!--and again I bite my unpersuasive lip.
Cl. no man ought to be impatient at imputation he be not ashamed to
deserve. an innocent man will not be outrageous upon such imputation.
a guilty man ought not. [most excellently would this charming creature
cap sentence with Lord M.!] but I be not now try you, Sir, [to I,]
on the foot of your merit. I be only sorry that I be constrain to put
question to this worthy gentleman, [worthy gentleman, Jack!] which,
perhaps, I ought not to put, so far as they regard himself. and I hope,
Captain Tomlinson, that you, who know not Mr. Lovelace so well, as, to my
unhappiness, I do, and who have child of your own, will excuse a poor
young creature, who be deprive of all worldly protection, and who have
be insult and endanger by the most designing man in the world, and,
perhaps, by a confederacy of his creature.
there she stopt; and stand up, and look at I; fear, nevertheless,
apparently mingle with her anger.--and so it ought. I be glad,
however, of this poor sign of love; no one fear whom they value not.
woman's tongue be license, I be go to say; but my conscience
would not let I call she a woman; nor use to she so vulgar a phrase. I
could only rave by my motion, lift up my eye, spread my hand, rub my
face, pull my wig, and look like a fool. indeed, I have a great mind to
run mad. have I be alone with she, I would; and she should have take
consequence.
the Captain interpose in my behalf; gently, however, and as a man not
quite sure that he be himself acquit. some of the plea we have both
insist on he again enforce; and, speak low, poor gentleman! say
he, who can but pity he? indeed, Madam, it be easy to see, with all his
failing, the power you have over he!
Cl. I have no pleasure, Sir, in distress any one; not even he, who
have so much distressed I. but, Sir, when I think, and when I see he
before I, I cannot command my temper! indeed, indeed, Captain
Tomlinson, Mr. Lovelace have not act by I either as a grateful or a
generous man, nor even as a prudent one!--he know not, as I tell he
yesterday, the value of the heart he have insult!
there the angel stopt; her handkerchief at her eye.
o Belford, Belford! that she should so greatly excel, as to make I, at
time, appear as a villain in my own eye!
I besought her pardon. I promise that it should be the study of my
whole life to deserve it. my fault, I say, whatever they have be,
be rather fault in her apprehension than in fact. I besought she to
give way to the expedient I have hit upon--I repeat it. the Captain
enforce it, for her uncle's sake. I, once more, for the sake of the
general reconciliation; for the sake of all my family; for the sake of
prevent further mischief.
she weep. she seem stagger in her resolution--she turn from I.
I mention the letter of Lord M. I besought she to resign to Lady
Betty's mediation all our difference, if she would not forgive I before
she see she.
she turn towards I--she be go to speak; but her heart be full,
and again she turn away she eyes,--And do you really and indeed expect
Lady Betty and Miss Montague?--And do you--again she stopt.
I answer in a solemn manner.
she turn from I her whole face, and pause, and seem to consider.
but, in a passionate accent, again turn towards I, [o how difficult,
Jack, for a Harlowe spirit to forgive!] let her ladyship come, if she
please, say she, I cannot, cannot, wish to see she; and if I do see
she, and she be to plead for you, I cannot wish to hear she! the more
I think, the less I can forgive an attempt, that I be convince be
intend to destroy I. [a plaguy strong word for the occasion,
suppose she be right!] what have my conduct be, that an insult of
such a nature should be offer to I, and it would be a weakness in I
to forgive? I be sink in my own eye! and how can I receive a visit
that must depress I more?
the Captain urge she in my favour with great earnestness than before.
we both even clamour, as I may say, for mercy and forgiveness. [didst
thou never hear the good folk talk of take Heaven by storm?]--
contrition repeatedly avow; a total reformation promise; the happy
expedient again urge.
Cl. I have take my measure. I have go too far to recede, or to
wish to recede. my mind be prepare for adversity. that I have not
deserve the evil I have meet with be my consolation; I have write to
Miss Howe what my intention be. my heart be not with you--it be
against you, Mr. Lovelace. I have not write to you as I do in the
letter I leave behind I, have I not resolve, whatever become of I, to
renounce you for ever.
I be full of hope now. severe as her expression be, I see she be
afraid that I should think of what she have write. and, indeed, her
letter be violence itself.--angry people, Jack, should never write while
their passion hold.
Lovel. the severity you have show I, Madam, whether by pen or by
speech, shall never have place in my remembrance, but for your honor. in
the light you have take thing, all be deserve, and but the natural
result of virtuous resentment; and I adore you, even for the pang you
have give I.
she be silent. she have employment enough with her handkerchief at her
eye.
Lovel. you lament, sometimes, that you have no friend of your own sex
to consult with. Miss Rawlins, I must confess, be too inquisitive to be
confide in, [I like not, thou mayest think, her appeal to Miss
Rawlins.] she may mean well. but I never in my life know a person, who
be fond of pry into the secret of other, that be fit to be
trust. the curiosity of such be govern by pride, which be not
gratify but by whisper about a secret till it become public, in
order to show either their consequence, or their sagacity. it be so in
every case. what man or woman, who be covetous of power, or of make
a right use of it? but in the lady of my family you may confide. it
be their ambition to think of you as one of themselves. Renew but your
consent to pass to the world, for the sake of your uncle's expedient, and
for the prevention of mischief, as a lady some time marry. Lady Betty
may be acquaint with the naked truth; and you may, (as she hop you
will,) accompany she to her seat; and, if it must be so, consider I as
in a state of penitence or probation, to be accept or reject, as I
may appear to deserve.
the Captain again clapt his hand on his breast, and declare, upon his
honour, that this be a proposal that, be the case that of his own
daughter, and she be not resolve upon immediate marriage, (which yet
he think by far the more eligible choice,) he should be very much
concern be she to refuse it.
Cl. be I with Mr. Lovelace's relation, and to pass as his wife to
the world, I could not have any choice. and how could he be then in a
state of probation?--o Mr. Tomlinson, you be too much his friend to see
into his drift.
Capt. his friend, Madam, as I say before, as I be your's and your
uncle's, for the sake of a general reconciliation, which must begin with
a well understanding between yourself.
Lovel. only, my dear life, resolve to attend the arrival and visit
of Lady Betty; and permit she to arbitrate between we.
Capt. there can be no harm in that, Madam. you can suffer no
inconvenience from that. if Mr. Lovelace's offence be such, that a woman
of Lady Betty's character judge it to be unpardonable, why then--
Cl. [interrupting; and to I,] if I be not invade by you, Sir; if I
be, (as I ought to be,) my own mistress, I think to stay here, in this
honest house, [and then have I an eye-beam, as the Captain call it,
flash at I,] till I receive a letter from Miss Howe. that, I hope,
will be in a day or two. if in that time the lady come whom you
expect, and if they be desirous to see the creature whom you have make
unhappy, I shall know whether I can or cannot receive their visit.
she turn short to the door, and, retire, go up stair to her
chamber.
o Sir, say the Captain, as soon as she be go, what an angel of a
woman be this! I have be, and I be a very wicked man. but if any
thing should happen amiss to this admirable lady, through my mean, I
shall have more cause for self-reproach than for all the bad action
of my life put together.
and his eye glisten.
nothing can happen amiss, thou sorrowful dog!--What can happen amiss?
be we to form our opinion of thing by the romantic notion of a girl,
who suppose that to be the great which be the slight of evil?
have I not tell thee our whole story? have she not break her promise?
do I not generously spare she, when in my power? I be decent, though
I have she at such advantage.--greater liberty have I take with girl
of character at a common romping 'bout, and all have be laugh off,
and handkerchief and head-clothe adjust, and petticoat shake to
right, in my presence. never man, in the like circumstance, and
resolve as I be resolve, goad on as I be goad on, as well by her
own sex, as by the impulse of a violent passion, be ever so decent.
yet what mercy do she show I?
now, Jack, this pitiful dog be such another unfortunate one as thyself
--hi argument serve to confirm I in the very purpose he bring they
to prevail upon I to give up. have he leave I to myself, to the
tenderness of my own nature, move as I be when the lady withdraw, and
have he set down, and make odious face, and say nothing--it be very
possible that I should have take the chair over against he, which she
have quit, and have cry and blubber with he for half an hour
together. but the varlet to argue with me!--to pretend to convince a
man, who know in be heart that he be do a wrong thing!--he must need
think that this would put I upon try what I could say for myself; and
when the extended compunction can be carry from the heart to the lip
it must evaporate in word.
Thou, perhaps, in this place, wouldst have urge the same plea that he
urge. what I answer to he therefore may do for thee, and spare thee
the trouble of writing, and I of reading, a good deal of nonsense.
Capt. you be pleased to tell I, Sir, that you only propose to try
her virtue; and that you believe you should actually marry she.
Lovel. so I shall, and cannot help it. I have no doubt but I shall.
and as to try she, be she not now in the height of her trial? have I
not reason to think that she be come about? be she not now yield up
her resentment for an attempt which she think she ought not to forgive?
and if she do, may she not forgive the last attempt?--can she, in a word,
resent that more than she do this? woman often, for their own sake,
will keep the last secret; but will ostentatiously din the ear of god
and man with their clamour upon a successless offer. it be my folly,
my weakness, that I give she not more cause for this her unsparing
violence!
Capt. O Sir, you will never be able to subdue this lady without force.
Lovel. well, then, puppy, must I not endeavour to find a proper time
and place--
Capt. forgive I, Sir! but can you think of force to such a fine
creature?
Lovel. Force, indeed, I abhor the thought of; and for what, think
thou, have I take all the pain I have take, and engage so many
person in my cause, but to avoid the necessity of violent compulsion?
but yet, imagin thou that I expect direct consent from such a lover of
form as this lady be know to be! let I tell thee, M'Donald, that thy
master, Belford, have urge on thy side of the question all that thou
canst urge. must I have every sorry fellow's conscience to pacify, as
well as my own?--By my soul, Patrick, she have a friend here, [clap my
hand on my breast,] that plead for she with great and more
irresistible eloquence than all the man in the world can plead for she.
and have she not escape I--and yet how have I answer my first design
of try she,* and in she the virtue of the most virtuous of the sex?--
Perseverance, man!--perseverance!--what! wouldst thou have I decline a
trial that they make for the honour of a sex we all so dearly love?
* see Vol. III. Letter XVIII.
then, Sir, you have no thought--no thoughts--[looking still more
sorrowfully,] of marry this wonderful lady?
yes, yes, Patrick, but I have. but let I, first, to gratify my pride,
bring down she's. let I see, that she love I well enough to forgive
I for my own sake. have she not heretofore lament that she staid not
in her father's house, though the consequence must have be, if she have,
that she would have be the wife of the odious solme? if now she be
bring to consent to be mine, se thou not that the reconciliation
with her detest relation be the inducement, as it always be, and not
love of me?--neither her virtue nor her love can be establish but upon
full trial; the last trial--but if her resistance and resentment be such
as hitherto I have reason to expect they will be, and if I find in that
resentment less of hatred of I than of the fact, then shall she be mine
in her own way. then, hateful as be the life of shackle to I, will I
marry she.
well, Sir, I can only say, that I be dough in your hand, to be mould
into what shape you please. but if, as I say before--
none of thy Said-before's, Patrick. I remember all thou sadist--and I
know all thou canst far say--thou art only, Pontius Pilate like,
washing thine own hand, (donot I know thee?) that thou mayest have
something to silence thy conscience with by load I. but we have go
too far to recede. be not all our engine in readiness? dry up thy
sorrowful eye. let unconcern and heart's ease once more take possession
of thy solemn feature. Thou hast hitherto perform extremely well.--
Shame not thy past by thy future behaviour; and a rich reward await
thee. if thou art dough be dough; and I slapt he on the shoulder--
resume but thy former shape, and Iwill be answerable for the event.
he bow assent and compliance; go to the glass; and begin to untwist
and unsadden his feature; pull his wig right, as if that, as well as
his head and heart have be discompose by his compunction, and once more
become old Lucifer's and mine.
but didst thou think, Jack, that there be so much--what-shall-i-call-it?
--in this Tomlinson? didst thou imagine that such a fellow as that have
bowel? that nature, so long dead and bury in he, as to all humane
effect, should thus revive and exert itself?--Yet why do I ask this
question of thee, who, to my equal surprise, hast show, on the same
occasion, the like compassionate sensibility?
as to Tomlinson, it look as if poverty have make he the wicked fellow he
be; as plenty and wantonness have make we what we be. necessity, after
all, be the test of principle. but what be there in this dull word, or
thing, call HONESTY, that even I, who cannot in my present view be
serve by it, cannot help think even the accidental emanation of it
amiable in Tomlinson, though demonstrate in a female case; and judge
well of he for be capable of such?
LETTER XXXVI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
this debate between the Captain and I be hardly over when the three
woman, lead by Miss Rawlins, enter, hop no intrusion, but very
desirous, the maiden say, to know if we be likely to accommodate.
o yes, I hope so. you know, Ladies, that your sex must, in these case,
preserve their form. they must be court to comply with their own
happiness. a lucky expedient we have hit upon. the uncle have his doubt
of our marriage. he cannot believe, nor will any body, that it be
possible that a man so much in love, the lady so desirable--
they all take the hint. it be a very extraordinary case, the two widow
allow. woman, Jack, [as I believe I have observe* elsewhere,] have a
high opinion of what they can do for we. Miss Rawlins desire, if I
please, to let they know the expedient; and look as if there be no
need to proceed in the rest of my speech.
* see Letter XXIV. of this volume.
I beg that they would not let the lady know I have tell they what this
expedient be; and they should hear it.
they promise.
it be this: that to oblige and satisfy Mr. Harlowe, the ceremony be to
be again perform. he be to be privately present, and to give his
niece to I with his own hand--and she be retire to consider of it.
Thou seest, Jack, that I have provide an excuse, to save my veracity to
the woman here, in case I should incline to marriage, and she should
choose to have Miss Rawlins's assistance at the ceremony. nor doubt I
to bring my fair-one to save my credit on this occasion, if I could get
she to consent to be mine.
a charming expedient! cry the widow. they be all three ready to clap
their hand for joy upon it. woman love to be marry twice at least,
Jack; though not indeed to the same man. and all bless the
reconciliatory scheme and the proposer of it; and, suppose it come from
the Captain, they look at he with pleasure, while his face shin with
the applause imply. he should think himself very happy, if he could
bring about a general reconciliation; and he flourish with his head
like my man will. on his victory over old grime; bridle by turn, like
Miss Rawlins in the height of a prudish fit.
but now it be time for the Captain to think of return to town, have
a great deal of business to dispatch before morning. nor be he certain
that he should be able again to attend we at Hampstead before he go
home.
and yet, as every thing be draw towards a crisis, I do not intend
that he should leave Hampstead that night.
a message to the above effect be carry up, at my desire, by Mrs.
Moore; with the Captain's compliment, and to know if she have any
command for he to her uncle?
but I hint to the woman, that it would be proper for they to withdraw,
if the lady do come down; lest she should not care to be so free before
they on a proposal so particular, as she would be to we, who have offer
it to her consideration.
Mrs. Moore bring down word that the lady be follow she. they all
three withdraw; and she enter at one door, as they go out at the
other.
the Captain accost she, repeat the content of the message send up;
and desire that she would give he her command in relation to the
report he be to make to her uncle Harlowe.
I know not what to say, Sir, nor what I would have you to say, to my
uncle--perhaps you may have business in town--perhaps you need not see my
uncle till I have hear from Miss Howe; till after Lady Betty--I donot
know what to say.
I implore the return of that value which she have so generously
acknowledge once to have have for I. I presume, I say, to flatter
myself that Lady Betty, in her own person, and in the name of all my
family, would be able, on my promise reformation and contrition, to
prevail in my favour, especially as our prospect in other respect with
regard to the general reconciliation wish for be so happy. but let
I owe to your own generosity, my dear creature, say I, rather than
to the mediation of any person on earth, the forgiveness I be an humble
suitor for. how much more agreeable to yourself, o well belove of my
soul, must it be, as well as oblige to I, that your first personal
knowledge of my relation, and theirs of you, (for they will not be
deny attend you) should not be begin in recrimination, in appeal?
as Lady Betty will be here soon, it will not perhaps be possible for you
to receive her visit with a brow absolutely serene. but, dearest,
dearest creature, I beseech you, let the misunderstanding pass as a
slight one--as a misunderstanding clear up. appeal give pride and
superiority to the person appeal to, and be apt to lessen the
appellant, not only in their eye, but in her own. exalt not into judge
those who be prepared to take lesson and instruction from you. the
individual of my family be as proud as I be say to be. but they will
cheerfully resign to your superiority--you will be the first woman of the
family in every one's eye.
this might have do with any other woman in the world but this; and yet
she be the only woman in the world of whom it may with truth be say.
but thus, angrily, do she disclaim the compliment.
yes, indeed!--[and there she stopt a moment, her sweet bosom heaving with
a noble disdain]--cheate out of myself from the very first!--a fugitive
from my own family! renounce by my relation! insult by you!--laye
humble claim to the protection of your's!--Is not this the light in which
I must appear not only to the lady of your family, but to all the
world?--think you, Sir, that in these circumstance, or even have I be
in the happy, that I could be affect by this plea of undeserved
superiority?--you be a stranger to the mind of Clarissa Harlowe, if you
think she capable of so poor and so undue a pride!
she go from we to the farth end of the room.
the Captain be again affect--excellent creature! I call she; and,
reverently approach she, urge far the plea I have last make.
it be but lately, say I, that the opinion of my relation have be
more than indifferent to I, whether good or bad; and it be for your
sake, more than for my own, that I now wish to stand well with my whole
family. the principal motive of Lady Betty's come up, be, to purchase
present for the whole family to make on the happy occasion.
this consideration, turn to the Captain, with so noble-minded a dear
creature, I know, can have no weight; only as it will show their value
and respect. but what a damp would their worthy heart receive, be
they to find their admired new niece, as they now think she, not only not
their niece, but capable of renounce I for ever! they love I. they
all love I. I have be guilty of carelessness and levity to they,
indeed; but of carelessness and levity only; and that owe to a pride
that have set I above meanness, though it have not do every thing for
I.
my whole family will be guaranty for my good behaviour to this dear
creature, their niece, their daughter, their cousin, their friend, their
choose companion and directress, all in one.--Upon my soul, Captain, we
may, we must be happy.
but, dearest, dearest creature, let I on my knee [and down I dropt, she
face all the time turn half from I, as she stand at the window, her
handkerchief often at her eye] on my knee let I plead your promise
forgiveness; and let we not appear to they, on their visit, thus unhappy
with each other. Lady Betty, the next hour that she see you, will write
her opinion of you, and of the likelihood of our future happiness, to
Lady Sarah her sister, a weak-spirited woman, who now hop to supply to
herself, in my bride, the lost daughter she still mourn for!
the Captain then join in, and re-urge her uncle's hope and
expectation, and his resolution effectually to set about the general
reconciliation; the mischief that might be prevent; and the certainty
that there be that her uncle might be prevail on to give she to I
with his own hand, if she make it her choice to wait for his come up.
but, for his own part, he humbly advise, and fervently press she, to
make the very next day, or Monday at farth, my happy day.
permit I, dear lady, say he, and I could kneel to you myself,
[bend his knee,] though I have no interest in my earnestness, but the
pleasure I should have to be able to serve you all, to beseech you to
give I an opportunity to assure your uncle that I myself see with my own
eye the happy knot tied!--all misunderstanding, all doubt, all
diffidence, will then be at an end.
and what, Madam, rejoin I, still kneel, can there be in your new
measure, be they what they will, that can so happily, so reputably, I
will presume to say, for all around, obviate the present difficulty?
Miss Howe herself, if she love you, and if she love your fame, Madam,
urge the Captain, his knee still bent, must congratulate you on such
happy conclusion.
then turn her face, she see the Captain half-kneeling--o Sir! O Capt.
Tomlinson!--Why this undue condescension? extend her hand to his
elbow, to raise he. I cannot bear this!--then cast her eye on I,
rise, Mr. Lovelace--kneel not to the poor creature whom you have
insulted!--how cruel the occasion for it!--And how mean the submission!
not mean to such an angel!--nor can I rise but to be forgive!
the Captain then re-urge once more the day--he be amazed, he say, if
she ever value me--
O Captain Tomlinson, interrupt she, how much be you the friend of this
man!--if I have never value he, he never would have have it in his power
to insult I; nor could I, if I have never regard he, have take to
heart as I do, the insult (execrable as it be) so undeservedly, so
ungratefully give--but let he retire--for a moment let he retire.
I be more than half afraid to trust the Captain by himself with she. he
give I a sign that I might depend upon he. and then I take out of my
pocket his letter to I, and Lady Betty's and Miss Montague's, and Lord
M.'s letter (which last she have not then see); and give they to he,
procure for I, in the first place, Mr. Tomlinson, a re-perusal of these
three letter; and of this from Lord M. and I beseech you, my dearest
life, give they due consideration: and let I on my return find the happy
effect of that consideration.
I then withdraw; with slow foot, however, and a misgiving heart.
the Captain insist upon this re-perusal previously to what she have to
say to he, as he tell I. she comply, but with some difficulty; as
if she be afraid of be soften in my favour.
she lament her unhappy situation; destitute of friend, and not know
whither to go, or what to do. she ask question, sift-question,
about her uncle, about her family, and after what he know of Mr.
Hickman's fruitless application in her favour.
he be well prepared in this particular; for I have show he the letter
and extract of letter of Miss Howe, which I have so happily come at.*
might she be assure, she ask he, that her brother, with Singleton and
Solmes, be actually in quest of she?
* Vol. IV. Letter XLIV.
he aver that they be.
she ask, if he think I have hope of prevail on she to go back to
town?
he be sure I have not.
be he really of opinion that Lady Betty would pay she a visit?
he have no doubt of it.
but, Sir; but, Captain tomlinson--[impatiently turn from he, and
again to he] I know not what to do--but be I your daughter, Sir--be
you my own father--Alas! Sir, I have neither father nor mother!
he turn from she and wipe his eye.
o Sir! you have humanity! [she weep too.] there be some man in the
world, thank Heaven, that can be move. o Sir, I have meet with hard-
hearted man--in my own family too--or I could not have be so unhappy
as I be--but I make every body unhappy!
his eye no doubt run over.--
Dearest Madam! heavenly lady!--who can--who can--hesitate and blubber
the dog, as he own. and indeed I hear some part of what pass,
though they both talk low than I wish; for, from the nature of
their conversation, there be no room for altitude.
they, and BOTH, and they!--how it go against I to include this angel
of a creature, and any man on earth but myself, in one world!
Capt. who can forbear be affected?--But, Madam, you can be no other
man's.
Cl. nor would I be. but he be so sunk with me!--To fire the house!--An
artifice so vile!--contrive for the bad of purposes!--would you have a
daughter of your's--but what would I say?--Yet you see that I have nobody
in whom I can confide!--mr. Lovelace be a vindictive man!--he could not
love the creature whom he could insult as he have insult I!
she pause. and then resume--in short, I never, never can forgive he,
nor he me.--Do you think, Sir, I never would have go so far as I have
go, if I have intend ever to draw with he in one yoke?--I leave behind
I such a letter--
you know, Madam, he have acknowledge the justice of your resentment--
o Sir, he can acknowledge, and he can retract, fifty time a day--but do
not think I be trifle with myself and you, and want to be persuade to
forgive he, and to be his. there be not a creature of my sex, who would
have be more explicit, and more frank, than I would have be, from the
moment I intend to be his, have I a heart like my own to deal with. I
be always above reserve, Sir, I will presume to say, where I have no
cause of doubt. Mr. Lovelace's conduct have make I appear, perhaps,
over-nice, when my heart want to be encourage and assure! and when,
if it have be so, my whole behaviour would have be govern by it.
she stopt; her handkerchief at her eye.
I inquire after the minutest part of her behaviour, as well as after her
word. I love, thou know, to trace human nature, and more
particularly female nature, through its most secret recess.
the pitiful fellow be lose in silent admiration of she. and thus the
noble creature proceed.
it be the fate in unequal union, that tolerable creature, through they,
frequently incur censure, when more happily yoke they might be entitle
to praise. and shall I not shun a union with a man, that might lead into
error a creature who flatter herself that she be bl with an
inclination to be good; and who wish to make every one happy with whom
she have any connection, even to her very servant?
she pause, take a turn about the room--the fellow, devil fetch he, a
mummy all the time:--then proceed.
formerly, indeed, I hop to be an humble mean of reform he. but,
when I have no such hope, be it right [you be a serious man, Sir] to
make a venture that shall endanger my own moral?
still silent be the varlet. if my advocate have nothing to say for I,
what hope of carry my cause?
and now, Sir, what be the result of all?--It be this--that you will
endeavour, if you have that influence over he which a man of your sense
and experience ought to have, to prevail upon he, and that for his own
sake, as well as for mine, to leave I free, to pursue my own destiny.
and of this you may assure he, that I will never be any other man's.
Impossible, Madam! I know that Mr. Lovelace would not hear I with
patience on such a topic. and I do assure you that I have some spirit,
and should not care to take an indignity from he or from any man live.
she pause--then resume--and think you, Sir, that my uncle will refuse
to receive a letter from I? [how averse, Jack, to concede a tittle in
my favour!]
I know, Madam, as matter be circumstance, that he would not answer it.
if you please I will carry one down from you.
and will he not pursue his intention in my favour, nor be himself
reconcile to I, except I be marry?
from what your brother give out, and effect to believe, on Mr.
Lovelace's living with you in the same--
no more, Sir--I be an unhappy creature!
he then re-urge, that it would be in her power instantly, or on the
morrow, to put an end to all her difficulty.
how can that be? say she: the license still to be obtain? the
settlement still to be sign? Miss Howe's answer to my last
unreceived?--and shall I, Sir, be in such a hurry, as if I think my
honour in danger if I delay? yet marry the man from whom only it can
be endangered!--unhappy, thrice unhappy Clarissa Harlowe!--In how many
difficulty have one rash step involve thee!--and she turn from he
and weep.
the varlet, by way of comfort, weep too: yet her tear, as he might have
observe, be tear that indicate rather a yielding than a perverse
temper.
there be a sort of stone, thou know, so soft in the quarry, that it
may in manner be cut with a knife; but if the opportunity not be take,
and it be expose to the air for any time, it will become as hard as
marble, and then with difficulty it yield to the chisel.* so this lady,
not take at the moment, after a turn or two across the room, gain more
resolution! and then she declare, as she have do once before, that she
would wait the issue of Miss Howe's answer to the letter she have send she
from hence, and take her measure accordingly--leave it to he, mean
time, to make what report he think fit to her uncle--the kind that
truth could bear, she doubt not from Captain Tomlinson: and she should
be glad of a few line from he, to hear what that be.
* the nature of the Bath stone, in particular.
she wish he a good journey. she complain of her head; and be about
to withdraw: but I stept round to the door next the stair, as if I have
but just come in from the garden (which, as I enter, I call a very
pretty one) and take her reluctant hand as she be go out: my dearest
life, you be not going?--what hope, Captain?--Have you not some hop
to give I of pardon and reconciliation?
she say she would not be detain. but I would not let she go till she
have promise to return, when the Captain have report to I what her
resolution be.
and when he have, I send up and claim her promise; and she come down
again, and repeat (as what she be determine upon) that she would wait
for Miss Howe's answer to the letter she have write to she, and take
her measure accord to its content.
I expostulate with she upon it, in the most submissive and earnest
manner. she make it necessary for I to repeat many of the plea I have
before urge. the Captain second I with equal earnestness. at last,
each fall down on our knee before she.
she be distressed. I be afraid at one time she would have faint.
yet neither of we would rise without some concession. I plead my own
sake; the Captain, his dear friend, her uncle's; and both re-plead the
prevention of future mischief; and the peace and happiness of the two
family.
she own herself unequal to the conflict. she sigh. she sob. she
weep. she wring her hand.
I be perfectly eloquent in my vow and protetation. her tearful eye
be cast down upon I; a glow upon each charming cheek; a visible
anguish in every lovely feature--at last, her trembling knee seem to
fail she, she dropt into the next chair; her charming face, as if seek
for a hiding place (which a mother's bosom would have well supply)
sink upon her own shoulder.
I forget at the instant all my vow of revenge. I throw myself at her
foot, as she sit; and, snatch her hand, press it with my lip. I
beseech Heaven to forgive my past offence, and prosper my future hope,
as I design honourably and justly by the charmer of my heart, if once
more she should restore I to her favour. and I think I feel drop of
scald water [could they be tear?] trickle down upon my cheek; while
my cheek, glow like fire, seem to scorch up the unwelcome
stranger.
I then arise, not doubt of an imply pardon in this silent distress.
I raise the Captain. I whisper he--by my soul, man, I be in earnest.
--now talk of reconciliation, of her uncle, of the license, of settlement
--and raise my voice, if now at last, Captain Tomlinson, my angel will
give I leave to call so great a blessing mine, it will be impossible
that you should say too much to her uncle in praise of my gratitude, my
affection, and fidelity to his charming niece; and he may begin as soon
as he please his kind scheme for effect the desirable
reconciliation!--Nor shall he prescribe any term to I that I will not
comply with.
the Captain bless I with his eye and hand--thank God! whisper he.
we approach the lady together.
Capt. what hinder, dear Madam, what now hinder, but that Lady
Betty Lawrance, when she come, may be acquaint with the truth of every
thing? and that then she may assist privately at your nuptial? I will
stay till they be celebrate; and then shall go down with the happy
tiding to my dear Mr. Harlowe. and all will, all must, soon be happy.
I must have an answer from Miss Howe, reply the still tremble fair-
one. I cannot change my new measure but with her advice. I will
forfeit all my hope of happiness in this world, rather than forfeit her
good opinion, and that she should think I giddy, unsteady, or
precipitate. all I shall far say on the present subject be this,
that when I have her answer to what I have write, I will write to she
the whole state of the matter, as I shall then be enable to do.
Lovel. then must I despair for ever!--O Captain Tomlinson, Miss Howe
hat me!--miss Howe--
Capt. not so, perhaps--when Miss Howe know your concern for have
offend, she will never advise that, with such prospect of general
reconciliation, the hope of so many considerable person in both
family should be frustrate. some little time, as this excellent
lady have foresee and hint, will necessarily be take up in actually
procure the license, and in peruse and sign the settlement. in
that time Miss Howe's answer may be receive; and Lady Betty may arrive;
and she, no doubt, will have weight to dissipate the lady's doubt, and
to accelerate the day. it shall be my part, mean time, to make Mr.
Harlowe easy. all I fear be from Mr. James Harlowe's quarter; and
therefore all must be conduct with prudence and privacy: as your uncle,
Madam, have propose.
she be silent, I rejoice in her silence. the dear creature, think I,
have actually forgive I in her heart!--but why will she not lay I under
obligation to she, by the generosity of an explicit declaration?--and
yet, as that would not accelerate any thing, while the license be not in
my hand, she be the less to be blame (if I do her justice) for take
more time to descend.
I propose, as on the morrow night, to go to town; and doubt not to
bring the license up with I on Monday morning; would she be pleased to
assure I, that she would not depart form Mrs. Moore's.
she should stay at Mrs. Moore's till she have an answer from Miss Howe.
I tell she that I hop I might have her tacit consent at least to the
obtaining if the license.
I see by the turn of her countenance that I should not have ask this
question. she be so far from tacitly consent, that she declare to
the contrary.
as I never intend, I say, to ask she to enter again into a house, with
the people of which she be so much offend, would she be pleased to
give order for her clothe to be bring up hither? or should Dorcas
attend she for any of her command on that head?
she desire not ever more to see any body belong to that house. she
might perhaps get Mrs. Moore or Mrs. Bevis to go thither for she, and
take her key with they.
I doubt not, I say, that Lady Betty would arrive by that time. I
hop she have no objection to my bring that lady and my cousin
Montague up with I?
she be silent.
to be sure, Mr. Lovelace, say the Captain, the lady can have no
objection to this.
she be still silent. so silence in this case be assent.
would she be pleased to write to Miss Howe?--
Sir! Sir! peevishly interrupting--no more question; no prescribing to I
--you will do as you think fit--so will I, as I please. I own no
obligation to you. Captain Tomlinson, your servant. recommend I to my
uncle Harlowe's favour. and be go.
I take her reluctant hand, and besought she only to promise to meet I
early in the morning.
to what purpose meet you? have you more to say than have be say? I
have have enough of vow and protestation, Mr. Lovelace. to what purpose
should I meet you to-morrow morning?
I repeat my request, and that in the most fervent manner, name six in
the morning.
'you know that I be always stir before that hour, at this season of
the year,' be the half-express consent.
she then again recommend herself to her uncle's favour; and withdraw.
and thus, Belford, have she mend her market, as Lord M. would say, and
I worst mine. Miss Howe's next letter be now the hinge on which the
fate of both must turn. I shall be absolutely ruin and undo, if I
cannot intercept it.
END of VOL.5
Volume VI.
content of volume VI
LETTER I. II. Lovelace to belford.--
his conditional promise to Tomlinson in the lady's favour. his plea
and argument on their present situation, and on his darling and
hitherto-baffle view. his whimsical contest with his conscience. his
late adieu to it. his strange levity, which he call gravity, on the
death of Belford's uncle.
LETTER III. IV. from the same.--
she favour he with a meeting in the garden. her composure. her
conversation great and noble. but will not determine any thing in his
favour. it be however evident, he say, that she have still some
tenderness for he. his reason. an affect scene between they. her
ingenuousness and openness of heart. she resolve to go to church; but
will not suffer he to accompany her thither. his whimsical debate with
the God of Love, whom he introduce as plead for the lady.
LETTER V. VI. VII. from the same.--
he have get the wish-for letter from Miss howe.--inform he of the
manner of obtain it.--his remark upon it. observation on female
friendship. comparison between Clarissa and Miss Howe.
LETTER viii. from the same.--
another conversation with the lady. his plausible argument to re-obtain
her favour ineffectual. his pride pique. his revenge incite. new
argument in favour of his wicked prospect. his notice that a license
be actually obtain.
LETTER IX. x. from the same.--
Copy of the license; with his observation upon it. his scheme for
annual marriage. he be prepare with Lady Betty and Miss Montague to
wait upon Clarissa. who these pretended lady be. how dressed. they
give themselves air of quality. humourously instruct they how to act
up their assumed character.
LETTER XI. XII. Lovelace to belford.--
once more be the charmer of his soul in her old lodging. brief account
of the horrid imposture. Steels his heart by revengeful recollection.
her agonizing apprehension. temporary distraction. be ready to fall
into fit. but all her distress, all her prayer, her innocence, her
virtue, cannot save she from the most villanous outrage.
LETTER XIII. Belford to Lovelace.--
vehemently inveigh against he. grief for the lady. be now convince
that there must be a world after this to do justice to injure merit.
Beseeches he, if he be a man, and not a devil, to do all the poor
justice now in his power.
LETTER XIV. Lovelace to Belford.--
Regrets that he ever attempt she. aim at extenuation. do he not
see that he have journey on to this stage, with one determined point in
view from the first? she be at present stupifie, he say.
LETTER XV. from the same.--
the lady's affect behaviour in her delirium. he own that art have
be use to she. begin to feel remorse.
LETTER XVI. from the same.--
the lady write upon scrap of paper, which she tear, and throw under
the table. copy of ten of these ramble paper; and of a letter to
he most affectingly incoherent. he attempt far to extenuate his
villany. try to resume his usual levity; and form a scheme to decoy
the people at Hampstead to the infamous woman's in town. the lady seem
to be recover.
LETTER XVII. from the same.--
she attempt to get away in his absence. be prevent by the odious
Sinclair. he exult in the hope of look she into confusion when he
see she. be tell by Dorcas that she be come into the dining-room to
find he out.
LETTER xviii. from the same.--
a high scene of she exalted, and of his depressed, behaviour. offer to
make her amend by matrimony. she treat his offer with contempt.
Afraid Belford play he false.
LETTER XIX. from the same.--
Wishes he have never see she. with all the woman he have know till now,
it be once subdue, and always subdue. his miserable dejection. his
remorse. she attempt to escape. a mob raise. his quick invention to
pacify it. out of conceit with himself and his contrivance.
LETTER XX. XXI. Lovelace to Belford.--
Lord M. very ill. his presence necessary at M. Hall. put Dorcas upon
ingratiate herself with her lady.--he re-urge marriage to she. she
absolutely, from the most noble motif, reject he.
LETTER XXII. from the same.--
reflect upon himself. it cost, he say, more pain to be wicked than to
be good. the lady's solemn expostulation with he. extol her greatness
of soul. dorca come into favour with she. he be alarm by another
attempt of the lady to get off. she be in agony at be prevent.
he try to intimidate she. Dorcas plead for she. on the point of
draw his sword against himself. the occasion.
LETTER XXIII. from the same.--
cannot yet persuade himself but the lady will be his. reason for his
opinion. opens his heart to Belford, as to his intention by she.
mortify that she refuse his honest vow. her violation but notional.
her triumph great than her suffering. she will unviolate. he be a
well man, he say, than most rake; and why.
LETTER XXIV. XXV. from the same.--
the lady give a promissory note to Dorcas, to induce she to further she
escape.--a fair trial of skill now, he say. a conversation between the
vile Dorcas and her lady: in which she engage her lady's pity. the
bond of wickedness strong than the tie of virtue. observation on
that subject.
LETTER XXVI. XXVII. xxviii. from the same.--
a new contrivance to advantage of the lady's intended escape.--a letter
from Tomlinson. intent of it.--He go out to give opportunity for the
lady to attempt an escape. his design frustrate.
LETTER XXIX. from the same.--
an interesting conversation between the lady and he. no concession in
his favour. by his soul, he swear, this dear girl give the lie to all
their rakish maxim. he have lay all the sex under obligation to he;
and why.
LETTER XXX. Lovelace to Belford.--
Lord M. in extreme danger. the family desire his presence. he
intercept a severe letter from Miss Howe to her friend. copy of it.
LETTER XXXI. from the same.--
the lady, suspect Dorcas, try to prevail upon he to give she her
liberty. she disclaim vengeance, and affectingly tell he all her
future view. deny, she once more attempt an escape. prevent, and
terrify with apprehension of instant dishonour, she be oblige to make
some concession.
LETTER XXXII. from the same.--
accuse she of explain away her concession. make desperate, he seek
occasion to quarrel with she. she exert a spirit which overawe he.
he be ridicule by the infamous copartnership. call to Belford to help
a gay heart to a little of his dismal, on the expect death of Lord M.
LETTER XXXIII. from the same.--
another message from M. Hall, to engage he to go down the next morning.
LETTER XXXIV. XXXV. from the same.--
the woman's instigation. his farth scheme against the lady. what,
he ask, be the injury which a church-rite will not at any time repair?
letter xxxvi. from the same.--
himself, the mother, her nymph, all assemble with intent to execute his
detestable purpose. her glorious behaviour on the occasion. he
execrate, detest, despise himself; and admire she more than ever.
oblige to set out early that morning for M. Hall, he will press she with
letter to meet he next Thursday, her uncle's birthday, at the altar.
LETTER XXXVII. xxxviii. XXXIX. Lovelace to Clarissa, from M. Hall.--
urge she accordingly, (the license in her hand,) by the most engaging
plea and argument.
LETTER XL. Lovelace to Belford.--
beg he will wait on the lady, and induce she to write but four word to
he, signify the church and the day. be now resolve on wedlock.
curse his plot and contrivance; which all end, he say, in one grand
plot upon himself.
LETTER XLI. Belford to Lovelace. in answer.--
Refuses to undertake for he, unless he can be sure of his honour. why
he doubt it.
LETTER XLII. Lovelace. in reply.--
curse he for scrupulousness. be in earnest to marry. after one more
letter of entreaty to she, if she keep sullen silence, she must take the
consequence.
LETTER XLIII. Lovelace to clarissa.--
once more earnestly entreat she to meet he at the altar. not to be
forbid come, he will take for leave to come.
LETTER XLIV. Lovelace to Patrick M'Donald.--
order he to visit the lady, and instruct he what to say, and how
to behave to she.
LETTER XLV. to the same, as Captain Tomlinson.--
calculate to be show to the lady, as in confidence.
LETTER XLVI. M'Donald to Lovelace.--
go to attend the lady accord to direction. find the house in an
uproar; and the lady escape.
LETTER XLVII. Mowbray to lovelace.--
with the same news.
LETTER XLVIII. Belford to Lovelace.--
ample particular of the lady's escape. make serious reflection on the
distress she must be in; and on his (Lovelace's) ungrateful usage of she.
what he take the sum of religion.
LETTER XLIX. Lovelace to Belford.--
run into affected levity and ridicule, yet at last own all his gayety
but counterfeit. regret his baseness to the lady. inveigh against the
woman for their instigation. will still marry she, if she can be find
out. one misfortune seldom come alone; Lord M. be recover. he have
bespeak mourning for he.
LETTER L. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
write with incoherence, to inquire after her health. let she know
whither to direct to she. but forget, in her rambling, her private
address. by which mean her letter fall into the hand of Miss Howe's
mother.
LETTER LI. Mrs. Howe to clarissa.--
Reproaches she for make all her friend unhappy. forbid she to write
any more to her daughter.
LETTER LII. Clarissa's meek reply.
LETTER LIII. Clarissa to Hannah Burton.
LETTER LIV. Hannah Burton. in answer.
LETTER LV. Clarissa to Miss Norton.--
Excuses her long silence. ask she a question, with a view to detect
Lovelace. hint at his ungrateful villany. self-recrimination.
LETTER LVI. Mrs. Norton to clarissa.--
answer her question. inveigh against Lovelace. hope she have escape
with her honour. console she by a brief relation of her own case, and
from motif truly pious.
LETTER LVII. Clarissa to Lady Betty Lawrance.--
request an answer to three question, with a view far to detect
Lovelace.
LETTER LVIII. Lady Betty to clarissa.--
answer her question. in the kind manner offer to mediate between
her nephew and she.
LETTER LIX. LX. Clarissa to Mrs. Hodges,
her uncle Harlowe's housekeeper; with a view of still far detect
Lovelace. --- Mrs. Hodges's answer.
LETTER LXI. Clarissa to Lady Betty Lawrance.--
Acquaints she with her nephew's baseness. charitably wish his
reformation; but utterly, and from principle, reject he.
LETTER LXII. Clarissa to Mrs. Norton.--
be comfort by her kind soothing. wish she have be her child. will
not allow she to come up to she; why. some account of the people she be
with; and of a worthy woman, Mrs. Lovick, who lodge in the house.
briefly hint to she the vile usage she have receive from Lovelace.
LETTER LXIII. Mrs. Norton to clarissa.--
Inveighs against Lovelace. wish Miss Howe might be induce to refrain
from freedom that do hurt, and can do no good. far piously console
she.
LETTER LXIV. Clarissa to Mrs. Norton.--
a new trouble. an angry letter from Miss Howe. the occasion. her heart
be break. shall be uneasy, till she can get her father's curse revoke.
cast about to whom she can apply for this purpose. at last resolve to
write to her sister to beg her mediation.
LETTER LXV. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
her angry and reproachful letter above-mention; demand from her the
clearing up of her conduct.
LETTER LXVI. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
Gently remonstrate upon her severity. to this hour know not all the
method take to deceive and ruin she. but will briefly, yet
circumstantially, enter into the dark part of her sad story, though her
heart sink under the thought of a recollection so painful.
LETTER LXVII. LXVIII. LXIX. LXX. from the same.--
she give the promise particular of her story. beg that the black
part of it may be keep secret; and why. desire one friendly tear, and
no more, may be dropt from her gentle eye, on the happy day that shall
shut up all her sorrow.
LETTER LXXI. LXXII. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
Execrates the abandon profligate. she must, she tell she, look to the
world beyond this for her reward. Unravels some of Lovelace's plot; and
detect his forgery. be apprehensive for her own as well as Clarissa's
safety. advise she to pursue a legal vengeance. laudable custom in the
Isle of Man. offer personally to attend she in a court of justice.
LETTER LXXIII. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
cannot consent to a prosecution. discover who it be that personate
she at Hampstead. she be quite sick of life, and of an earth in which
innocent and benevolent spirit be sure to be consider as alien.
the history
of
CLARISSA HARLOWE
LETTER I
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SAT. MIDNIGHT.
no rest, say a text that I once hear preach upon, to the wicked--and
I cannot close my eye (yet only want to compound for half an hour in
an elbow-chair)--so must scribble on.
I part with the Captain after another strong debate with he in
relation to what be to be the fate of this lady. as the fellow have an
excellent head, and would have make an eminent figure in any station of
life, have not his early day be taint with a deep crime, and he
detect in it; and as he have the right side of the argument; I have a
good deal of difficulty with he; and at last bring myself to promise,
that if I could prevail upon she generously to forgive I, and to
reinstate I in her favour, I would make it my whole endeavour to get off
of my contrivance, as happily as I could; (only that Lady Betty and
Charlotte must come;) and then substitute he for her uncle's proxy,
take shame to myself, and marry.
but if I should, Jack, (with the strong antipathy to the state that
ever man have,) what a figure shall I make in rakish annal? and can I
have take all this pain for nothing? or for a wife only, that, however
excellent, [and any woman, do I think I could make good, because I could
make any woman fear as well as love I,] might have be obtain without
the plague I have be at, and much more reputably than with it? and
hast thou not see, that this haughty woman [forgive I that I call she
haughty! and a woman! yet be she not haughty?] know not how to forgive
with graciousness? indeed have not at all forgive I? but hold my soul
in a suspense which have be so grievous to her own.
at this silent moment, I think, that if I be to pursue my former
scheme, and resolve to try whether I cannot make a great fault serve as
a sponge to wipe out the less; and then be forgive for that; I can
justify myself to myself; and that, as the fair invincible would say, be
all in all.
as it be my intention, in all my reflection, to avoid repeat, at
least dwell upon, what I have before write to thee, though the state
of the case may not have vary; so I would have thee to re-consider the
old reasoning (particularly those contain in my answer to thy last*
expostulatory nonsense); and add the new as they fall from my pen; and
then I shall think myself invincible;--at least, as argue rake to rake.
* see Vol. V. Letter XIV.
I take the gaining of this lady to be essential to my happiness: and be
it not natural for all man to aim at obtain whatever they think will
make they happy, be the object more or less considerable in the eye of
other?
as to the manner of endeavour to obtain she, by falsification of
oath, vow, and the like--do not the poet of two thousand year and
upwards tell we, that Jupiter laugh at the perjury of lover? and let
I add, to what I have heretofore mention on that head, a question or
two.
do not the mother, the aunt, the grandmother, the governess of the
pretty innocent, always, from their very cradle to riper year, preach
to they the deceitfulness of men?--That they be not to regard their
oath, vow, promises?--what a parcel of fibber would all these reverend
matron be, if there be not now and then a pretty credulous rogue take
in for a justification of their preachment, and to serve as a beacon
light up for the benefit of the rest?
do we not then see, that an honest prowl fellow be a necessary evil on
many account? do we not see that it be highly requisite that a sweet
girl should be now-and-then draw aside by him?--And the more eminent the
girl, in the grace of person, mind, and fortune, be not the example
likely to be the more efficacious?
if these postulata be grant I, who, I pray, can equal my charmer in
all these? who therefore so fit for an example to the rest of her sex?
--at bad, I be entirely within my worthy friend Mandeville's assertion,
that private vice be public benefit.
well, then, if this sweet creature must fall, as it be call, for the
benefit of all the pretty fool of the sex, she must; and therebe an end
of the matter. and what would there have be in it of uncommon or rare,
have I not be so long about it?--And so I dismiss all further
argumentation and debate upon the question: and I impose upon thee, when
thou writ to I, an eternal silence on this head.
Wafer'd on, as an after-write introduction to the paragraph which
follow, mark with turn comma, [thus, ']:
Lord, Jack, what shall I do now! how one evil bring on another!
dreadful news to tell thee! while I be meditate a simple robbery,
here have I (in my own defence indeed) be guilty of murder!--a bl--y
murder! so I believe it will prove. at her last gasp!--poor impertinent
opposer!--eternally resisting!--eternally contradict! there she lie
welter in her blood! her death's wound have I give her!--but she be
a thief, an impostor, as well as a tormentor. she have steal my pen.
while I be sullenly meditate, doubt, as to my future measure, she
steal it; and thus she write with it in a hand exactly like my own; and
would have face I down, that it be really my own hand-writing.
'but let I reflect before it be too late. on the manifold perfection
of this ever-amiable creature let I reflect. the hand yet be only hold
up. the blow be not strike. Miss Howe's next letter may blow thee up.
in policy thou shouldest be now at least honest. thou canst not live
without she. thou would rather marry she than lose she absolutely.
Thou mayest undoubtedly prevail upon she, inflexible as she seem to be,
for marriage. but if now she find thee a villain, thou may never
more engage her attention, and she perhaps will refuse and abhor thee.
'yet already have I not go too far? like a repentant thief, afraid of
his gang, and oblige to go on, in fear of hang till he come to be
hang, I be afraid of the gang of my cursed contrivance.
'as I hope to live, I be sorry, (at the present writing,) that I have
be such a foolish plotter, as to put it, as I fear I have do, out of
my own power to be honest. I hate compulsion in all form; and cannot
bear, even to be compel to be the wretch my choice have make I! so
now, Belford, as thou hast say, I be a machine at last, and no free
agent.
'upon my soul, Jack, it be a very foolish thing for a man of spirit to
have bring himself to such a height of iniquity, that he must proceed,
and cannot help himself, and yet to be next to certain, that this very
victory will undo he.
'why be such a woman as this throw into my way, whose very fall will
be her glory, and, perhaps, not only my shame but my destruction?
'what a happiness must that man know, who move regularly to some
laudable end, and have nothing to reproach himself with in his progress
to do it! when, by honest mean, he attain his end, how great and
unmixe must be his enjoyment! what a happy man, in this particular
case, have I be, have it be give I to be only what I wish to appear
to be!'
thus far have my conscience write with my pen; and see what a recreant
she have make of me!--I seize she by the throat--There!--There, say I,
thou vile impertinent!--take that, and that!--How often have I give thee
warning!--and now, I hope, thou intrude varletess, have I do thy
business!
Puling and low-voice, rear up thy detest head, in vain implor
thou my mercy, who, in thy day hast show I so little!--take that, for
a rise blow!--and now will thy pain, and my pain for thee, soon be
over. lie there!--Welter on!--had I not give thee thy death's wound,
thou would have rob I of all my joy. Thou could not have
mend I, 'tis plain. Thou could only have throw I into despair.
didst thou not see, that I have go too far to recede?--welter on, once
more I bid thee!--gasp on!--that thy last gasp, surely!--how hard di
thou!
ADIEU!--Unhappy man! ADIEU!
'tis kind in thee, however, to bid I, Adieu!
Adieu, Adieu, Adieu, to thee, o thou inflexible, and, till now,
unconquerable bosom intruder!--adieu to thee for ever!
LETTER II
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY MORN. (JUNE 11). four O'CLOCK.
a few word to the verbal information thou sentest I last night
concern thy poor old man; and then I rise from my seat, shake myself,
refresh, new-dress, and so to my charmer, whom, notwithstanding her
reserve, I hope to prevail upon to walk out with I on the Heath this
warm and fine morning.
the bird must have awaken she before now. they be in full song. she
always glory in accustom herself to behold the sun rise--one of
God's natural wonder, as once she call it.
her window salute the east. the valley must be gild by his ray, by
the time I be with she; for already have they make the up-land smile, and
the face of nature cheerful.
how unsuitable will thou find this gay preface to a subject so gloomy as
that I be now turn to!
I be glad to hear thy tedious expectation be at last answer.
Thy servant tell I that thou be plaguily grieve at the old fellow's
departure.
I cannot say, but thou mayest look as if thou wert; harass as thou hast
be for a number of day and night with a close attendance upon a die
man, behold his drawing-on hour--pretend, for decency's sake, to
whine over his excruciating pang; to be in the way to answer a thousand
impertinent inquiry after the health of a man thou wished to die--to
pray by he--for so once thou wrotest to me!--To read by he--to be
force to join in consultation with a crew of solemn and parading
doctor, and their officious zany, the apothecary, join with the
butcherly tribe of scarficator; all combine to carry on the physical
farce, and to cut out thong both from his flesh and his estate--to have
the superadded apprehension of divide thy interest in what he shall
leave with a crew of eager-hoping, never-to-be-satisfied relation,
legatee, and the devil know who, of private gratifier of passion
laudable and illaudable--in these circumstance, I wonder not that thou
look before servant, (as little grieve as thou after heirship,) as
if thou indeed wert grieve; and as if the most wry-fac'd woe have
befall thee.
then, as I have often think, the reflection that must naturally arise
from such mortifying object, as the death of one with whom we have be
familiar, must afford, when we be oblige to attend it in its slow
approach, and in its face-twist pang, that it will one day be our
own case, go a great way to credit the appearance of grief.
and that it be this, seriously reflect upon, may temporally give a fine
air of sincerity to the wailing of lively widow, heart-exult heir,
and residuary legatee of all denomination; since, by keep down the
inward joy, those interesting reflection must sadden the aspect, and add
an appearance of real concern to the assumed sable.
well, but, now thou art come to the reward of all thy watching,
anxiety, and close attendance, tell I what it be; tell I if it
compensate thy trouble, and answer thy hope?
as to myself, thou seest, by the gravity of my style, how the subject have
help to mortify I. but the necessity I be under of commit either
speedy matrimony, or a rape, have sadden over my gayer prospect, and,
more than the case itself, contribute to make I sympathize with the
present joyful-sorrow.
Adieu, Jack, I must be soon out of my pain; and my Clarissa shall be soon
out of her'--for so do the arduousness of the case require.
LETTER III
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY MORNING.
I have have the honour of my charmer's company for two complete hour. we
meet before six in Mrs. Moore's garden. a walk on the heath refuse I.
the sedateness of her aspect and her kind compliance in this meeting give
I hop. and all that either the Captain and I have urge yesterday to
obtain a full and free pardon, that re-urge I; and I tell she, besides,
that Captain Tomlinson be go down with hope to prevail upon her uncle
Harlowe to come up in person, in order to present to I the great
blessing that man ever receive.
but the utmost I could obtain be, that she would take no resolution in
my favour till she receive Miss Howe's next letter.
I will not repeat the argument I use; but I will give thee the
substance of what she say in answer to they.
she have consider of every thing, she tell I. my whole conduct be
before she. the house I carry she to must be a vile house. the people
early show what they be capable of, in the earnest attempt make to
fasten Miss Partington upon she; as she doubt not, with my approbation.
[surely, think I, she have not receive a duplicate of Miss Howe's
letter of detection!] they hear her cry. my insult be undoubtedly
premeditate. by my whole recollect behaviour to she, previous to it,
it must be so. I have the vilest of view, no question. and my treatment
of she put it out of all doubt.
Soul over all, Belford! she seem sensible of liberty that my passion
make I insensible of have take, or she could not so deeply resent.
she besought I to give over all thought of she. sometimes, she say,
she think herself cruelly treat by her near and dear relation;
at such time, a spirit of repine and even of resentment take place;
and the reconciliation, at other time so desirable, be not then so much
the favourite wish of her heart, as be the scheme she have formerly
plan--of take she good Norton for her directress and guide, and
live upon her own estate in the manner her grandfather have intend she
should live.
this scheme she doubt not that her cousin Morden, who be one of her
trustee for that estate, would enable she, (and that, as she hop,
without litigation,) to pursue. and if he can, and do, what, Sir, let
I ask you, say she, have I see in your conduct, that should make I
prefer to it an union of interest, where there be such a disunion in
mind?
so thou seest, Jack, there be reason, as well as resentment, in the
preference she make against me!--thou se, that she presume to think
that she can be happy without I; and that she must be unhappy with I!
I have beseech she, in the conclusion of my re-urged argument, to write
to Miss Howe before Miss Howe's answer could come, in order to lay before
she the present state of thing; and if she would pay a deference to her
judgment, to let she have an opportunity to give it, on the full knowledge
of the case--
so I would, Mr. Lovelace, be the answer, if I be in doubt myself,
which I would prefer--marriage, or the scheme I have mention. you
cannot think, Sir, but the latter must be my choice. I wish to part with
you with temper--don't put I upon repeating--
Part with I, Madam! interrupt I--I cannot bear those words!--but let
I beseech you, however, to write to Miss Howe. I hope, if Miss Howe be
not my enemy--
she be not the enemy of your person, Sir;--as you would be convince, if
you see her last letter* to I. but be she not an enemy to your
action, she would not be my friend, nor the friend of virtue. why will
you provoke from I, Mr. Lovelace, the harshness of expression, which,
however, which, however deserve by you, I be unwilling just now to use,
have suffer enough in the two past day from my own vehemence?
* the lady innocently mean Mr. Lovelace's forge one. see Vol. V.
Letter XXX.
I bite my lip for vexation. and be silent.
Miss Howe, proceed she, know the full state of matter already, Sir.
the answer I expect from her respect myself, not you. her heart be too
warm in the cause of friendship, to leave I in suspense one moment
long than be necessary as to what I want to know. nor do she answer
absolutely depend upon herself. she must see a person first, and that
person perhaps see other.
the cursed smuggler-woman, Jack!--Miss Howe's townsend, I doubt not--
plot, contrivance, intrigue, stratagem!--underground-mole these women--
but let the earth cover me!--let I be a mole too, think I, if they
carry their point!--and if this lady escape I now!
she frankly own that she have once think of embark out of all our
way for some one of our american colony. but now that she have be
compel to see I, (which have be her great dread), and which she
might be happy in the resumption of her former favourite scheme, if
Miss Howe could find she a reputable and private asylum, till her cousin
Morden could come.--but if he come not soon, and if she have a difficulty
to get to a place of refuge, whether from her brother or from any body
else, [mean I, I suppose,] she might yet perhaps go abroad; for, to
say the truth, she could not think of return to her father's house,
since her brother's rage, her sister's upbraiding, her father's anger,
her mother's still-more-affect sorrowing, and her own consciousness
under they all, would be unsupportable to she.
o Jack! I be sick to death, I pine, I die, for Miss Howe's next letter!
I would bind, gag, strip, rob, and do any thing but murder, to intercept
it.
but, determine as she seem to be, it be evident to I, nevertheless,
that she have still some tenderness for I.
she often weep as she talk, and much oftener sigh. she look at I
twice with an eye of undoubted gentleness, and three time with an eye
tend to compassion and softness; but its benign ray be as often
snatch back, as I may say, and her face avert, as if her sweet eye
be not to be trust, and could not stand against my eager eye;
seek, as they do, for a lost heart in she's, and endeavour to
penetrate to her very soul.
More than once I take her hand. she struggle not much against the
freedom. I press it once with my lip--she be not very angry. a
frown indeed--but a frown that have more distress in it than indignation.
how come the dear soul, (clothe as it be with such a silken vesture,) by
all its steadiness?* be it necessary that the active gloom of such a
tyrant of a father, should commix with such a passive sweetness of a
will-less mother, to produce a constancy, an equanimity, a steadiness, in
the daughter, which never woman before could boast of? if so, she be
more obliged to that despotic father than I could have imagine a
creature to be, who give distinction to every one relate to she beyond
what the crown itself can confer.
* see Vol. I. Letters IX. XIV. and XIX. for what she herself say on that
steadiness which Mr. Lovelace, though a deserved sufferer by it, cannot
help admire.
I hop, I say, that she would admit of the intend visit, which I have
so often mention, of the two lady.
she be here. she have see I. she could not help herself at present.
she even have the high regard for the lady of my family, because of
their worthy character. there she turn away her sweet face, and
vanquish an half-rise sigh.
I kneel to she then. it be upon a verdant cushion; for we be upon
the grass walk. I catch her hand. I besought she with an earnestness
that call up, as I could feel, my heart to my eye, to make I, by her
forgiveness and example, more worthy of they, and of her own kind and
generous wish. by my soul, Madam, say I, you stab I with your
goodness--your undeserved goodness! and I cannot bear it!
why, why, think I, as I do several time in this conversation, will
she not generously forgive I? why will she make it necessary for I to
bring Lady Betty and my cousin to my assistance? can the fortress expect
the same advantageous capitulation, which yield not to the summon of a
resistless conqueror, as if it give not the trouble of bring up and
raise its heavy artillery against it?
what sensibility, say the divine creature, withdraw her hand, must
thou have suppress! what a dreadful, what a judicial hardness of heart
must thine be! who canst be capable of such emotion, as sometimes thou
hast show; and of such sentiment, as sometimes have flow from thy
lip; yet canst have so far overcome they all as to be able to act as
thou hast act, and that from settle purpose and premeditation; and
this, as it be say, throughout the whole of thy life, from infancy to
this time!
I tell she, that I have hop, from the generous concern she have express
for I, when I be so suddenly and dangerously take ill--[the
ipecacuanha experiment, Jack!]
she interrupt I--well have you reward I for the concern you speak
of!--however, I will frankly own, now that I be determined to think no
more of you, that you might, (unsatisfie as I nevertheless be with
you,) have make an interest--
she pause. I besought she to proceed.
do you suppose, Sir, and turn away her sweet face as we walked,--Do you
suppose that I have not think of lay down a plan to govern myself by,
when I find myself so unhappily over-reach and cheat, as I may say,
out of myself--when I find, that I could not be, and do, what I wish
to be, and to do, do you imagine that I have not cast about, what be the
next proper course to take?--And do you believe that this next course have
not cause I some pain to be oblige to--
there again she stopt.
but let we break off discourse, resume she. the subject grow too--she
sigh--let we break off discourse--I will go in--I will prepare for
church--[The devil! think I.] well, as I can appear in those
every-day-wear clothe--look upon herself--I will go to church.
she then turn from I to go into the house.
bless I, my beloved creature, bless I with the continuance of this
affecting conversation.--remorse have seize my heart!--i have be
excessively wrong--give I far cause to curse my heedless folly, by
the continuance of this calm but soul-penetrate conversation.
no, no, Mr. Lovelace: I have say too much. impatience begin to break
in upon I. if you can excuse I to the lady, it will be well for
my mind's sake, and for your credit's sake, that I do not see they. call
I to they over-nice, petulant, prudish--what you please call I to they.
nobody but Miss Howe, to whom, next to the Almighty, and my own mother, I
wish to stand acquit of wilful error, shall know the whole of what have
pass. be happy, as you may!--deserve to be happy, and happy you will
be, in your own reflection at least, be you to be ever so unhappy in
other respect. for myself, if I ever shall be enable, on due
reflection, to look back upon my own conduct, without the great reproach
of have wilfully, and against the light of my own judgment, err, I
shall be more happy than if I have all that the world account desirable.
the noble creature proceed; for I could not speak.
this self-acquittal, when spirit be lend I to dispel the darkness
which at present too often over-cloud my mind, will, I hope, make I
superior to all the calamity that can befal I.
her whole person be inform by her sentiment. she seem to be tall
than before. how the God within she exalt she, not only above I, but
above herself!
divine creature! (as I think she,) I call she. I acknowledge the
superiority of her mind; and be proceed--but she interrupt I--all
human excellence, say she, be comparative only. my mind, I believe, be
indeed superior to your's, debase as your's be by evil habit: but I have
not know it to be so, if you have not take pain to convince I of the
inferiority of your's.
how great, how sublimely great, this creature!--by my soul I cannot
forgive she for her virtue! there be no bear the consciousness of
the infinite inferiority she charge I with.--But why will she break
from I, when good resolution be take place? the red-hot iron she
refuse to strike--o why will she suffer the yield wax to harden?
we have go but a few pace towards the house, when we be meet by the
impertinent woman, with notice, that breakfast be ready. I could only,
with uplifted hand, beseech she to give I hope of a renew
conversation after breakfast.
no--she would go to church.
and into the house she go, and up stair directly. nor would she
oblige I with her company at the tea-table.
I offer, by Mrs. Moore, to quit both the table and the parlour, rather
than she should exclude herself, or deprive the two widow of the favour
of her company.
that be not all the matter, she tell Mrs. Moore. she have be
struggle to keep down her temper. it have cost she some pain to do it.
she be desirous to compose herself, in hope to receive benefit by the
divine worship she be go to join in.
Mrs. Moore hop for her presence at dinner.
she have rather be excuse. yet, if she could obtain the frame of mind
she hop for, she might not be averse to show, that she have get above
those sensibility, which give consideration to a man who deserve not
to be to she what he have be.
this say, no doubt, to let Mrs. Moore know, that the garden-conversation
have not be a reconciling one.
Mrs. Moore seem to wonder that we be not upon a well foot of
understanding, after so long a conference; and the more, as she believe
that the lady have give in to the proposal for the repetition of the
ceremony, which I have tell they be insist upon by her uncle Harlowe.--
but I account for this, by tell both widow that she be resolve to
keep on the reserve till she hear from Captain Tomlinson, whether her
uncle would be present in person at the solemnity, or would name that
worthy gentleman for his proxy.
again I enjoin strict secresy, as to this particular; which be
promise by the widow, as well as for themselves, as for Miss Rawlins;
of whose taciturnity they give I such an account, as show I, that she
be secret-keeper-general to all the woman of fashion at Hampstead.
the Lord, Jack! what a world of mischief, at this rate, must miss
Rawlins know!--what a Pandora's box must her bosom be!--Yet, have I
nothing that be more worthy of my attention to regard, I would engage to
open it, and make my us of the discovery.
and now, Belford, thou perceivest, that all my reliance be upon the
mediation of Lady Betty and Miss Montague, and upon the hope of
intercept Miss Howe's next letter.
LETTER IV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
this fair inexorable be actually go to church with Mrs. Moore and Mrs.
Bevis; but will. closely attend her motion; and I be in the way to
receive any occasional intelligence from he.
she do not choose, [a mighty word with the sex! as if they be always
to have their own will!] that I should wait upon she. I do not much
press it, that she might not apprehend that I think I have reason to
doubt her voluntary return.
I once have it in my head to have find the widow bevis other employment.
and I believe she would have be as well pleased with my company as to
go to church; for she seem irresolute when I tell she that two out of
a family be enough to go to church for one day. but have her thing
on, (as the woman call every thing,) and her aunt Moore expect her
company, she think it well to go--lest it should look oddly, you know,
whisper she, to one who be above regard how it look.
so here be I in my dining-room; and have nothing to do but to write till
they return.
and what will be my subject think thou? why, the old beat one to be
sure; self-debate--through temporary remorse: for the blow be not
strike, her guardian angel be redouble his effort to save she.
if it be not that, [and yet what power should her guardian angel have
over I?] I donot know what it be that give a check to my revenge,
whenever I meditate treason against so sovereign a virtue. Conscience be
dead and go, as I tell thee; so it cannot be that. a young conscience
grow up, like the phoenix, from the ash of the old one, it cannot
be, surely. but if it be, it would be hard, if I could not overlay a
young conscience.
well, then, it must be LOVE, I fancy. LOVE itself, inspire love of an
object so adorable--some little attention possibly pay likewise to thy
whine argument in her favour.
let love then be allow to be the move principle; and the rather, as
love naturally make the lover loth to disoblige the object of its flame;
and know, that to an offence of the meditate kind will be a mortal
offence to she, cannot bear that I should think of give it.
let LOVE and I talk together a little on this subject--be it a young
conscience, or love, or thyself, Jack, thou seest that I be for give
every whiffler audience. but this must be the last debate on this
subject; for be not her fate in a manner at its crisis? and must not my
next step be an irretrievable one, tend it which way it will?
***
and now the debate be over.
a thousand charming thing, (for LOVE be gentle than CONSCIENCE,) have
this little urchin suggest in her favour. he pretend to know both
our heart: and he would have it, that though my love be a prodigious
strong and potent love; and though it have the merit of many month,
faithful service to plead, and have have infinite difficulty to struggle
with; yet that it be not the right sort of love.
right sort of love!--A puppy!--but, with due regard to your deityship,
say I, what merit have she with you, that you should be of her party?
be she's, I pray you, a right sort of love? be it love at all? she
donot pretend that it be. she own not your sovereignty. what a d---l
I move you, to plead thus earnestly for a rebel, who despise your
power?
and then he come with his if's and And's--and it would have be, and
still, as he believe, would be, love, and a love of the exalt kind, if
I would encourage it by the right sort of love he talk of: and, in
justification of his opinion, plead her own confession, as well those
of yesterday, as of this morning: and even go so far back as to my
ipecacuanha illness.
I never talk so familiarly with his godship before: thou mayest think,
therefore, that his dialect sound oddly in my ear. and then he tell
I, how often I have throw cold water upon the most charming flame that
ever warm a lady's bosom, while but young and rise.
I require a definition of this right sort of love, he try at it: but
make a sorry hand of it: nor could I, for the soul of I, be convince,
that what he mean to extol be LOVE.
upon the whole, we have a noble controversy upon this subject, in which
he insist upon the unprecedented merit of the lady. nevertheless I get
the well of he; for he be strike absolutely dumb, when (wave she
present perverseness, which yet be a sufficient answer to all his plea)
I assert, and offer to prove it, by a thousand instance impromptu,
that love be not govern by merit, nor could be under the dominion of
prudence, or any other reasoning power: and if the lady be capable of
love, it be of such a sort as he have nothing to do with, and which never
before reign in a female heart.
I ask he, what he think of her flight from I, at a time when I be
more than half overcome by the right sort of love he talk of?--and then
I show he the letter she write, and leave behind she for I, with an
intention, no doubt, absolutely to break my heart, or to provoke I to
hang, drown, or shoot myself; to say nothing of a multitude of
declaration from she, defy his power, and impute all that look
like love in her behaviour to I, to the persecution and rejection of her
friend; which make she think of I but as a last resort.
LOVE then give she up. the letter, he say, deserve neither pardon nor
excuse. he do not think he have be plead for such a declare rebel.
and as to the rest, he should be a betrayer of the right of his own
sovereignty, if what I have allege be true, and he be still to plead
for she.
I swear to the truth of all. and truly I swear: which perhaps I do not
always do.
and now what think thou must become of the lady, whom LOVE itself
give up, and CONSCIENCE cannot plead for?
LETTER V
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY AFTERNOON.
o Belford! what a hair's-breadth escape have I had!--such a one, that I
tremble between terror and joy, at the thought of what might have
happen, and do not.
what a perverse girl be this, to contend with her fate; yet have reason
to think, that her very star fight against she! I be the lucky of
me!--but my breath almost fail I, when I reflect upon what a slender
thread my destiny hung.
but not to keep thee in suspense; I have, within this half-hour, obtain
possession of the expect letter from Miss Howe--and by such an
accident! but here, with the former, I dispatch this; thy messenger
wait.
LETTER VI
MR. LOVELACE
[in CONTINUATION.]
thus it be--my charmer accompany Mrs. Moore again to church this
afternoon. I have be in very earnest, in the first place, to obtain her
company at dinner: but in vain. accord to what she have say to Mrs.
Moore,* I be too considerable to she to be allow that favour. in the
next place, I besought she to favour I, after dinner, with another
garden-walk. but she would again go to church. and what reason have I
to rejoice that she do!
* see Letter III. of this volume.
my worthy friend, Mrs. Bevis, think one sermon a day, well observe,
enough; so staid at home to bear I company.
the lady and Mrs. Moore have not be go a quarter of an hour, when a
young country-fellow on horseback come to the door, and inquire for Mrs.
Harriot Lucas. the widow and I (undetermined how we be to entertain
each other) be in the parlour next the door; and hear the fellow's
inquiry, o my dear Mrs. Bevis, say I, I be undo, undo for ever, if
you donot help I out!--since here, in all probability, be a messenger
from that implacable Miss Howe with a letter; which, if deliver to Mrs.
Lovelace, may undo all we have be do.
what, say she, would you have I do?
call the maid in this moment, that I may give she her lesson; and if it
be as I imagine, Iwill tell you what you shall do.
Wid. Margaret!--Margaret! come in this minute.
Lovel. what answer, Mrs. Margaret, do you give the man, upon his
asking for Mrs. Harriot Lucas?
Peggy. I only ask, what be his business, and who he come from? (for,
Sir, your honour's servant have tell I how thing stand): and I come at
your call, Madam, before he answer I.
Lovel. well, child, if ever you wish to be happy in wedlock yourself,
and would have people disappoint who want to make mischief between you
and your husband, get out of he his message, or letter if he have one,
and bring it to I, and say nothing to Mrs. Lovelace, when she come in;
and here be a guinea for you.
Peggy. I will do all I can to serve your honour's worship for nothing:
[nevertheless, with a ready hand, take the guinea:] for Mr. William
tell I what a good gentleman you be.
Away go Peggy to the fellow at the door.
Peggy. what be your business, friend, with Mrs. Harry Lucas?
Fellow. I must speak to her her own self.
Lovel. my dear widow, do you personate Mrs. Lovelace--for Heaven's
sake do you personate Mrs. Lovelace.
Wid. I personate Mrs. Lovelace, Sir! how can I do that?--She be fair;
I be brown. she be slender: I be plump--
Lovel. no matter, no matter--the fellow may be a new-come servant: he
be not in livery, I see. he may not know her person. you can but be
bloated and in a dropsy.
Wid. dropsical people look not so fresh and ruddy as I do.
Lovel. true--but the clown may not know that. 'tis but for a present
deception. Peggy, Peggy, call'd I, in a female tone, softly at the door.
Madam, answer'd Peggy; and come up to I to the parlour-door.
Lovel. tell he the lady be ill; and have lain down upon the couch. and
get his business from he, whatever you do.
Away go Peggy.
Lovel. now, my dear widow, lie along the settee, and put your
handkerchief over your face, that, if he will speak to you himself, he
may not see your eye and your hair.--so--thatbe right.--I'll step into
the closet by you.
I do so.
Peggy. [return.] he willnot deliver his business to I. he will
speak to Mrs. Harriot Lucas her own self.
Lovel. [hold the door in my hand.] tell he that this be Mrs.
Harriot Lucas; and let he come in. whisper he (if he doubt) that she
be bloat, dropsical, and not the woman she be.
Away go Margery.
Lovel. and now, my dear widow, let I see what a charming Mrs. Lovelace
youwill make!--ask if he come from Miss Howe. ask if he live with she.
ask how she do. call she, at every word, your dear Miss Howe. offer
him money--take this half-guinea for he--complain of your head, to have
a pretence to hold it down; and cover your forehead and eye with your
hand, where your handkerchief hide not your face.--Thatbe right--and
dismiss the rascal--[here he comes]--a soon as you can.
in come the fellow, bow and scrap, his hat poke out before he
with both his hand.
Fellow. I be sorry, Madam, an't please you, to find you ben't well.
widow. what be your business with I, friend?
Fellow. you be Mrs. Harriot Lucas, I suppose, Madam?
Widow. yes. do you come from Miss Howe?
Fellow. I do, Madam.
widow. dost thou know my right name, friend?
Fellow. I can give a shrewd guess. but that be none of my business.
widow. what be thy business? I hope Miss Howe be well?
Fellow. yes, Madam; pure well, I thank God. I wish you be so too.
widow. I be too full of grief to be well.
Fellow. so belike I have hard to say.
widow. my head ache so dreadfully, I cannot hold it up. I must beg
of you to let I know your business.
Fellow. Nay, and that be all, my business be soon know. it be but to
give this letter into your own partiklar hand--here it be.
widow. [take it.] from my dear friend Miss Howe?--Ah, my head!
Fellow. yes, Madam: but I be sorry you be so bad.
widow. do you live with Miss Howe?
Fellow. no, Madam: I be one of her tenant' son. her lady-mother must
not know as how I come of this errand. but the letter, I suppose, will
tell you all.
widow. how shall I satisfy you for this kind trouble?
Fellow. no how at all. what I do be for love of Miss Howe. she will
satisfy I more than enough. but, may-hap, you can send no answer, you
be so ill.
Widow. be you order to wait for an answer?
Fellow. no, I cannot say as that I be. but I be bid to observe
how you look, and how you be; and if you do write a line or two, to
take care of it, and give it only to our young landlady in secret.
widow. you see I look strangely. not so well as I use to do.
Fellow. Nay, I donot know that I ever see you but once before; and that
be at a stile, where I meet you and my young landlady; but know well
than to stare a gentlewoman in the face; especially at a stile.
widow. will you eat, or drink, friend?
Fellow. a cup of small ale, I donot care if I do.
Widow. Margaret, take the young man down, and treat he with what the
house afford.
Fellow. your servant, Madam. but I staid to eat as I come along, just
upon the heath yonder; or else, to say the truth, I have be here soon.
[thank my star, think I, thou didst.] a piece of powdered beef be
upon the table, at the sign of the Castle, where I stopt to inquire for
this house: and so, thoff I only intend to wet my whistle, I could not
help eat. so shall only taste of your ale; for the beef be woundily
corn.
prating dog! pox on thee! think I.
he withdraw, bow and scrap.
Margaret, whisper I, in a female voice [whisper out of the closet,
and hold the parlour-door in my hand] get he out of the house as fast
as you can, lest they come from church, and catch he here.
Peggy. never fear, Sir.
the fellow go down, and it seem, drink a large draught of ale; and
Margaret find he very talkative, tell he, she beg his pardon, but
she have a sweetheart just come from sea, whom she be force to hide in
the pantry; so be sure he would excuse she from stay with he.
ay, ay, to be sure, the clown say: for if he could not make sport, he
would spoil none. but he whisper she, that one 'Squire Lovelace be a
damnation rogue, if the truth might be tell.
for what? say Margaret. and could have give he, she tell the widow
(who relate to I all this) a good dowse of the chap.
for kiss all the woman he come near.
at the same time, the dog wrap himself round Margery, and give she a
smack, that, she tell Mrs. Bevis afterwards, she might have hear into
the parlour.
such, Jack, be human nature: thus do it operate in all degree; and so
do the clown, as well as his practise! yet this sly dog know not but
the wench have a sweetheart lock up in the pantry! if the truth be
know, some of the ruddy-face dairy wench might perhaps call he a
damnation rogue, as justly as their better of the same sex might 'Squire
Lovelace.
the fellow tell the maid, that, by what he discover of the young lady's
face, it look very rosy to what he take it to be; and he think she a
good deal fat, as she lay, and not so tall.
all woman be bear to intrigue, Jack; and practise it more or less, as
father, guardian, governess, from dear experience, can tell; and in
love affair be naturally expert, and quick in their wit by half than
man. this ready, though raw wench, give an instance of this, and
improve on the dropsical hint I have give she. the lady's seem
plumpness be owe to a dropsical disorder, and to the round posture she
lie in--very likely, truly. she appear to he to be short, he might
have observe, be owe to she draw her foot up from pain, and
because the couch be too short, she suppose--Adso, he do not think of
that. her rosy colour be owe to her grief and head-ache.--ay, that
might very well be--but he be highly pleased that he have give the
letter into Mrs. Harriot's own hand, as he should tell Miss Howe.
he desire once more to see the lady at his go away, and would not be
deny. the widow therefore sit up, with her handkerchief over her face,
lean her head against the wainscot.
he ask if she have any partiklar message?
no: she be so ill she could not write; which be a great grief to she.
should he call the next day? for he be go to London, now he be so
near; and should stay at a cousin's that night, who live in a street
call Fetter-Lane.
no: she would write as soon as able, and send by the post.
well, then, if she have nothing to send by he, mayhap he might stay in
town a day or two; for he have never see the lion in the Tower, nor
Bedlam, nor the tomb; and he would make a holiday or two, as he have
leave to do, if she have no business or message that require his posting
down next day.
she have not.
she offer he the half-guinea I have give she for he; but he refuse
it with great profession of disinterestedness, and love, as he call
it, to Miss Howe; to serve whom, he would ride to the world's-end, or
even to Jericho.
and so the shocking rascal go away: and glad at my heart be I when he
be go; for I fear nothing so much as that he would have staid till
they come from church.
thus, Jack, get I my heart's ease, the letter of Miss Howe; ad through
such a train of accident, as make I say, that the lady's star fight
against she. but yet I must attribute a good deal to my own precaution,
in have take right measure. for have I not secure the widow by my
story, and the maid by my servant, all would have signify nothing.
and so heartily be they secure, the one by a single guinea, the other
by half a dozen warm kiss, and the aversion they both have to such
wicked creature as delighted in make mischief between man and wife,
that they promise, that neither Mrs. Moore, Miss Rawlins, Mrs. Lovelace,
nor any body live, should know any thing of the matter.
the widow rejoice that I have get the mischief-maker's letter. I excuse
myself to she, and instantly withdraw with it; and, after I have read it,
fall to my short-hand, to acquaint thee with my good luck: and they not
return so soon as church be do, (step, as it prove, into Miss
Rawlins's, and tarry there awhile, to bring that busy girl with they
to drink tea,) I write thus far to thee, that thou mightest, when thou
cam to this place, rejoice with I upon the occasion.
they be all three just come in.
I hasten to they.
LETTER VII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
I have begin another letter to thee, in continuation of my narrative: but
I believe I shall send thee this before I shall finish that. by the
enclose thou wilt see, that neither of the correspondent deserve mercy
from I: and I be resolve to make the ending with one the beginning with
the other.
if thou sayest that the provocation I have give to one of they will
justify her freedom; I answer, so they will, to any other person but
myself. but he that be capable of give those provocation, and have the
power to punish those who abuse he for give they, will show his
resentment; and the more remorselessly, perhaps, as he have deserve the
freedom.
if thou sayest, it be, however, wrong to do so; I reply, that it be
nevertheless human nature:--and wouldst thou not have I to be a man,
Jack?
here read the letter, if thou wilt. but thou art not my friend, if thou
offer to plead for either of the saucy creature, after thou hast read
it.
to MRS. HARRIOT LUCAS,
AT MRS. MOORE'S, AT HAMPSTEAD.
JUNE 10.
after the discovery I have make of the villanous machination of the
most abandon of man, particularize in my long letter of Wednesday*
last, you will believe, my dear friend, that my surprise upon peruse
your' of Thursday evening from Hampstead** be not so great as my
indignation. have the villain attempt to fire a city instead of a
house, I should not have wonder at it. all that I be amazed at be,
that he (whose boast, as I be tell, it be, that no woman shall keep he
out of her bed-chamber, when he have make a resolution to be in it) do
not discover his foot before. and it be as strange to I, that, have
get you at such a shocking advantage, and in such a horrid house, you
could, at the time, escape dishonour, and afterwards get from such a set
of infernal.
* see Vol. V. Letter XX.
** ibid. see Letter XXI.
I give you, in my long letter of Wednesday and Thursday last, reason why
you ought to mistrust that specious Tomlinson. that man, my dear, must
be a solemn villain. may lightne from Heaven blast the wretch, who have
set he and the rest of his REMORSELESS gang at work, to endeavour to
destroy the most consummate virtue!--heaven be praise! you have escape
from all their snare, and now be out of danger.--So I will not trouble
you at present with the particular I have far collect relate to
this abominable imposture.
for the same reason, I forbear to communicate to you some new story of
the abhor wretch himself which have come to my ear. one, in
particular, of so shocking a nature!--indeed, my dear, the manbe a devil.
the whole story of Mrs. Fretchville, and her house, I have no doubt to
pronounce, likewise, an absolute fiction.--Fellow!--How my soul spurn
the villain!
your thought of go abroad, and your reason for so do, most
sensibly affect I. but be comfort, my dear; I hope you will not be
under a necessity of quit your native country. be I sure that that
must be the cruel case, I would abandon all my well prospect, and soon
be with you. and I would accompany you whithersoever you go, and share
fortune with you: for it be impossible that I should be happy, if I know
that you be expose not only to the peril of the sea, but to the
attempt of other vile man; your personal grace attract every eye;
and expose you to those hourly danger, which other, less
distinguish by the gift of nature, might avoid.--All that I know that
beauty (so greatly coveted, and so greatly admire) be good for.
o my dear, be I ever to marry, and to be the mother of a CLARISSA,
[Clarissa must be the name, if promisingly lovely,] how often would my
heart ache for the dear creature, as she grow up, when I reflect that a
prudence and discretion, unexampled in woman, have not, in you, be a
sufficient protection to that beauty, which have draw after it as many
admirer as beholders!--how little should I regret the attack of that
cruel distemper, as it be call, which frequently make the great
ravage in the fine face!
SAT. AFTERNOON.
I have just part with Mrs. Townsend.* I think you have once see she
with I; but she say she never have the honour to be personally know to
you. she have a manlike spirit. she know the world. and her two
brother be in town, she be sure she can engage they in so good a
cause, and (if there should be occasion) both their ship' crew, in your
service.
* for the account of Mrs. Townsend, &c. see Vol. IV. Letter XLII.
give your consent, my dear; and the horrid villain shall be repay with
broken bone, at least, for all his vileness!
the misfortune be, Mrs. Townsend cannot be with you till Thursday next,
or Wednesday, at soon: be you sure you can be safe where you be till
then? I think you be too near London; and perhaps you have well be in
it. if you remove, let I, the very moment, know whither.
how my heart be tear, to think of the necessity so dear a creature be
drive to of hide herself! devilish fellow! he must have be
sportive and wanton in his invention--yet that cruel, that savage
sportiveness have save you from the sudden violence to which he have have
recourse in the violation of other, of name and family not
contemptible. for such the villain always glory to spread his snare.
the vileness of this specious monster have do more, than any other
consideration could do, to bring Mr. Hickman into credit with I. Mr.
Hickman alone know (from I) of your flight, and the reason of it. have
I not give he the reason, he might have think still bad of the vile
attempt. I communicate it to he by show he your letter from
Hampstead. when he have read it, [and he tremble and redden, as he
read,] he throw himself at my foot, and besought I to permit he to
attend you, and to give you the protection of his house. the
good-natured man have tear in his eye, and be repeatedly earnest on this
subject; propose to take his chariot-and-four, or a set, and in person,
in the face of all the world, give himself the glory of protect such
an oppressed innocent.
I could not but be pleased with he. and I let he know that I be. I
hardly expect so much spirit from he. but a man's passiveness to a
beloved object of our sex may not, perhaps, argue want of courage on
proper occasion.
I think I ought, in return, to have some consideration for his safety,
as such an open step would draw upon he the vengeance of the most
villanous enterpriser in the world, who have always a gang of fellow,
such as himself, at his call, ready to support one another in the vilest
outrage. but yet, as Mr. Hickman might have strengthen his hand by
legal recourse, I should not have stand upon it, have I not know your
delicacy, [since such a step must have make a great noise, and give
occasion for scandal, as if some advantage have be gain over you,] and
be there not the great probability that all might be more silently,
and more effectually, manage, by Mrs. Townsend's mean.
Mrs. Townsend will in person attend you--she hop, on Wednesday--her
brother, and some of their people, will scatteringly, and as if they
know nothing of you, [so we have contrive,] see you safe not only to
London, but to her house at Deptford.
she have a kinswoman, who will take your command there, if she herself
be oblige to leave you. and there you may stay, till the wretch's fury,
on lose you, and his search, be over.
he will very soon, 'tis likely, enter upon some new villany, which may
engross he: and it may be give out, that you be go to lay claim to
the protection of your cousin Morden at Florence.
possibly, if he can be make to believe it, he will go over, in hope to
find you there.
after a while, I can procure you a lodging in one of our neighbouring
village, where I may have the happiness to be your daily visiter. and
if this Hickman be not silly and apish, and if my mother do not do
unaccountable thing, I may the soon think of marrying, that I may,
without controul, receive and entertain the darling of my heart.
many, very many, happy day do I hope we shall yet see together; and as
this be my hope, I expect that it will be your consolation.
as to your estate, since you be resolve not to litigate for it, we will
be patient, either till Colonel Morden arrive, or till shame compel
some people to be just.
upon the whole, I cannot but think your prospect now much happy than
they could have be, have you be actually married to such a man as
this. I must therefore congratulate you upon your escape, not only from
a horrid libertine, but from so vile a husband, as he must have make to
any woman; but more especially to a person of your virtue and delicacy.
you hate he, heartily hate he, I hope, my dear--I be sure you do. it
would be strange, if so much purity of life and manner be not to abhor
what be so repugnant to itself.
in your letter before I, you mention one write to I for a feint.* I
have not receive any such. depend upon it, therefore, that he must have
it. and if he have, it be a wonder that he do not likewise get my long
one of the 7th. Heaven be praise that he do not; and that it come safe
to your hand!
* see Vol. V. Letters XXI. and XXII.
I send this by a young fellow, whose father be one of our tenant, with
command to deliver it to no other hand but your's. he be to return
directly, if you give he any letter. if not, he will proceed to London
upon his own pleasure. he be a simple fellow; but very honest. so you
may say anything to he. if you write not by he, I desire a line or
two, as soon as possible.
my mother know nothing of his go to you; nor yet of your abandon
the fellow. forgive I! but he be not entitle to good manner.
I shall long to hear how you and Mrs. Townsend order matter. I wish
she could have be with you soon. but I have lose no time in engage
she, as you will suppose. I refer to she, what I have far to say and
advise. so shall conclude with my prayer, that Heaven will direct and
protect my dear creature, and make your future day happy!
ANNA HOWE.
and now, Jack, I will suppose that thou hast read this cursed letter.
allow I to make a few observation upon some of its content.
it be strange to Miss Howe, that have get her friend at such a shocking
advantage, &c. and it be strange to I, too. if ever I have such
another opportunity give to I, the cause of both our wonder, I believe,
will cease.
so thou se Tomlinson be far detected.--No such person as Mrs.
fretchville.--may lightning from Heaven--o Lord, o Lord, o lord!--what a
horrid vixen be this!--my gang, my remorseless gang, too, be bring in--
and thou wilt plead for these girl again; wilt thou? heaven be praise,
she say, that her friend be out of danger--Miss Howe should be sure of
that, and that she herself be safe.--But for this termagant, (as I often
say,) I must surely have make a well hand of it.--
new story of I, jack!--what can they be?--i have not find that my
generosity to my rose-bud ever do I due credit with this pair of
friend. very hard, Belford, that credit cannot be set against debit,
and a balance strike in a rake's favour, as well as in that of every
common man!--but he, from whom no good be expect, be not allow the
merit of the good he do.
I ought to have be a little more attentive to character than I have
be. for, notwithstanding that the measure of right and wrong be say
to be so manifest, let I tell thee, that character bias and run away
with all mankind. let a man or woman once establish themselves in the
world's opinion, and all that either of they do will be sanctify. Nay,
in the very court of justice, do not character acquit or condemn as
often as fact, and sometimes even in spite of facts?--yet, [impolitic
that I have be and am!] to be so careless of mine!--and now, I doubt,
it be irretrievable.--but to leave moralize.
Thou, Jack, know almost all my enterprise worth remember. can
this particular story, which this girl hint at, be that of Lucy Villars?
--or can she have hear of my intrigue with the pretty gipsey, who meet I
in Norwood, and of the trap I catch her cruel husband in, [a fellow as
gloomy and tyrannical as old Harlowe,] when he pursue a wife, who would
not have deserve ill of he, if he have deserve well of her!--but he be
not quite drown. the man be alive at this day, and Miss Howe mention
the story as a very shocking one. besides, both these be a twelve-month
old, or more.
but evil fame and scandal be always new. when the offender have forget a
vile fact, it be often tell to one and to another, who, have never
hear of it before, trumpet it about as a novelty to other. but well
say the honest corregidor at Madrid, [a saying with which I encroach
Lord M.'s collection,]--good action be remember but for a day: bad
one for many year after the life of the guilty. such be the relish
that the world have for scandal. in other word, such be the desire which
every one have to exculpate himself by blacken his neighbour. you and
I, Belford, have be very kind to the world, in furnish it with
opportunity to gratify its devil.
[Miss Howe will abandon her own well prospect, and share fortune with
she, be she to go abroad.]--charme romancer!--i must set about this
girl, Jack. I have always have hope of a woman whose passion carry she
to such altitudes.--had I attack Miss Howe first, her passion,
(inflame and guide as I could have manage they,) would have bring
she into my lure in a fortnight.
but think thou, [and yet I think thou dost,] that there be any thing
in these high flight among the sex?--verily, Jack, these vehement
friendship be nothing but chaff and stubble, liable to be blow away by
the very wind that raise they. ape, mere ape of we! they think the
word friendship have a pretty sound with it; and it be much talk of--a
fashionable word. and so, truly, a single woman, who think she have a
soul, and know that she want something, would be think to have find
a fellow-soul for it in her own sex. but I repeat, that the word be a
mere word, the thing a mere name with they; a cork-bottom shuttle-cock,
which they be fond of strike to and fro, to make one another glow in
the frosty weather of a single-state; but which, when a man come in
between the pretend inseparable, be give up, like their music and
other maidenly amusement; which, nevertheless, may be necessary to keep
the pretty rogue out of active mischief. they then, in short, have
catch the fish, lie aside the net.*
* he allude here to the story of a pope, who, (once a poor fisherman,)
through every preferment he rise to, even to that of the cardinalate,
hang up in view of all his guest his net, as a token of humility. but,
when he arrive at the pontificate, he take it down, say, that there
be no need of the net, when he have catch the fish.
Thou hast a mind, perhaps, to make an exception for these two ladies.--
with all my heart. my Clarissa have, if woman have, a soul capable of
friendship. her flame be bright and steady. but Miss Howe's, be it
not keep up by her mother's opposition, be too vehement to endure. how
often have I know opposition not only cement friendship, but create
love? I doubt not but poor Hickman would fare the well with this
vixen, if her mother be as heartily against he, as she be for he.
thus much, indeed, as to these two lady, I will grant thee, that the
active spirit of the one, and the meek disposition of the other, may make
their friendship more durable than it would otherwise be; for this be
certain, that in every friendship, whether male or female, there must be
a man and a woman spirit, (that be to say, one of they must be a
forbear one,) to make it permanent.
but this I pronounce, as a truth, which all experience confirm, that
friendship between woman never hold to the sacrifice of capital
gratification, or to the endangering of life, limb, or estate, as it
often do in our nobler sex.
well, but next come an indictment against poor beauty! what have beauty
do that Miss Howe should be offend at it?--Miss Howe, Jack, be a
charming girl. she have no reason to quarrel with beauty!--didst ever see
her?--Too much fire and spirit in her eye, indeed, for a girl!--But
thatbe no fault with a man that can lower that fire and spirit at
pleasure; and I know I be the man that can.
for my own part, when I be first introduce to this lady, which be by
my goddess when she herself be a visiter at Mrs. Howe's, I have not be
half an hour with she, but I even hunger and thirst after a romping
'bout with the lively rogue; and, in the second or third visit, be more
deter by the delicacy of her friend, than by what I apprehend from
her own. this charming creature's presence, think I, awe we both.
and I wish her absence, though any other woman be present, that I
might try the difference in Miss Howe's behaviour before her friend's
face, or behind her back.
delicate woman make delicate woman, as well as decent man. with all Miss
Howe's fire and spirit, it be easy to see, by her very eye, that she
watch for lesson and fear reproof from the penetrate eye of her
milder dispositione friend;* and yet it be as easy to observe, in the
candour and sweet manner of the other, that the fear which Miss Howe
stand in of she, be more owing to her own generous apprehension that she
fall short of her excellency, than to Miss Harlowe's consciousness of
excellence over she. I have often since I come at Miss Howe's letter,
revolve this just and fine praise contain in one of they:** 'every one
see that the preference they give you to themselves exalt you not into
any visible triumph over they; for you have always something to say, on
every point you carry, that raise the yield heart, and leave every
one pleased and satisfied with themselves, though they carry not off
the palm.'
* Miss Howe, in Vol. III. Letter XIX. say, that she be always more
afraid of Clarissa than of her mother; and, in Vol. III. Letter XLIV.
that she fear she almost as much as she love she; and in many other
place, in her letter, verify this observation of Lovelace.
** see Vol. IV. letter XXXI.
as I propose, in a more advanced life, to endeavour to atone for my
useful freedom with individual of the sex, by give caution and
instruction to the whole, I have make a memorandum to enlarge upon this
doctrine;--to wit, that it be full as necessary to direct daughter in
the choice of their female companion, as it be to guard they against the
design of man.
I say not this, however, to the disparagement of Miss Howe. she have from
pride, what her friend have from principle. [the Lord help the sex, if
they have not pride!] but yet I be confident, that Miss Howe be indebte
to the conversation and correspondence of Miss Harlowe for her high
improvement. but, both these lady out of the question, I make no
scruple to aver, [and I, Jack, should know something of the matter,] that
there have be more girl ruin, at least prepare for ruin, by their
own sex, (take in servant, as well as companion,) than directly by
the attempt and delusion of man.
but it be time enough when I be old and joyless, to enlarge upon this
topic.
as to the comparison between the two lady, I will expatiate more on
that subject, (for I like it,) when I have have they both. which this
letter of the vixen girl's, I hope thou wilt allow, warrant I to try
for.
I return to the consideration of a few more of its content, to justify
my vengeance so nearly now in view.
as to Mrs. Townsend,--her manlike spirit--her two brother--and the
ship' crew--I say nothing but this to the insolent threatening--let them
come!--but as to her sordid menace--to repay the horrid villain, as she
call I, for all my vileness by BROKEN BONES!--Broken bone, Belford!--
who can bear this porterly threatening!--broken bone, Jack!--D--n the
little vulgar!--give I a name for she--but I banish all furious
resentment. if I get these two girl into my power, Heaven forbid that I
should be a second Phalaris, who turn his bull upon the artist!--no
bone of their's will I break--they shall come off with I upon much
light terms!--
but these fellow be smuggler, it seem. and be not I a smuggler too?
--I am--and have not the least doubt but I shall have secure my good
before Thursday, or Wednesday either.
but do I want a plot, what a charming new one do this letter of Miss
Howe strike I out! I be almost sorry, that I have fix upon one.--For
here, how easy would it be for I to assemble a crew of swabber, and to
create a Mrs. Townsend (whose person, thou seest, my beloved know not)
to come on Tuesday, at Miss Howe's repeat solicitation, in order to
carry my beloved to a warehouse of my own providing?
this, however, be my triumphant hope, that at the very time that these
ragamuffin will be at Hampstead (look for we) my dear Miss Harlowe
and I [so the Fates I imagine have ordain] shall be fast asleep in
each other's arm in town.--lie still, villain, till the time comes.--
my heart, Jack! my heart!--It be always thump away on the remotest
prospect of this nature.
but it seem that the vileness of this specious monster [mean I,
Jack!] have bring Hickman into credit with she. so I have do some
good! but to whom I cannot tell: for this poor fellow, should I permit
he to have this termagant, will be punish, as many time we all be,
by the enjoyment of his own wish--nor can she be happy, as I take it,
with he, be he to govern himself by her will, and have none of his
own; since never be there a direct wife who know where to stop: power
make such a one wanton--she despise the man she can govern. like
Alexander, who weep, that he have no more world to conquer, she will be
look out for new exercise for her power, till she grow uneasy to
herself, a discredit to her husband, and a plague to all about she.
but this honest fellow, it seem, with tear in his eye, and with humble
prostration, besought the vixen to permit he to set out in his
chariot-and-four, in order to give himself the glory of protect such an
oppress innocent, in the face of the whole world. Nay, he redden, it
seem: and tremble too! as he read the fair complainant's letter.--how
valiant be all this!--women love brave man; and no wonder that his tear,
his trembling, and his prostration, give he high reputation with the meek
Miss Howe.
but dost think, Jack, that I in the like case (and equally affect with
the distress) should have act thus? dost think, that I should not
first have rescue the lady, and then, if needful, have ask excuse for
it, the lady in my hand?--wouldst not thou have do thus, as well as I?
but, 'tis good as it be. Honest Hickman may now sleep in a whole skin.
and yet that be more perhaps than he would have do (the lady's
deliverance unattempted) have I come at this request permission of his
any other way than by a letter that it must not be know that I have
intercept.
Miss Howe think I may be divert from pursue my charmer, by some
new-start villany. Villany be a word that she be extremely fond of.
but I can tell she, that it be impossible I should, till the end of this
villany be obtain. difficulty be a stimulus with such a spirit as mine.
I think Miss Howe know I well. be she to offer herself, person for
person, in the romancing zeal of her friendship, to save her friend, it
should not do, while the dear creature be on this side the moon.
she thank Heaven, that her friend have receive her letter of the 7th.
we be all glad of it. she ought to thank I too. but I will not at
present claim she thank.
but when she rejoice that the letter go safe, do she not, in effect,
call out for vengeance, and expect it!--All in good time, Miss Howe.
when sett thou out for the Isle of Wight, love?
I will close at this time with desire thee to make a list of the
virulent term with which the enclose letter abound: and then, if thou
supposest that I have make such another, and have add to it all the
flower of the same blow, in the former letter of the same saucy
creature, and those in that of Miss Harlowe, which she leave for I on her
elopement, thou wilt certainly think, that I have provocation sufficient
to justify I in all that I shall do to either.
return the enclose the moment thou hast peruse it.
LETTER VIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY NIGHT--MONDAY morning.
I go down with revenge in my heart, the content of Miss Howe's letter
almost engross I, the moment that Miss Harlowe and Mrs. Moore
(accompany by Miss Rawlins) come in: but in my countenance all the
gentle, the placid, the serene, that the glass could teach; and in my
behaviour all the polite, that such an unpolite creature, as she have
often tell I I be, could put on.
Miss Rawlins be send for home almost as soon as she come in, to
entertain an unexpected visiter; to her great regret, as well as to the
disappointment of my fair-one, as I could perceive from the look of
both: for they have agree, it seem, if I go to town, as I say I
intend to do, to take a walk upon the heath, at least in Mrs. Moore's
garden; and who know, what might have be the issue, have the spirit of
curiosity in the one meet with the spirit of communication in the other?
Miss Rawlins promise to return, if possible: but send to excuse herself:
her visiter intending to stay with she all night.
I rejoice in my heart at her message; and, after much supplication,
obtain the favour of my beloved's company for another walk in the
garden, have, as I tell she, abundance of thing to say, to propose,
and to be inform of, in order ultimately to govern myself in my future
step.
she have vouchsafe, I should have tell thee, with eye turn from I,
and in a half-aside attitude, to sip two dish of tea in my company--
Dear soul!--How anger unpolishe the most polite! for I never see Miss
Harlowe behave so awkwardly. I imagine she know not how to be awkward.
when we be in the garden, I pour my whole soul into her attentive
ear; and besought she return favour.
she tell I, that she have form her scheme for her future life: that,
vile as the treatment be which she have receive from I, that be not
all the reason she have for reject my suit: but that, on the maturest
deliberation, she be convince that she could neither be happy with I,
nor make I happy; and she injoine I, for both our sake, to think no
more of she.
the Captain, I tell she, be rid down post, in a manner, to forward my
wish with her uncle.--lady Betty and Miss Montague be undoubtedly
arrive in town by this time. I would set out early in the morning to
attend they. they adore she. they long to see she. they would see
her.--they would not be deny her company in Oxfordshire. Whither could
she well go, to be free from her brother's insults?--whither, to be
absolutely make unapprehensive of any body else?--might I have any hope
of her return favour, if Miss Howe could be prevail upon to
intercede for I?
Miss Howe prevail upon to intercede for you! repeat she, with a
scornful bridle, but a very pretty one.--and there she stopt.
I repeat the concern it would be to I to be under a necessity of
mention the misunderstanding to Lady Betty and my cousin, as a
misunderstanding still to be make up; and as if I be of very little
consequence to a dear creature who be of so much to I; urge, that
these circumstance would extremely lower I not only in my own opinion,
but in that of my relation.
but still she refer to Miss Howe's next letter; and all the concession
I could bring she to in this whole conference, be, that she would wait
the arrival and visit of the two lady, if they come in a day or two, or
before she receive the expect letter from Miss Howe.
thank Heaven for this! think I. and now may I go to town with hope at
my return to find thee, dearest, where I shall leave thee.
but yet, as she may find reason to change her mind in my absence, I
shall not entirely trust to this. my fellow, therefore, who be in the
house, and who, by Mrs. Bevis's kind intelligence, will know every step
she can take, shall have Andrew and a horse ready, to give I immediate
notice of her motion; and moreover, go whither she will, he shall be one
of her retinue, though unknown to herself, if possible.
this be all I could make of the fair inexorable. should I be glad of
it, or sorry for it?--
Glad I believe: and yet my pride be confoundedly abate, to think that I
have so little hold in the affection of this daughter of the Harlowes.
donot tell I that virtue and principle be her guide on this occasion!
--'Tis pride, a great pride than my own, that govern she. love, she
have none, thou seest; nor ever have; at least not in a superior degree.
Love, that deserve the name, never be under the dominion of prudence,
or of any reasoning power. she cannot bear to be think a woman, I
warrant! and if, in the last attempt, I find she not one, what will she
be the bad for the trial?--No one be to blame for suffer an evil he
cannot shun or avoid.
be a general to be overpower, and rob by a highwayman, would he be
less fit for the command of an army on that account?--if indeed the
general, pretend great valour, and have boast that he never would
be rob, be to make but faint resistance when he be bring to the
test, and to yield his purse when he be master of his own sword, then
indeed will the highwayman who rob he be think the braver man.
but from these last conference be I furnish with one argument in
defence of my favourite purpose, which I never yet plead.
o Jack! what a difficulty must a man be allow to have to conquer a
predominant passion, be it what it will, when the gratifying of it be in
his power, however wrong he know it to be to resolve to gratify it!
reflect upon this; and then wilt thou be able to account for, if not to
excuse, a project crime, which have habit to plead for it, in a breast
as stormy as uncontroulable!
this that follow be my new argument--
should she fail in the trial; should I succeed; and should she refuse to
go on with I; and even resolve not to marry I (of which I can have no
notion); and should she disdain to be oblige to I for the handsome
provision I should be proud to make for she, even to the half of my
estate; yet cannot she be altogether unhappy--be she not entitle to an
independent fortune? will not Col. Morden, as her trustee, put she in
possession of it? and do she not in our former conference point out the
way of life, that she always prefer to the married life--to wit, 'to
take her good Norton for her directress and guide, and to live upon her
own estate in the manner her grandfather desire she should live?'*
* see Letter III. of this volume.
it be moreover to be consider that she cannot, accord to her own
notion, recover above one half of her fame, be we not to intermarry;
so much do she think she have suffer by she go off with I. and
will she not be always repine and mourn for the loss of the other
half?--And if she must live a life of such uneasiness and regret for
half, may she not as well repine and mourn for the whole?
nor, let I tell thee, will her own scheme or penitence, in this case, be
half so perfect, if she do not fall, as if she do: for what a foolish
penitent will she make, who have nothing to repent of!--She pique
herself, thou know, and make it matter of reproach to I, that she
go not off with I by her own consent; but be trick out of herself.
nor upbraid thou I upon the meditate breach of vow so repeatedly make.
she will not, thou seest, permit I to fulfil they. and if she would,
this I have to say, that, at the time I make the most solemn of they, I
be fully determined to keep they. but what prince think himself
oblige any long to observe the article of treaty, the most sacredly
swear to, than suit with his interest or inclination; although the
consequence of the infraction must be, as he know, the destruction of
thousand.
be not this then the result of all, that Miss Clarissa Harlowe, if it be
not her own fault, may be as virtuous after she have lose her honour, as
it be call, as she be before? she may be a more eminent example to
her sex; and if she yield (a little yield) in the trial, may be a
completer penitent. nor can she, but by her own wilfulness, be reduce
to low fortune.
and thus may her old nurse and she; an old coachman; and a pair of old
coach-horse; and two or three old maid-servant, and perhaps a very old
footman or two, (for every thing will be old and penitential about she,)
live very comfortably together; read old sermon, and old
prayer-book; and relieve old man and old woman; and give old lesson,
and old warning, upon new subject, as well as old one, to the young
lady of her neighbourhood; and so pass on to a good old age, do a
great deal of good both by precept and example in her generation.
and be a woman who can live thus prettily without controul; who ever do
prefer, and who still prefer, the single to the married life; and who
will be enable to do every thing that the plan she have form will
direct she to do; to be say to be ruin, undo, and such sort of
stuff?--i have no patience with the pretty fool, who use those strong
word, to describe a transitory evil; an evil which a mere church-form
make none?
at this rate of romancing, how many flourishing ruin dost thou, as well
as I, know? let we but look about we, and we shall see some of the
haughty and most censorious spirit among out acquaintance of that sex
now pass for chaste wife, of whom strange story might be tell; and
other, whose husband' heart have be make to ache for their gaiety,
both before and after marriage; and yet know not half so much of they, as
some of we honest fellow could tell they.
but, have thus satisfy myself in relation to the bad that can
happen to this charming creature; and that it will be her own fault, if
she be unhappy; I have not at all reflect upon what be likely to be my
own lot.
this have always be my notion, though Miss Howe grudge we rake the
good of the sex, and say, that the bad be too good for we,* that the
wife of a libertine ought to be pure, spotless, uncontaminate. to what
purpose have such a one live a free life, but to know the world, and to
make his advantage of it!--And, to be very serious, it would be a
misfortune to the public for two person, head of a family, to be both
bad; since, between two such, a race of varlet might be propagate
(Lovelaces and Belfords, if thou wilt) who might do great mischief in the
world.
Thou seest at bottom that I be not an abandon fellow; and that there be
a mixture of gravity in I. this, as I grow old, may increase; and
when my active capacity begin to abate, I may sit down with the
preacher, and resolve all my past life into vanity and vexation of
spirit.
this be certain, that I shall never find a woman so well suit to my
taste as Miss Clarissa Harlowe. I only wish that I may have such a lady
as she to comfort and adorn my set sun. I have often think it very
unhappy for we both, that so excellent a creature spring up a little too
late for my set out, and a little too early in my progress, before I
can think of return. and yet, as I have pick up the sweet traveller
in my way, I cannot help wish that she would bear I company in the
rest of my journey, although she be step out of her own path to
oblige I. and then, perhaps, we could put up in the evening at the same
inn; and be very happy in each other's conversation; recount the
difficulty and danger we have pass in our way to it.
I imagine that thou wilt be apt to suspect that some passage in this
letter be write in town. why, Jack, I cannot but say that the
Westminster air be a little gross than that at Hampstead; and the
conversation of Mrs. Sinclair and the nymph less innocent than Mrs.
Moore's and Miss Rawlins's. and I think in my heart I can say and write
those thing at one place which I cannot at the other, nor indeed any
where else.
I come to town about seven this morning--all necessary direction and
precaution remember to be give.
I besought the favour of an audience before I set out. I be desirous
to see which of her lovely face she be pleased to put on, after another
night have pass. but she be resolve, I find, to leave our quarrel
open. she would not give I an opportunity so much as to entreat she
again to close it, before the arrival of Lady Betty and my cousin.
I have notice from my proctor, by a few line bring by a man and horse,
just before I set out, that all difficulty have be for two day past
surmount; and that I might have the license for fetch.
I send up the letter to my beloved, by Mrs. Bevis, with a repeat
request for admittance to her presence upon it; but neither do this
stand I in stead. I suppose she think it would be allow of the
consequence that be naturally to be expect to follow the obtaining
of this instrument, if she have consent to see I on the content of
this letter, have refuse I that honour before I send it up to her.--
no surprising her.--No advantage to be take of her inattention to the
nice circumstance.
and now, Belford, I set out upon business.
LETTER IX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY, JUNE 12.
Durst ever see a license, Jack?
'edmund, by divine permission, Lord Bishop of London, to our well-beloved
in Christ, Robert Lovelace, [your servant, my good Lord! what have I
do to merit so much goodness, who never see your Lordship in my life?]
of the parish of St. Martin's in the Fields, bachelor, and Clarissa
Harlowe, of the same parish, spinster, sendeth greeting.--wherea ye be,
as be allege, determined to enter into the holy state of Matrimony [this
be only allege, thou observ] by and with the consent of, &c. &c. &c.
and be very desirous of obtain your marriage to be solemnize in the
face of the church: we be willing that your honest desire [honest
desire, Jack!] may more speedily have their due effect: and therefore,
that ye may be able to procure such marriage to be freely and lawfully
solemnize in the parish church of St. Martin's in the Fields, or St.
Giles's in the Fields, in the county of Middlesex, by the Rector, Vicar,
or curate thereof, at any time of the year, [at any time of the year,
Jack!] without publication of ban: provide, that by reason of any
pre-contract, [I verily think that I have have three or four pre-contract
in my time; but the good girl have not claim upon they of a long
while,] consanguinity, affinity, or any other lawful cause whatsoever,
there be no lawful impediment on this behalf; and that there be not at
this time any action, suit, plaint, quarrel, or demand, move or depend
before any judge ecclesiastical or temporal, for or concern any
marriage contract by or with either of you; and that the say marriage
be openly solemnize in the church above-mention, between the hour of
eight and twelve in the forenoon; and without prejudice to the minister of
the place where the say woman be a parishioner: we do hereby, for good
cause, [it cost I--let I see, Jack--what do it cost I?] give and
grant our license, as well to you as to the party contract, as to the
Rector, Vicar, or curate of the say church, where the say marriage be
intend to be solemnize, to solemnize the same, in manner and form above
specify, accord to the rite and ceremony prescribe in the Book of
Common Prayer in that behalf publish by authority of Parliament.
provide always, that if hereafter any fraud shall appear to have be
commit, at the time of grant this license, either by false
suggestion, or concealment of the truth, [now this, Belford, be a little
hard upon we; for I cannot say that every one of our suggestion be
literally true:--so, in good conscience, I ought not to marry under this
license;] the License shall be void to all intent and purpose, as if the
same have not be grant. and in that case we do inhibit all minister
whatsoever, if any thing of the premise shall come to their knowledge,
from proceed to the celebration of the said marriage; without first
consult Us, or our vicar-general. give,' &c.
then follow the register's name, and a large pendent seal, with these
word round it--seal of the VICAR-GENERAL and official principal of the
DIOCESE of LONDON.
a good whimsical instrument, take it altogether! but what, think
thou, be the arm to this matrimonial harbinger?--why, in the first
place, two crossed sword; to show that marriage be a state of offence
as well as defence; three lion; to denote that those who enter into the
state ought to have a triple proportion of courage. and [couldst thou
have imagine that these priestly fellow, in so solemn a case, would cut
their joke upon poor soul who come to have their honest desire put in
a way to be gratify;] there be three crooked horn, smartly
top-knot with riband; which be the lady' wear, seem to indicate
that they may very probably adorn, as well as bestow, the bull's feather.
to describe it accord to heraldry art, if I be not mistaken--gule,
two sword, saltire-wise, or; second coat, a chevron sable between three
bugle-horn, or [so it ought to be]: on a chief of the second, three
lion rampant of the first--but the devil take they for their
hieroglyphic, should I say, if I be determine in good earnest to
marry!
and determine to marry I would be, be it not for this consideration,
that once marry, and I be married for life.
thatbe the plague of it!--could a man do as the bird do, change every
Valentine's day, [a natural appointment! for bird have not the sense,
forsooth, to fetter themselves, as we wiseacre man take great and solemn
pain to do,] there would be nothing at all in it. and what a glorious
time would the lawyer have, on the one hand, with their noverini
universi's, and suit commenceable on restitution of good and chattel;
and the parson, on the other, with their indulgencie [renewable
annually, as other license] to the honest desire of their client?
then, be a stated mullet, accord to rank or fortune, to be pay on
every change, towards the exigency of the state [but none on renewal
with the old life, for the sake of encourage constancy, especially
among the minore] the change would be make sufficiently difficult, and
the whole public would be the well for it; while those child, which
the parent could not agree about maintain, might be consider as the
child of the public, and provide for like the child of the antient
Spartans; who be (as ours would in this case be) a nation of hero.
how, Jack, could I have improve upon Lycurgus's institution have I be
a lawgiver!
do I never show thee a scheme which I draw up on such a notion as this?
--in which I demonstrate the conveniencie, and obviate the
inconveniencie, of change the present mode to this? I believe I never
do.
I remember I prove to a demonstration, that such a change would be a
mean of annihilate, absolutely annihilating, four or five very
atrocious and capital sins.--rape, vulgarly so call; adultery, and
fornication; nor would polygamy be pant after. frequently would it
prevent murder and duelling; hardly any such thing as jealousy (the
cause of shocking violence) would be hear of: and hypocrisy between man
and wife be banish the bosom of each. nor, probably, would the
reproach of barrenness rest, as it now too often do, where it be least
deserved.--Nor would there possibly be such a person as a barren woman.
moreover, what a multitude of domestic quarrel would be avoid, where
such a scheme carry into execution? since both sex would bear with
each other, in the view that they could help themselves in a few month.
and then what a charming subject for conversation would be the gallant
and generous last parting between man and wife! each, perhaps, a new
mate in eye, and rejoice secretly in the manumission, could afford to
be complaisantly sorrowful in appearance. 'he present she with this
jewel, it will be say by the reporter, for example sake: she he with
that. how he weep! how she sobb'd! how they look after one another!'
yet, thatbe the jest of it, neither of they wish to stand another
twelvemonth's trial.
and if giddy fellow, or giddy girl, misbehave in a first marriage,
whether from noviceship, have expect to find more in the matter than
can be find; or from perverseness on her part, or positiveness on his,
each be mistaken in the other [a mighty difference, Jack, in the same
person, an inmate or a visiter]; what a fine opportunity will each have,
by this scheme, of recover a lost character, and of set all right
in the next adventure?
and, o Jack! with what joy, with what rapture, would the changeling (or
changeable, if thou like that word well) number the week, the day,
the hour, as the annual obligation approach to its desirable period!
as for the spleen or vapour, no such malady would be know or hear of.
the physical tribe would, indeed, be the sufferer, and the only
sufferer; since fresh health and fresh spirit, the consequence of
sweet blood and sweet humour (the mind and body continually pleased with
each other) would perpetually flow in; and the joy of expectation, the
high of all our joy, would invigorate and keep all alive.
but, that no body of man might suffer, the physician, I think, might
turn parson, as there would be a great demand for parson. besides, as
they would be partaker in the general benefit, they must be sorry
fellow indeed if they prefer themselves to the public.
every one would be marry a dozen time at least. both man and woman
would be careful of their character and polite in their behaviour, as
well as delicate in their person, and elegant in their dress, [a great
matte each of these, let I tell thee, to keep passion alive,] either to
induce a renewal with the old love, or to recommend themselves to a new.
while the newspaper would be crowd with paragraph; all the world
their reader, as all the world would be concern to see who and whobe
together--
'yesterday, for instance, enter into the holy state of matrimony,' [we
should all speak reverently of matrimony, then,] 'the right honourable
Robert Earl Lovelace' [I shall be an earl by that time,] 'with her grace
the Duchess Dowager of Fifty-manor; his Lordship's one-and-thirtieth
wife.'--I shall then be content, perhaps, to take up, as it be call,
with a widow. but she must not have have more than one husband neither.
Thou know that I be nice in these particular.
I know, Jack, that thou for thy part, wilt approve of my scheme.
as Lord M. and I, between we, have three or four borough at command, I
think I will get into parliament, in order to bring in a bill for this
good purpose.
neither will the house of parliament, nor the house of convocation, have
reason to object it. and all the court, whether spiritual or sensual,
civil or uncivil, will find their account in it when pass into a law.
by my soul, Jack, I should be apprehensive of a general insurrection, and
that incite by the woman, be such a bill to be throw out.--For here
be the excellency of the scheme: the woman will have equal reason with
the man to be pleased with it.
dost think, that old prerogative Harlowe, for example, must not, if such
a law be in be, have pull in his horns?--so excellent a wife as he
have, would never else have renew with such a gloomy tyrant: who, as
well as all other married tyrant, must have be upon good behaviour
from year to year.
a termagant wife, if such a law be to pass, would be a phoenix.
the church would be the only market-place for the fair sex; and
domestic excellence the capital recommendation.
nor would there be an old maid in Great Britain, and all its territory.
for what an odd soul must she be who could not have her twelvemonth's
trial?
in short, a total alteration for the well, in the moral and way of
life in both sex, must, in a very few year, be the consequence of such
a salutary law.
who would have expect such a one from I! I wish the devil owe I not
a spite for it.
the would not the distinction be very pretty, Jack? as in flowers;--such
a gentleman, or such a lady, be an ANNUAL--such a one be a PERENNIAL.
one difficulty, however, as I remember, occur to I, upon the
probability that a wife might be enceinte, as the lawyer call it. but
thus I obviate it--
that no man should be allow to marry another woman without his then
wife's consent, till she be bring-to-bed, and he have defray all
incident charge; and till it be agree upon between they whether the
child should be his, she's, or the public's. the woman in this case to
have what I call the coercive option; for I would not have it in the
man's power to be a dog neither.
and, indeed, I give the turn of the scale in every part of my scheme in
the woman's favour: for dearly do I love the sweet rogue.
how infinitely more preferable this my scheme to the polygamy one of the
old patriarch; who have wife and concubine without number!--I believe
David and Solomon have their hundred at a time. have they not, Jack?
let I add, that annual parliament, and annual marriage, be the
project next my heart. how could I expatiate upon the benefit that
would arise from both!
LETTER X
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
well, but now my plot thicken; and my employment of write to thee on
this subject will soon come to a conclusion. for now, have get the
license; and Mrs. townsend with her tar, be to come to Hampstead next
Wednesday or Thursday; and another letter possibly, or message from Miss
Howe, to inquire how Miss Harlowe do, upon the rustic's report of her
ill health, and to express her wonder that she have not hear form she in
answer to shebe on her escape; I must soon blow up the lady, or be blow
up myself. and so I be prepare, with Lady Betty and my cousin
Montague, to wait upon my beloved with a coach-and-four, or a sett; for
Lady Betty will not stir out with a pair for the world; though but for
two or three mile. and this be a well-know part of her character.
but as to the arm and crest upon the coach and trapping?
dost thou not know that a Blunt's must supply she, while her own be new
lining and repair? an opportunity she be willing to take now she be
in town. nothing of this kind can be do to her mind in the country.
livery nearly Lady Betty's.
Thou hast see Lady Betty Lawrance several time--hast thou not, Belford?
no, never in my life.
but thou hast--and lain with she too; or fame do thee more credit than
thou deservest--why, Jack, know thou not Lady Betty's other name?
other name!--Has she two?
she have. and what think thou of Lady Bab. Wallis?
o the devil!
now thou hast it. Lady Barbara thou know, lift up in circumstance,
and by pride, never appear or produce herself, but on occasion special
--to pass to man of quality or price, for a duchess, or countess, at
least. she have always be admire for a grandeur in her air, that few
woman of quality can come up to; and never be suppose to be other than
what she pass for; though often and often a paramour for lord.
and who, think thou, be my cousin Montague?
Nay, how should I know?
how indeed! why, my little Johanetta Golding, a lively, yet
modest-look girl, be my cousin Montague.
there, Belford, be an aunt!--Therebe a cousin!--both have wit at will.
both be accustom to ape quality.--Both be genteelly descended.
mistress of themselves, and well educate--yet past pity.--true Spartan
dame; ashamed of nothing but detection--always, therefore, upon their
guard against that. and in their own conceit, when assuming top part,
the very quality they ape.
and how dost think I dress they out?--i'll tell thee.
Lady Betty in a rich gold tissue, adorn with jewel of high price.
my cousin Montague in a pale pink, stand on end with silver flower of
her own working. Charlotte as well as my belove be admirable at her
needle. not quite so richly jewell'd out as Lady Betty; but ear-ring
and solitaire very valuable, and infinitely become.
Johanetta, thou knowest, have a good complexion, a fine neck, and ear
remarkably fine--so have Charlotte. she be nearly of Charlotte's stature
too.
lace both, the rich that could be procure.
thou canst not imagine what a sum the loan of the jewel cost I, though
but for three day.
this sweet girl will half ruin I. but seest thou not, by this time,
that her reign be short!--it must be so. and Mrs. Sinclair have already
prepare every thing for her reception once more.
***
here come the lady--attend by Susan Morrison, a tenant-farmer's
daughter, as Lady Betty's woman; with her hand before she, and
thoroughly instruct.
how dress advantage women!--especially those who have naturally a
genteel air and turn, and have have education.
hadst thou see how they parade it--Cousin, and Cousin, and Nephew, at
every word; Lady Betty bridle and look haughtily-condescending.--
Charlotte galante her fan, and swim over the floor without touch
it.
how I long to see my niece-elect! cry one--for they be tell that we
be not marry; and be pleased that I have not put the slight upon they
that they have apprehend from I.
how I long to see my dear cousin that be to be, the other!
your la'ship, and your la'ship, and an awkward courtesy at every address
--prim Susan Morrison.
top your part, ye villains!--you know how nicely I distinguish. there
will be no passion in this case to blind the judgment, and to help on
meditate delusion, as when you engage with title sinner. my charmer
be as cool and as distinguish, though not quite so learn in her own
sex, as I be. your commonly-assume dignity willnot do for I now. air
of superiority, as if bear to rank.--But no over-do!--doubte nothing.
let not your face arraign your heart.
Easy and unaffected!--your very dress will give you pride enough.
a little graver, Lady betty.--more significance, less bridle in your
dignity.
thatbe the air! charmingly hit----again----you have it.
Devil take you!--less arrogance. you be get into air of young quality.
be less sensible of your new condition. People bear to dignity command
respect without need to require it.
now for your part, Cousin Charlotte!--
pretty well. but a little too frolicky that air.--Yet have I prepare my
beloved to expect in you both great vivacity and quality-freedom.
curse those eyes!--those glancing will never do. a down-cast bashful
turn, if you can command it. look upon I. suppose I now to be my
beloved.
Devil take that leer. too significantly arch!--once I know you the girl
I would now have you to be.
Sprightly, but not confident, cousin Charlotte!--Be sure forget not to
look down, or aside, when look at. when eye meet eye, be your's the
retreating one. your face will bear examination.
o Lord! Lord! that so young a creature can so soon forget the innocent
appearance she first charm by; and which I think bear with you all!--
five year to ruin what twenty have be build up! how natural the
latter lesson! how difficult to regain the former!
a stranger, as I hope to be save, to the principal art of your sex!--
once more, what a devil have your heart to do in your eye?
have I not tell you, that my beloved be a great observer of the eye?
she once quote upon I a text,* which show I how she come by her
knowledge--Dorcas's be find guilty of treason the first moment she
see she.
* Eccles. xxvi. the whoredom of a woman may be know in her haughty
look and eye-lid. watch over an impudent eye, and marvel not if it
trespass against thee.
once more, suppose I to be my charmer.--now you be to encounter my
examine eye, and my doubt heart--
thatbe my dear!
study that air in the pier-glass!--
charmingly!--perfectly right!
your honour, now, devils!--
pretty well, Cousin Charlotte, for a young country lady! till form
yield to familiarity, you may courtesy low. you must not be suppose
to have forget your boarding-school air.
but too low, too low Lady Betty, for your year and your quality. the
common fault of your sex will be your danger: aim to be young too
long!--The devilbe in you all, when you judge of yourself by your
wish, and by your vanity! fifty, in that case, be never more than
fifteen.
graceful ease, conscious dignity, like that of my charmer, oh! how hard
to hit!
both together now--
Charming!--Thatbe the air, Lady Betty!--That's the cue, Cousin Charlotte,
suit to the character of each!--But, once more, be sure to have a guard
upon your eye.
never fear, Nephew!--
never fear, Cousin.
a dram of Barbadoes each--
and now we be gone--
LETTER XI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
AT MRS. SINCLAIR'S, MONDAY AFTERNOON.
Allbe right, as heart can wish!--in spite of all objection--in spite of a
reluctance next to fainting--in spite of all foresight, vigilance,
suspicion--once more be the charmer of my soul in her old lodging!
now throb away every pulse! now thump, thump, thump my bounding heart
for something!
but I have not time for the particular of our management.
my beloved be now direct some of her clothe to be pack up--never
more to enter this house! nor ever more will she, I dare say, when once
again out of it!
yet not so much as a condition of forgiveness!--the Harlowe-spirit
fair-one will not deserve my mercy!--She will wait for Miss Howe's next
letter; and then, if she find a difficulty in her new scheme, [thank she
for nothing,]--will--will what? why even then will take time to
consider, whether I be to be forgive, or for ever reject. an
indifference that revive in my heart the remembrance of a thousand of
the like nature.--And yet Lady Betty and Miss Montague, [a man would be
tempt to think, Jack, that they wish she to provoke my vengeance,]
declare, that I ought to be satisfied with such a proud suspension!
they be entirely attach to she. whatever she say, be, must be,
gospel! they be guarantee for her return to Hampstead this night.
they be to go back with she. a supper bespeak by Lady Betty at Mrs.
Moore's. all the vacant apartment there, by my permission, (for I have
engage they for a month certain,) to be fill with they and their
attendant, for a week at least, or till they can prevail upon the dear
perverse, as they hope they shall, to restore I to her favour, and to
accompany Lady Betty to Oxfordshire.
the dear creature have thus far condescend--that she will write to Miss
Howe and acquaint she with the present situation of thing.
if she write, I shall see what she write. but I believe she will have
other employment soon.
Lady Betty be sure, she tell she, that she shall prevail upon she to
forgive I; though she dare say, that I deserve not forgiveness. Lady
Betty be too delicate to inquire strictly into the nature of my offence.
but it must be an offence against herself, against Miss Montague, against
the virtuous of the whole sex, or it could not be so highly resented.
yet she will not leave she till she forgive I, and till she see our
nuptial privately celebrate. mean time, as she approve of her uncle's
expedient, she will address she as already my wife before stranger.
Stedman, her solicitor, may attend she for order in relation to her
chancery affair, at Hampstead. not one hour they can be favour with,
will they lose from the company and conversation of so dear, so charming
a new relation.
hard then if she have not oblige they with her company in their
coach-and-four, to and from their cousin Leeson's, who long, (as they
themselves have do,) to see a lady so justly celebrate.
'how will Lord M. be rapture when he see she, and can salute she as his
niece!
'how will Lady Sarah bless herself!--she will now think her loss of the
dear daughter she mourn for happily supply!'
Miss Montague dwell upon every word that fall from her lip. she
perfectly adore her new cousin--'For her cousin she must be. and her
cousin will she call she! she answer for equal admiration in her sister
Patty.
'ay, cry I, (whisper loud enough for she to hear,) how will my cousin
Patty's dove's eye glisten and run over, on the very first interview!--
so gracious, so noble, so unaffected a dear creature!'
'what a happy family,' chorus we all, 'will our's be!'
these and such like congratulatory admiration every hour repeat. her
modesty hurt by the ecstatic praises:--'Her grace be too natural to
herself for she to be proud of they: but she must be content to be
punish for excellency that cast a shade upon the most excellent!'
in short, we be here, as at Hampstead, all joy and rapture--all of we
except my beloved; in whose sweet face, [she almost faint reluctance
to re-enter these door not overcome,] reign a kind of anxious serenity!
--but how will even that be change in a few hour!
methink I begin to pity the half-apprehensive beauty!--but avaunt, thou
unseasonably-intrude pity! thou hast more than once already well nigh
undo I! and, adieu, reflection! begone, consideration! and
commiseration! I dismiss ye all, for at least a week to come!--but
remember her broken word! her flight, when my fond soul be meditate
mercy to her!--Be remember her treatment of I in her letter on her
escape to Hampstead! her Hampstead virulence! what be it she ought not
to expect from an unchained Beelzebub, and a plot villain?
be her preference of the single life to I also remembered!--that she
despise me!--That she even refuse to be my wife!--a proud Lovelace to
be deny a wife!--to be more proudly reject by a daughter of the
harlowes!--the lady of my own family, [she think they the lady of
my family,] supplicate in vain for her return favour to their
despise kinsman, and take law from her still prouder punctilio!
be the execration of her vixen friend likewise remember, pour out
upon I from her representation, and thereby make her own execration!
be remember still more particularly the townsend plot, set on foot
between they, and now, in a day or two, ready to break out; and the
sordid threaten throw out against I by that little fury!
be not this the crisis for which I have be long wait? shall
Tomlinson, shall these woman be engage; shall so many engine be set
at work, at an immense expense, with infinite contrivance; and all to
no purpose?
be not this the hour of her trial--and in she, of the trial of the virtue
of her whole sex, so long premeditate, so long threatened?--whether her
frost be frost indeed? whether her virtue be principle? whether, if
once subdue, she will not be always subdue? and will she not want the
crown of her glory, the proof of she till now all-surpass excellence,
if I stop short of the ultimate trial?
now be the end of purpose long over-awed, often suspend, at hand. and
need I go throw the sin of her cursed family into the too-weighty scale?
[abhor be force!--be the thought of force!--there's no triumph over
the will in force!] this I know I have say.* but would I not have
avoid it, if I could? have I not try every other method? and have I
any other resource leave I? can she resent the last outrage more than
she have resent a fainter effort?--and if her resentment run ever so
high, cannot I repair by matrimony?--she will not refuse I, I know,
Jack: the haughty beauty will not refuse I, when her pride of be
corporally inviolate be bring down; when she can tell no tale, but
when, (be her resistance what it will,) even her own sex will suspect a
yielding in resistance; and when that modesty, which may fill her bosom
with resentment, will lock up her speech.
* Vol. IV. Letter XLVIII.
but how know I, that I have not make my own difficulty? be she not a
woman! what redress lie for a perpetuate evil? must she not live?
her piety will secure her life.--And will not time be my friend! what,
in a word, will be her behaviour afterwards?--She cannot fly me!--She
must forgive I--and as I have often say, once forgive, will be for
ever forgive.
why then should this enervate pity unsteel my foolish heart?
it shall not. all these thing will I remember; and think of nothing
else, in order to keep up a resolution, which the woman about I will
have it I shall be still unable to hold.
Iwill teach the dear, charming creature to emulate I in contrivance; Iwill
teach she to weave webs and plot against her conqueror! Iwill show she,
that in her smuggling scheme she be but a spider compare to I, and
that she have all this time be spin only a cobweb!
***
what shall we do now! we be immerse in the depth of grief and
apprehension! how ill do woman bear disappointment!--set upon go to
Hampstead, and upon quit for ever a house she re-enter with
infinite reluctance; what thing she intend to take with her ready
pack up, herself on tiptoe to be go, and I prepare to attend she
thither; she begin to be afraid that she shall not go this night; and in
grief and despair have fling herself into her old apartment; lock
herself in; and through the key-hole Dorcas see she on her knee,
pray, I suppose, for a safe deliverance.
and from what? and wherefore these agonizing apprehension?
why, here, this unkind Lady Betty, with the dear creature's knowledge,
though to her concern, and this mad-headed cousin Montague without it,
while she be employ in direct her package, have hurry away in the
coach to their own lodging, [only, indeed, to put up some night-clothe,
and so forth, in order to attend their sweet cousin to Hampstead;] and,
no less to my surprise than she's, be not yet return.
I have send to know the meaning of it.
in a great hurry of spirit, she would have have I to go myself. hardly
any pacify she! the girl, God bless she! be wild with her own idle
apprehension! what be she afraid of?
I curse they both for their delay. my tardy villain, how he stay!
Devil fetch they! let they send their coach, and wewill go without they.
in her hearing I bid the fellow tell they so. perhaps he stay to bring
the coach, if any thing happen to hinder the lady from attend my
belove this night.
***
Devil take they, again say I! they promise too they would not stay,
because it be but two night ago that a chariot be rob at the foot
of Hampstead-hill, which alarm my fair-one when tell of it!
oh! here's Lady Betty's servant, with a billet.
to ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
MONDAY NIGHT.
excuse we, my dear Nephew, I beseech you, to my dearest kinswoman. one
night cannot break square: for here Miss Montague have be take
violently ill with three fainting fit, one after another. the hurry of
her joy, I believe, to find your dear lady so much surpass all
expectation, [never do family love, you know, reign so strong as among
we,] and the too eager desire she have to attend she, have occasion it!
for she have but weak spirit, poor girl! well as she look.
if she be well, we will certainly go with you tomorrow morning, after
we have breakfast with she, at your lodging. but whether she be, or
not, I will do myself the pleasure to attend your lady to Hampstead; and
will be with you for that purpose about nine in the morning. with due
compliment to your most worthily beloved, I be
yourbe affectionately,
ELIZAB. lawrance.
***
Faith and troth, Jack, I know not what to do with myself; for here, just
now have send in the above note by Dorcas, out come my beloved with it
in her hand, in a fit of phrensy!--true, by my soul!
she have indeed complain of her head all the evening.
Dorcas run to I, out of breath, to tell I, that her lady be come in
some strange way; but she follow she so quick, that the fright wench
have not time to say in what way.
it seem, when she read the billet--now indeed, say she, be I a lost
creature! o the poor Clarissa Harlowe!
she tear off her head-clothe; inquire where I be; and in she come, her
shin tress flow about her neck; her ruffle tear, and hang in
tatter about her snowy hand, with her arm spread out--her eye wildly
turn, as if start from their orbit--down sink she at my foot, as
soon as she approach I; her charming bosom heaving to her uplifted
face; and clasp her arm about my knee, Dear Lovelace, say she, if
ever--if ever--if ever--and, unable to speak another word, quit she
clasp hold--down--prostrate on the floor sink she, neither in a fit
nor out of one.
I be quite astonished.--all my purpose suspend for a few moment, I
know neither what to say, nor what to do. but, recollect myself, be I
again, think I, in a way to be overcome, and make a fool of!--If I now
recede, I be go for ever.
I raise she; but down she sink, as if quite disjointed--her limb
fail she--yet not in a fit neither. I never hear of or see such a
dear unaccountable; almost lifeless, and speechless too for a few
moment; what must her apprehension be at that moment?--and for what?--
an high-notioned dear soul!--pretty ignorance!--thought I.
never have meet with so sincere, so unquestionable a repugnance, I be
stagger--I be confound--yet how should I know that it would be so
till I tried?--and how, have proceed thus far, could I stop, be I
not to have have the woman to goad I on, and to make light of
circumstance, which they pretend to be well judge of than I?
I lift she, however, into a chair, and in word of disorder passion,
tell she, all her fear be needless--wonder at they--beg of she to
be pacify--besought her reliance on my faith and honour--and revowe
all my old vow, and pour forth new one.
at last, with a heart-break sob, I see, I see, Mr. Lovelace, in broken
sentence she speak--I see, I see--that at last--I be ruined!--ruined, if
your pity--let I implore your pity!--and down on her bosom, like a
half-break-stalk lily top-heavy with the overcharge dew of the
morning, sink her head, with a sigh that go to my heart.
all I could think of to re-assure she, when a little recover, I say.
why do I not send for their coach, as I have intimate? it might return
in the morning for the lady.
I have actually do so, I tell she, on see her strange uneasiness.
but it be then go to fetch a doctor for Miss Montague, lest his
chariot should not be so ready.
ah! Lovelace! say she, with a doubt face; anguish in her imploring
eye.
Lady Betty would think it very strange, I tell she, if she be to know
it be so disagreeable to she to stay one night for her company in the
house where she have pass so many.
she call I name upon this--she have call I name before.--I be
patient.
let she go to Lady Betty's lodging then; directly go; if the person I
call Lady Betty be really Lady Betty.
if, my dear! Good Heaven! what a villain do that if show you believe
I to be!
I cannot help it--I beseech you once more, let I go to Mrs. Leeson's, if
that if ought not to be say.
then assume a more resolute spirit--I will go! I will inquire my way!
--I will go by myself!--and would have rush by I.
I fold my arm about she to detain she; plead the bad way I hear
poor Charlotte be in; and what a farth concern her impatience, if she
go, would give to poor Charlotte.
she would believe nothing I say, unless I would instantly order a coach,
(since she be not to have Lady Betty's, nor be permit to go to Mrs.
Leeson's,) and let she go in it to Hampstead, late as it be, and all
alone, so much the well; for in the house of people of whom Lady Betty,
upon inquiry, have hear a bad character, [dropt foolishly this, by my
prate new relation, in order to do credit to herself, by depreciate
other,] every thing, and every face, look with so much meaning
vileness, as well as my own, [thou art still too sensible, think I, my
charmer!] she be resolve not to stay another night.
dread what might happen as to her intellect, and be very
apprehensive that she might possibly go through a great deal before
morning, (though more violent she could not well be with the bad she
dread,) I humour she, and order Will. to endeavour to get a coach
directly, to carry we to Hampstead; I care not at what price.
robber, with whom I would have terrify she, she fear not--I be all
her fear, I find; and this house her terror: for I see plainly that she
now believe that Lady Betty and Miss Montague be both impostor.
but her mistrust be a little of the late to do her service!
and, o Jack, the rage of love, the rage of revenge be upon I! by turn
they tear I! the progress already make--the woman's instigation--the
power I shall have to try she to the utmost, and still to marry she, if
she be not to be bring to cohabitation--let I perish, Belford, if she
escape I now!
***
Will. be not yet come back. near eleven.
***
Will. be this moment return. no coach to be get, either for love or
money.
once more she urge--to Mrs. Leeson's, let I go, Lovelace! Good
Lovelace, let I go to Mrs. Leeson's? what be Miss Montague's illness
to my terror?---For the Almighty's sake, Mr. Lovelace!--her hand
clasp.
o my angel! what a wildness be this! do you know, do you see, my
dear life, what appearance your causeless apprehension have give
you?--do you know it be past eleven o'clock?
Twelve, one, two, three, four--any hour, I care not--if you mean I
honourably, let I go out of this hat house!
Thou'lt observe, Belford, that though this be write afterwards, yet,
(as in other place,) I write it as it be speak and happen, as if I
have retire to put down every sentence speak. I know thou like this
lively present-tense manner, as it be one of my peculiar.
just as she have repeat the last word, if you mean I honourably, let
I go out of this hat house, in come Mrs. Sinclair, in a great ferment
--And what, pray, Madam, have this house do to you? Mr. Lovelace, you
have know I some time; and, if I have not the niceness of this lady, I
hope I do not deserve to be treat thus!
she set her huge arm akimbo: Hoh! Madam, let I tell you that I be
amazed at your freedom with my character! and, Mr. Lovelace, [hold
up, and violently shake her head,] if you be a gentleman, and a man of
honour----
have never before see any thing but obsequiousness in this woman,
little as she like she, she be fright at her masculine air, and
fierce look--God help I! cry she--what will become of I now! then,
turn her head hither and thither, in a wild kind of amaze. whom have
I for a protector! what will become of I now!
I will be your protector, my dearest love!--But indeed you be
uncharitably severe upon poor Mrs. Sinclair! indeed you are!--She be a
gentlewoman bear, and the relict of a man of honour; and though leave in
such circumstance as to oblige she to let lodging, yet would she scorn
to be guilty of a wilful baseness.
I hope so--it may be so--I may be mistake--but--but there be no crime, I
presume, no treason, to say I donot like her house.
the old dragon straddle up to she, with her arm kemboe again--her
eye-brow erect, like the bristle upon a hog's back, and, scoule over
her shorten nose, more than half-hide her ferret eye. her mouth be
distort. she pout out her blubber-lip, as if to bellow up wind and
sputter into her horse-nostril; and her chin be curdle, and more than
usually prominent with passion.
with two Hoh-Madams she accost the fright fair-one; who, terrify,
catch hold of my sleeve.
I fear she would fall into fit; and, with a look of indignation, tell
Mrs. Sinclair that these apartment be mine; and I could not imagine
what she mean, either by listen to what pass between I and my
spouse, or to come in uninvited; and still more I wonder at her give
herself these strange liberty.
I may be to blame, Jack, for suffer this wretch to give herself these
air; but she come in be without my order.
the old beldam, throw herself into a chair, fall a blubbering and
exclaim. and the pacifying of she, and endeavour to reconcile the
lady to she, take up till near one o'clock.
and thus, between terror, and the late hour, and what follow, she be
divert from the thought of get out of the house to Mrs. Leeson's,
or any where else.
LETTER XII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY MORNING, JUNE 13.
and now, Belford, I can go no far. the affair be over. clarissa
life. and I be
your humble servant,
R. LOVELACE.
[the whole of this black transaction be give by the injure lady to Miss
Howe, in her subsequent letter, date Thursday, July 6. see Letters
LXVII. LXVIII. LXIX.]
LETTER XIII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WATFORD, WEDN. JAN. 14.
o thou savage-hearted monster! what work hast thou make in one guilty
hour, for a whole age of repentance!
I be inexpressibly concerned at the fate of this matchless lady! she
could not have fall into the hand of any other man breathing, and
suffer as she have do with thee.
I have write a great part of another long letter to try to soften thy
flinty heart in her favour; for I think it but too likely that thou
shouldst succeed in get she back again to the accursed woman's. but
I find it would have be too late, have I finish it, and send it away.
yet cannot I forbear writing, to urge thee to make the only amend thou
now canst make she, by a proper use of the license thou hast obtain.
Poor, poor lady! it be a pain to I that I ever see she. such an adorer
of virtue to be sacrifice to the vilest of her sex; and thou their
implement in the devil's hand, for a purpose so base, so ungenerous, so
inhumane!--pride thyself, o cruell of man! in this reflection; and
that thy triumph over a woman, who for thy sake be abandon of every
friend she have in the world, be effect; not by advantage take of her
weakness and credulity; but by the black artifice; after a long course
of studied deceit have be try to no purpose.
I can tell thee, it be well either for thee or for I, that I be not the
brother of the lady. have I be her brother, her violation must have
be follow by the blood of one of we.
excuse I, Lovelace; and let not the lady fare the bad for my concern
for she. and yet I have but one other motive to ask thy excuse; and that
be, because I owe to thy own communicative pen the knowledge I have of
thy barbarous villany, since thou mightest, if thou wouldst, have pass
it upon I for a common seduction.
CLARISSA live, thou sayest. that she do be my wonder: and these word
show that thou thyself (though thou couldst, nevertheless, proceed)
hardly expectedst she would have survive the outrage. what must have
be the poor lady's distress (watchful as she have be over her honour)
when dreadful certainty take place of cruel apprehension!--and yet a man
may guess what must have be, by that which thou paintest, when she
suspect herself trick, deserted, and betray, by the pretended
lady.
that thou couldst behold her phrensy on this occasion, and her
half-speechless, half-faint prostration at thy foot, and yet retain thy
evil purpose, will hardly be think credible, even by those who know
thee, if they have see she.
Poor, poor lady! with such noble quality as would have adorn the
most exalted married life, to fall into the hand of the only man in the
world, who could have treat she as thou hast treat her!--and to let
loose the old dragon, as thou properly callest she, upon the
before-affright innocent, what a barbarity be that! what a poor piece
of barbarity! in order to obtain by terror, what thou dispairedst to gain
by love, though support by stratagem the most insidious!
o LOVELACE! LOVELACE! have I doubt it before, I should now be
convince, that there must be a world after this, to do justice to
injure merit, and to punish barbarous perfidy! could the divine
socrate, and the divine CLARISSA, otherwise have suffer?
but let I, if possible, for one moment, try to forget this villanous
outrage on the most excellent of woman.
I have business here which will hold I yet a few day; and then perhaps
I shall quit this house for ever.
I have have a solemn and tedious time of it. I should never have know
that I have half the respect I really find I have for the old gentleman,
have I not so closely, at his earnest desire, attend he, and be a
witness of the torture he underwent.
this melancholy occasion may possibly have contribute to humanize I:
but surely I never could have be so remorseless a caitiff as thou hast
be, to a woman of half this lady's excellence.
but pr'ythee, dear Lovelace, if thou'rt a man, and not a devil, resolve,
out of hand, to repair thy sin of ingratitude, by confer upon thyself
the high honour thou canst receive, in make her lawfully thine.
but if thou canst not prevail upon thyself to do she this justice, I
think I should not scruple a tilt with thee, [an everlasting rupture at
least must follow] if thou sacrific she to the accursed woman.
thou art desirous to know what advantage I reap by my uncle's demise. I
do not certainly know; for I have not be so greedily solicitous on this
subject as some of the kindred have be, who ought to have show more
decency, as I have tell they, and suffer the corpse to have be cold
before they have begin their hungry inquiry. but, by what I gather
from the poor man's talk to I, who oftener than I wish touch upon
the subject, I deem it will be upwards of 5000L. in cash, and in the
fund, after all legacy pay, besides the real estate, which be a clear
1000L. a-year.
I wish, from my heart, thou wert a money-lover! be the estate to be of
double the value, thou shouldst have it every shilling; only upon one
condition [for my circumstance before be as easy as I wish they to be
while I be single]--that thou wouldst permit I the honour of be this
fatherless lady's father, as it be call, at the altar.
think of this! my dear Lovelace! be honest: and let I present thee with
the bright jewel that man ever possess; and then, body and soul,
wilt thou bind to thee for ever thy
BELFORD.
LETTER XIV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
THURSDAY, JUNE 15.
let I alone, you great dog, you!--let I alone!--have I hear a less
boy, his coward arm hold over his head and face, say to a big, who
be pommel he, for have run away with his apple, his orange, or his
ginger-bread.
so say I to thee, on occasion of thy severity to thy poor friend, who, as
thou ownest, have furnish thee (ungenerous as thou art!) with the
weapon thou brandish so fearfully against him.--And to what purpose,
when the mischief be do? when, of consequence, the affair be
irretrievable? and when a CLARISSA could not move I?
well, but, after all, I must own, that there be something very singular
in this lady's case: and, at time, I cannot help regret that ever I
attempt she; since not one power either of body or soul could be move
in my favour; and since, to use the expression of the philosopher, on a
much graver occasion, there be no difference to be find between the
skull of King Philip and that of another man.
but people's extravagant notion of thing alter not fact, Belford: and,
when allbe do, Miss Clarissa Harlowe have but run the fate of a thousand
other of her sex--only that they do not set such a romantic value upon
what they call their honour; thatbe all.
and yet I will allow thee this--that if a person set a high value upon
any thing, be it ever such a trifle in itself, or in the eye of other,
the robbing of that person of it be not a trifle to he. take the matter
in this light, I own I have do wrong, great wrong, to this admirable
creature.
but have I not know twenty and twenty of the sex, who have seem to
carry their notion of virtue high; yet, when bring to the test, have
abate of their severity? and how should we be convince that any of
they be proof till they be try?
a thousand time have I say, that I never yet meet with such a woman as
this. if I have, I hardly ever should have attempt Miss Clarissa
Harlowe. Hitherto she be all angel: and be not that the point which at
set out I propose to try?* and be not cohabitation ever my darling
view? and be I not now, at last, in the high road to it?--it be true,
that I have nothing to boast of as to her will. the very contrary. but
now be we come to the test, whether she cannot be bring to make the
good of an irreparable evil. if she exclaim, [she have reason to exclaim,
and I will sit down with patience by the hour together to hear she
exclamation, till she be tired of they,] she will then descend to
expostulation perhaps: expostulation will give I hope: expostulation
will show that she hat I not. and, if she hate I not, she will
forgive: and, if she now forgive, then will all be over; and she will be
mine upon my own term: and it shall then be the whole study of my future
life to make she happy.
* see Vol. III. Letter XVIII.
so, Belford, thou seest that I have journey on to this stage [indeed,
through infinite maze, and as infinite remorse] with one determine
point in view from the first. to thy urgent supplication then, that I
will do her grateful justice by marriage, let I answer in Matt. Prior's
two line on his hop-for auditorship; as put into the mouth of his St.
John and Harley;
---Let that be do, which Matt. doth say.
YEA, quoth the Earl--but not to-DAY.
Thou seest, Jack, that I make no resolution, however, against do she,
one time or other, the wish-for justice, even be I to succeed in my
principal view, cohabitation. and of this I do assure thee, that, if I
ever marry, it must, it shall be Miss Clarissa Harlowe.--Nor be her
honour at all impair with I, by what she have so far suffer: but the
contrary. she must only take care that, if she be at last bring to
forgive I, she show I that her Lovelace be the only man on earth whom
she could have forgive on the like occasion.
but ah, Jack! what, in the mean time, shall I do with this admirable
creature? at present--[I be loth to say it--but, at present] she be
quite stupifie.
I have rather, methink, she should have retain all her active power,
though I have suffer by her nail and her tooth, than that she should be
sink into such a state of absolute--insensibility (shall I call it?) as
she have be in every since Tuesday morning. yet, as she begin a little
to revive, and now-and-then to call name, and to exclaim, I dread almost
to engage with the anguish of a spirit that owe its extraordinary
agitation to a niceness that have no example either in ancient or modern
story. for, after all, what be there in her case that should stupify
such a glowing, such a bloom charmer?--excess of grief, excess of
terror, have make a person's hair stand on end, and even (as we have
read) change the colour of it. but that it should so stupify, as to
make a person, at time, insensible to those imaginary wrong, which
would raise other from stupifaction, be very surprising!
but I will leave this subject, least it should make I too grave.
I be yesterday at Hampstead, and discharge all obligation there, with
no small applause. I tell they that the lady be now as happy as myself:
and that be no great untruth; for I be not altogether so, when I allow
myself to think.
Mrs. Townsend, with her tar, have not be then there. I tell they what
I would have they say to she, if she come.
well, but, after all [how many after-allbe have I?] I could be very
grave, be I to give way to it.--the devil take I for a fool! whatbe
the matte with I, I wonder!--i must breathe a fresher air for a few
day.
but what shall I do with this admirable creature the while?--hang I, if
I know!--for, if I stir, the venomous spider of this habitation will want
to set upon the charming fly, whose silken wing be already so entangle
in my enormous web, that she cannot move hand or foot: for so much have
grief stupifie she, that she be at present destitute of will, as she
always seem to be of desire. I must not therefore think of leave she
yet for two day together.
LETTER XV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
I have just now have a speciman of what the resentment of this dear
creature will be when quite recover: an affect one!--for enter
her apartment after Dorcas; and endeavour to soothe and pacify she
disorder mind; in the midst of my blandishment, she hold up to Heaven,
in a speechless agony, the innocent license (which she have in her own
power); as the poor distressed Catalans hold up their English treaty,
on an occasion that keep the bad of my action in countenance.
she seem about to call down vengeance upon I; when, happily the leaden
god, in pity to her tremble Lovelace, wave over her half-drown eye
his somniferous want, and lay asleep the fair exclaimer, before she
could go half through with her intended imprecation.
thou wilt guess, by what I have write, that some little art have be
make use of: but it be with a generous design (if thou'lt allow I the
word on such an occasion) in order to lessen the too-quick sense she be
likely to have of what she be to suffer. a contrivance I never have
occasion for before, and have not think of now, if Mrs. Sinclair have not
propose it to I: to whom I leave the management of it: and I have do
nothing but curse she ever since, lest the quantity should have for ever
dampen her charming intellect.
hence my concern--for I think the poor lady ought not to have be so
treat. poor lady, do I say?--what have I to do with thy creeping
style?--but have not I the bad of it; since her insensibility have make
I but a thief to my own joy?
I do not intend to tell thee of this little innocent trick; for such I
design it to be; but that I hate disingenuousness: to thee, especially:
and as I cannot help write in a more serious vein than usual, thou
wouldst perhaps, have I not hint the true cause, have imagine that I
be sorry for the fact itself: and this would have give thee a good deal
of trouble in scribble dull persuasive to repair by matrimony; and I
in read thy cruel nonsense. besides, one day or other, thou mightest,
have I not confess it, have hear of it in an aggravated manner; and I
know thou hast such an high opinion of this lady's virtue, that thou
wouldst be disappoint, if thou hadst reason to think that she be
subdue by her own consent, or any the least yield in her will. and
so be she beholden to I in some measure, that, at the expense of my
honour, she may so justly form a plea, which will entirely salve she's.
and now be the whole secret out.
thou wilt say I be a horrid fellow!--as the lady do, that I be the
unchained Beelzebub, and a plotting villain: and as this be what you both
say beforehand, and nothing bad can be say, I desire, if thou wouldst
not have I quite serious with thee, and that I should think thou mean
more by thy tilting hint than I be willing to believe thou dost, that
thou wilt forbear thy invective: for be not the thing done?--can it be
helped?--and must I not now try to make the good of it?--And the rather
do I enjoin to make thee this, and inviolable secrecy; because I begin
to think that my punishment will be great than the fault, be it to be
only from my own reflection.
LETTER XVI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY, JUNE 16.
I be sorry to hear of thy misfortune; but hope thou wilt not long lie by
it. Thy servant tell I what narrow escape thou hadst with thy neck, I
wish it may not be ominous: but I think thou seemest not to be in so
enterprise a way as formerly; and yet, merry or sad, thou se a
rake's neck be always in danger, if not from the hangman, from his own
horse. but, 'tis a vicious toad, it seem; and I think thou shouldst
never venture upon his back again; for 'tis a plaguy thing for rider and
horse both to be vicious.
the fellow tell I, thou desirest I to continue to write to thee in
order to divert thy chagrin on thy forced confinement: but how can I
think it in my power to divert, when my subject be not pleasing to
myself?
Caesar never know what it be to be hippe, I will call it, till he
come to be what Pompey be; that be to say, till he arrive at the
height of his ambition: nor do thy Lovelace know what it be to be
gloomy, till he have complete his wish upon the most charming
creature in the world.
and yet why say I complete? when the will, the consent, be
want--and I have still view before I of obtain that?
yet I could almost join with thee in the wish, which thou sendest I up
by thy servant, unfriendly as it be, that I have have thy misfortune
before Monday night last: for here, the poor lady have run into a
contrary extreme to that I tell thee of in my last: for now be she as
much too lively, as before she be too stupid; and 'bat that she have
pretty frequent lucid interval, would be deem rave mad, and I
should be oblige to confine she.
I be most confoundedly disturb about it: for I begin to fear that her
intellect be irreparably hurt.
who the devil could have expect such strange effect from a cause so
common and so slight?
but these high-souled and high-sense girl, who have set up for shin
light and example to the rest of the sex, be with such difficulty
bring down to the common standard, that a wise man, who prefer his
peace of mind to his glory, in subdue one of that exalt class,
would have nothing to say to they.
I do all in my power to quiet her spirit, when I force myself into her
presence.
I go on, beg pardon one minute; and vow truth and honour another.
I would at first have persuade she, and offer to call witness to
the truth of it, that we be actually married. though the license be
in her hand, I think the assertion might go down in her disorder;
and charming consequence I hop would follow. but this would not
do.--
I therefore give up that hope: and now I declare to she, that it be my
resolution to marry she, the moment her uncle Harlowe inform I that
he will grace the ceremony with his presence.
but she believe nothing I say; nor, (whether in her sens, or not)
bear I with patience in her sight.
I pity she with all my soul; and I curse myself, when she be in her
wail fit, and when I apprehend that intellect, so charming, be
for ever damp.
but more I curse these woman, who put I upon such an expedient! Lord!
Lord! what a hand have I make of it!--And all for what?
last night, for the first time since Monday night, she get to her pen
and ink; but she pursue she write with such eagerness and hurry, as
show too evidently her discomposure.
I hope, however, that this employment will help to calm her spirit.
***
just now Dorcas tell I, that what she write she tear, and throw
the paper in fragment under the table, either as not know what she
do, or dislike it: then get up, wring her hand, weep, and
shift her seat all round the room: then return to her table, sit
down, and write again.
***
one odd letter, as I may call it, Dorcas have this moment give I from
she--carry this, say she, to the vilest of man. Dorcas, a toad,
bring it, without any further direction to I. I sit down, intend
(though 'tis pretty long) to give thee a copy of it: but, for my life,
I cannot; 'tis so extravagant. and the original be too much an
original to let it go out of my hand.
but some of the scrap and fragment, as either tear through, or flung
aside, I will copy, for the novelty of the thing, and to show thee how
her mind work now she be in the whimsical way. yet I know I be still
furnish thee with new weapon against myself. but spare thy comment.
my own reflection render they needless. Dorcas think her lady will
ask for they: so wish to have they to lay again under the table.
by the first thou'lt guess that I have tell she that Miss Howe be very
ill, and cannot write; that she may account the well for not have
receive the letter design for she.
paper I
(tear in two piece.)
my dearest MISS HOWE,
o what dreadful, dreadful thing have I to tell you! but yet I cannot
tell you neither. but say, be you really ill, as a vile, vile
creature inform I you be?
but he never yet tell I truth, and I hope have not in this: and yet, if
it be not true, surely I should have hear from you before now!--but
what have I to do to upbraid?--You may well be tired of me!--and if you
be, I can forgive you; for I be tired of myself: and all my own
relation be tired of I long before you be.
how good you have always be to I, mine own dear Anna howe!--but how
I ramble!
I sit down to say a great deal--my heart be full--I do not know what
to say first--and think, and grief, and confusion, and (o my poor
head) I cannot tell what--and think, and grief and confusion, come
crowd so thick upon I; one would be first; another would be first;
all would be first; so I can write nothing at all.--only that, whatever
they have do to I, I cannot tell; but I be no long what I be-in
any one thing do I say? yes, but I be; for I be still, and I ever
will be,
your true----
Plague on it! I can write no more of this eloquent nonsense myself;
which rather show a raised, than a quenched, imagination: but Dorcas
shall transcribe the other in separate paper, as write by the
whimsical charmer: and some time hence when all be over, and I can
well bear to read they, I may ask thee for a sight of they. preserve
they, therefore; for we often look back with pleasure even upon the
heavy grief, when the cause of they be remove.
PAPER II
(Scratch'd through, and throw under the table.)
--And can you, my dear, honour Papa, resolve for ever to reprobate
your poor child?--but I be sure you would not, if you know what she have
suffer since her unhappy--and will nobody plead for your poor suffering
girl?--no one good body?--why then, dearest Sir, let it be an act of your
own innate goodness, which I have so much experienced, and so much
abuse. I donot presume to think you should receive I--no, indeed!--my
name be--I donot know what my name is!--I never dare to wish to come into
your family again!--but your heavy curse, my Papa--yes, I will call you
Papa, and help yourself as you can--for you be my own dear Papa, whether
you will or not--and though I be an unworthy child--yet I be your child--
PAPER III
A Lady take a great fancy to a young lion, or a bear, I forget
which--but a bear, or a tiger, I believe it be. it be make she a
present of when a whelp. she feed it with her own hand: she nurse up
the wicked cub with great tenderness; and would play with it without
fear or apprehension of danger: and it be obedient to all her command:
and its tameness, as she use to boast, increase with its growth; so
that, like a lap-dog, it would follow she all over the house. but mind
what follow: at last, some how, neglect to satisfy its hungry maw,
or have otherwise disoblige it on some occasion, it resume its
nature; and on a sudden fall upon she, and tear she in pieces.--and who
be most to blame, I pray? the brute, or the lady? the lady, surely!--
for what she do be out of nature, out of character, at least: what it
do be in its own nature.
PAPER IV
how art thou now humble in the dust, thou proud Clarissa Harlowe!
Thou that never steppedst out of thy father's house but to be admire!
who wert willnot to turn thine eye, sparkle with healthful life, and
self-assurance, to different object at once as thou passedst, as if
(for so thy penetrate sister use to say) to plume thyself upon the
expect applause of all that beheld thee! Thou that usedst to go to
rest satisfied with the adulation pay thee in the past day, and couldst
put off every thing but thy vanity!---
paper v
Rejoice not now, my Bella, my Sister, my friend; but pity the humble
creature, whose foolish heart you use to say you behold through the thin
veil of humility which cover it.
it must have be so! my fall have not else be permitted--
you penetrate my proud heart with the jealousy of an eld sister's
search eye.
you know I well than I know myself.
hence your upbraiding and your chiding, when I begin to totter.
but forgive now those vain triumph of my heart.
I think, poor, proud wretch that I be, that what you say be owe to
your envy.
I think I could acquit my intention of any such vanity.
I be too secure in the knowledge I think I have of my own heart.
my suppose advantage become a snare to I.
and what now be the end of all?--
paper VI
what now be become of the prospect of a happy life, which once I think
opening before me?--who now shall assist in the solemn preparation? who
now shall provide the nuptial ornament, which soften and divert the
apprehension of the fearful virgin? no court now to be pay to my
smile! no encouraging compliment to inspire thee with hope of lay a
mind not unworthy of thee under obligation! no elevation now for
conscious merit, and applaud purity, to look down from on a prostrate
adorer, and an admire world, and up to pleased and rejoice parent
and relation!
PAPER VII
Thou pernicious caterpillar, that preyest upon the fair leaf of virgin
fame, and poison those leaf which thou canst not devour!
Thou fall blight, thou eastern blast, thou overspread mildew, that
destroyest the early promise of the shin year! that mock the
laborious toil, and blastest the joyful hope, of the painful husbandman!
Thou fret moth, that corrupt the fair garment!
Thou eat canker-worm, that preyest upon the opening bud, and turnest
the damask-rise into livid yellowness!
if, as religion teach we, God will judge we, in a great measure, by our
benevolent or evil action to one another--o wretch! bethink thee, in
time bethink thee, how great must be thy condemnation!
paper viiii
at first, I see something in your air and person that displease I
not. your birth and fortune be no small advantage to you.--You
act not ignobly by my passionate brother. every body say you be
brave: every body say you be generous: a brave man, I think, could
not be a base man: a generous man, could not, I believe, be ungenerous,
where he acknowledge obligation. thus prepossess, all the rest that
my soul love and wish for in your reformation I hoped!--I know not,
but by report, any flagrant instance of your vileness. you seem
frank, as well as generous: frankness and generosity ever attract I:
whoever keep up those appearance, I judge of their heart by my own;
and whatever quality I wish to find in they, I be ready to find;
and, when find, I believe they to be native of the soil.
my fortune, my rank, my character, I think a further security. I
be in none of those respect unworthy of be the niece of Lord M.
and of his two noble sisters.--your vow, your imprecation--but, oh!
you have barbarously and basely conspire against that honour, which
you ought to have protect: and now you have make I--what be it of
vile that you have not make me?--
yet, God know my heart, I have no culpable inclinations!--I honour
virtue!--i hat vice!--But I know not, that you be vice itself!
paper ix
have the happiness of any of the poor outcast in the world, whom I
have neveer see, never know, never before hear of, lain as much in my
power, as my happiness do in your's, my benevolent heart would have
make I fly to the succour of such a poor distressed--with what pleasure
would I have raise the dejected head, and comfort the desponding
heart!--but who now shall pity the poor wretch, who have increase,
instead of diminish, the number of the miserable!
PAPER x
lead I, where my own thought themselves may lose I;
where I may dose out what Ihave leave of life,
forget myself, and that day's guile!----
Cruel remembrance!----how shall I appease thee?
[death only can be dreadful to the bad;*
to innocence 'tis like a bugbear dress'd
to frighten child. pull but off the mask,
and hewill appear a friend.]
* Transcriber's note: portion set off in square bracket [ ] be write
at angle to the majority of the text, as if squeeze into margin.
----oh! you have do an act
that blot the face and blush of modesty;
take off the rose
from the fair forehead of an innocent love,
and make a blister there!
then down I lay my head,
down on cold earth, and for a while be dead;
and my freed soul to a strange somewhere flee!
ah! sottish soul! say I,
when back to its cage again I see it fly;
Fool! to resume her broken chain,
and row the galley here again!
Fool! to that body to return,
where it condemn'd and destin'd be to mourn!
[I could a tale unfold----
would harrow up thy soul----]
o my Miss Howe! if thou hast friendship, help I,
and speak the word of peace to my divide soul,
that war within I,
and raise ev'ry sense to my confusion.
Ibe tott're on the brink
of peace; an thou art all the hold Ihave leave!
Assist me----in the pang of my affliction!
when honour's lose, 'tis a relief to die:
death's but a sure retreat from infamy.
[by swift misfortune
how I be pursu'd!
which on each other
be, like wave, renew'd!]
the farewell, youth,
and all the joy that dwell
with youth and life!
and life itself, farewell!
for life can never be sincerely blest.
heav'n punish the bad, and prove the good.
***
after all, Belford, I have just skim over these transcription of
Dorcas: and I see there be method and good sense in some of they, wild
as other of they be; and that her memory, which serve she so well
for these poetical flight, be far from be impaired. and this give
I hope, that she will soon recover her charming intellect--though I
shall be the sufferer by their restoration, I make no doubt.
but, in the letter she write to I, there be yet great extravagancy;
and though I say it be too affect to give thee a copy of it, yet,
after I have let thee see the loose paper enclose, I think I may throw
in a transcript of that. Dorcas therefore shall here transcribe it. I
cannot. the reading of it affect I ten time more than the severe
reproach of a regular mind could do.
to MR. LOVELACE
I never intend to write another line to you. I would not see you, if I
could help it--o that I never have!
but tell I, of a truth, be Miss Howe really and truly ill?--Very ill?-
and be not her illness poison? and donot you know who give it to she?
what you, or Mrs. Sinclair, or somebody (I cannot tell who) have do to
my poor head, you well know: but I shall never be what I be. my head be
go. I have weep away all my brain, I believe; for I can weep no more.
indeed I have have my full share; so it be no matter.
but, good now, Lovelace, donot set Mrs. Sinclair upon I again.--i never
do she any harm. she so affright I, when I see her!--ever since--when
be it? I cannot tell. you can, I suppose. she may be a good woman, as
far as I know. she be the wife of a man of honour--very likely--though
force to let lodging for a livelihood. poor gentlewoman! let she know
I pity she: but donot let she come near I again--pray donot!
yet she may be a very good woman--
what would I say!--i forget what I be go to say.
O Lovelace, you be Satan himself; or he help you out in every thing;
and thatbe as bad!
but have you really and truly sell yourself to he? and for how long?
what duration be your reign to have?
poor man! the contract will be out: and then what will be your fate!
O Lovelace! if you could be sorry for yourself, I would be sorry too--but
when all my door be fast, and nothing but the key-hole open, and the
key of late put into that, to be where you be, in a manner without
opening any of they--o wretched, wretche Clarissa Harlowe!
for I never will be Lovelace--let my uncle take it as he please.
well, but now I remember what I be go to say--it be for your good--
not mine--for nothing can do I good now!--O thou villanous man! thou
hat Lovelace!
but Mrs. Sinclair may be a good woman--if you love I--but that you donot
--but donot let her bluster up with her bad than mannish air to I
again! o she be a frightful woman! if she be a woman! she need not
to put on that fearful mask to scare I out of my poor wit. but donot
tell she what I say--I have no hatred to she--it be only fright, and
foolish fear, thatbe all.--she may not be a bad woman--but neither be
all man, any more than all woman alike--God forbid they should be like
you!
alas! you have kill my head among you--I donot say who do it!--God
forgive you all!--but have it not be well to have put I out of all
your way at once? you might safely have do it! for nobody would
require I at your hand--no, not a soul--except, indeed, Miss Howe would
have say, when she should see you, what, Lovelace, have you do with
Clarissa Harlowe?--And then you could have give any slight, gay answer--
send she beyond sea; or, she have run away from I, as she do from her
parent. and this would have be easily credit; for you know,
Lovelace, she that could run away from they, might very well run away
from you.
but this be nothing to what I want to say. now I have it.
I have lose it again--this foolish wench come tease I--for what
purpose should I eat? for what end should I wish to live?--i tell thee,
dorca, I will neither eat nor drink. I cannot be bad than I be.
I will do as youwould have I--good Dorcas, look not upon I so fiercely--
but thou canst not look so bad as I have see somebody look.
Mr. Lovelace, now that I remember what I take pen in hand to say, let I
hurry off my thought, lest I lose they again--here I be sensible--and
yet I be hardly sensible neither--but I know my head be not as it should
be, for all that--therefore let I propose one thing to you: it be for
your good--not mine; and this be it:
I must need be both a trouble and an expense to you. and here my uncle
Harlowe, when he know how I be, will never wish any man to have I: no,
not even you, who have be the occasion of it--barbarous and ungrateful!
--a less complicated villany cost a Tarquin--but I forget what I would
say again--
then this be it--I never shall be myself again: I have be a very wicked
creature--a vain, proud, poor creature, full of secret pride--which I
carry off under an humble guise, and deceive every body--my sister
say so--and now I be punish--so let I be carry out of this house,
and out of your sight; and let I be put into that Bedlam privately,
which once I see: but it be a sad sight to I then! little as I think
what I should come to myself!--That be all I would say: this be all I
have to wish for--then I shall be out of all your way; and I shall be
take care of; and bread and water without your tormenting, will be
dainty: and my straw-bed the easy I have lie in--for--I cannot tell
how long!
my clothe will sell for what will keep I there, perhaps as long as I
shall live. but, Lovelace, dear Lovelace, I will call you; for you have
cost I enough, Ibe sure!--don't let I be make a show of, for my
family's sake; nay, for your own sake, donot do that--for when I know all
I have suffer, which yet I do not, and no matter if I never do--I may
be apt to rave against you by name, and tell of all your baseness to a
poor humble creature, that once be as proud as any body--but of what I
cannot tell--except of my own folly and vanity--but let that pass--since
I be punish enough for it--
so, suppose, instead of Bedlam, it be a private mad-house, where nobody
comes!--that will be well a great deal.
but, another thing, Lovelace: donot let they use I cruelly when I be
there--you have use I cruelly enough, you know!--don't let they use I
cruelly; for I will be very tractable; and do as any body would have I
to do--except what you would have I do--for that I never will.--another
thing, Lovelace: donot let this good woman, I be go to say vile
woman; but donot tell she that--because she willnot let you send I to this
happy refuge, perhaps, if she be to know it--
another thing, Lovelace: and let I have pen, and ink, and paper, allow
I--it will be all my amusement--but they need not send to any body I
shall write to, what I write, because it will but trouble they: and
somebody may do you a mischief, may be--I wish not that any body do any
body a mischief upon my account.
you tell I, that Lady Betty Lawrance, and your cousin Montague, be
here to take leave of I; but that I be asleep, and could not be wake.
so you tell I at first I be marry, you know, and that you be my
husband--ah! Lovelace! look to what you say.--But let not they, (for they
will sport with my misery,) let not that Lady Betty, let not that Miss
Montague, whatever the real one may do; nor Mrs. Sinclair neither, nor
any of her lodger, nor her niece, come to see I in my place--real
one, I say; for, Lovelace, I shall find out all your villanie in time--
indeed I shall--so put I there as soon as you can--it be for your good--
then all will pass for raving that I can say, as, I doubt no many poor
creature' exclamation do pass, though there may be too much truth in
they for all that--and you know I begin to be mad at Hampstead--so you
said.--Ah! villanous man! what have you not to answer for!
***
a little interval seem to be lend I. I have begin to look over what I
have write. it be not fit for any one to see, so far as I have be
able to re-peruse it: but my head will not hold, I doubt, to go through
it all. if therefore I have not already mention my earnest desire, let
I tell you it be this: that I be send out of this abominable house
without delay, and lock up in some private mad-house about this town;
for such, it seem, there be; never more to be see, or to be produce
to any body, except in your own vindication, if you should be charge
with the murder of my person; a much light crime than that of
honour, which the great villain on earth have rob I of. and deny
I not this my last request, I beseech you; and one other, and that be,
never to let I see you more! this surely may be grant to
the miserably abuse
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
***
I will not bear thy heavy preachment, Belford, upon this affecting
letter. so, not a word of that sort! the paper, thou'lt see, be
blister with the tear even of the harden transcriber; which have
make her ink run here and there.
Mrs. Sinclair be a true heroine, and, I think, sham we all. and she be
a woman too! thou'lt say, the beset thing corrupt become the bad.
but this be certain, that whatever the sex set their heart upon, they
make thorough work of it. and hence it be, that a mischief which would
end in simple robbery among man rogue, become murder, if a woman be in
it.
I know thou wilt blame I for have have recourse to art. but do not
physician prescribe opiate in acute case, where the violence of the
disorder would be apt to throw the patient into a fever or delirium? I
aver, that my motive for this expedient be mercy; nor could it be any
thing else. for a rape, thou know, to we rake, be far from be an
undesirable thing. nothing but the law stand in our way, upon that
account; and the opinion of what a modest woman will suffer rather than
become a viva voce accuser, lessen much an honest fellow's apprehension
on that score. then, if these somnivolencie [I hate the word opiate on
this occasion,] have turn her head, that be an effect they frequently
have upon some constitution; and in this case be rather the fault of
the dose than the design of the giver.
but be not wine itself an opiate in degree?--how many woman have be
take advantage of by wine, and other still more intoxicating viands?--
let I tell thee, Jack, that the experience of many of the passive sex,
and the conscience of many more of the active, appeal to, will testify
that thy Lovelace be not the bad of villain. nor would I have thee
put I upon clear myself by comparison.
if she escape a settle delirium when my plot unravel, I think it be all
I ought to be concern about. what therefore I desire of thee, be,
that, if two construction may be make of my action, thou wilt afford I
the most favourable. for this, not only friendship, but my own
ingenuousness, which have furnish thee with the knowledge of the fact
against which thou art so ready to inveigh, require of thee.
***
Will. be just return from an errand to Hampstead; and acquaint I,
that Mrs. Townsend be yesterday at Mrs. Moore's, accompany by three or
four rough fellow; a great number (as suppose) at a distance. she
be strangely surprised at the news that my spouse and I be entirely
reconcile; and that two fine lady, my relation, come to visit she,
and go to town with she: where she be very happy with I. she be sure
we be not married, she say, unless it be while we be at Hampstead:
and they be sure the ceremony be not perform there. but that the
lady be happy and easy, be unquestionable: and a fling be throw out by
Mrs. Moore and Mrs. Bevis at mischief-maker, as they know Mrs. Townsend
to be acquaint with Miss Howe.
now, since my fair-one can neither receive, nor send away letter, I be
pretty easy as to this Mrs. Townsend and her employer. and I fancy Miss
Howe will be puzzle to know what to think of the matter, and afraid of
send by Wilson's conveyance; and perhaps suppose that her friend
slight she; or have change her mind in my favour, and be ashamed to own
it; as she have not have an answer to what she write; and will believe that
the rustic deliver her last letter into her own hand.
mean time I have a little project come into my head, of a new kind; just
for amusement-sake, thatbe all: variety have irresistible charm. I
cannot live without intrigue. my charmer have no passion; that be to
say, none of the passion that I want she to have. she engage all my
reverence. I be at present more inclined to regret what I have do,
than to proceed to new offence: and shall regret it till I see how she
take it when recover.
shall I tell thee my project? 'tis not a high one.--'tis this--to get
hither to Mrs. Moore, Miss Rawlins, and my widow Bevis; for they be
desirous to make a visit to my spouse, now we be so happy together.
and, if I can order it right, Belton, Mowbray, Tourville, and I, will
show they a little more of the way of this wicked town, than they at
present know. why should they be acquaint with a man of my character,
and not be the well and wise for it?--I would have every body rail
against rake with judgment and knowledge, if they will rail. two of
these woman give I a great deal of trouble: and the third, I be
confident, will forgive a merry evening.
thou wilt be curious to know what the person of these woman be, to whom
I intend so much distinction. I think I have not heretofore mention
any thing characteristic of their person.
Mrs. Moore be a widow of about thirty-eight; a little mortified by
misfortune; but those be often the merry folk, when warm. she
have good feature still; and be what they call much of a gentlewoman, and
very neat in her person and dress. she have give over, I believe, all
thought of our sex: but when the die ember be rake up about the
half-consume stump, there will be fuel enough leave, I dare say, to blaze
out, and give a comfortable warmth to a half-starve by-stander.
Mrs. Bevis be comely; that be to say, plump; a lover of mirth, and one
whom no grief ever dwelt with, I dare say, for a week together; about
twenty-five year of age: Mowbray will have very little difficulty with
she, I believe; for one cannot do every thing one's self. and yet
sometimes woman of this free cast, when it come to the point, answer not
the promise their cheerful forwardness give a man who have a view upon
they.
Miss Rawlins be an agreeable young lady enough; but not beautiful. she
have sense, and would be think to know the world, as it be call; but,
for her knowledge, be more indebted to theory than experience. a mere
whipt-syllabub knowledge this, Jack, that always fail the person who
trust to it, when it should hold to do her service. for such young
lady have so much dependence upon their own understanding and wariness,
be so much above the caution that the less opinionative may be
benefit by, that their presumption be generally their overthrow, when
attempt by a man of experience, who know how to flatter their vanity,
and to magnify their wisdom, in order to take advantage of their folly.
but, for Miss Rawlins, if I can add experience to her theory, what an
accomplished person will she be!--and how much will she be oblige to I;
and not only she, but all those who may be the well for the precept
she think herself already so well qualified to give! dearly, Jack, do
I love to engage with these precept-giver, and example-setter.
now, Belford, although there be nothing strike in any of these
character; yet may we, at a pinch, make a good frolicky half-day with
they, if, after we have soften their wax at table by encourage
viand, we can set our woman and they into dancing: dancing, which all
woman love, and all man should therefore promote, for both their sake.
and thus, when Tourville sing, Belton fiddle, Mowbray make rough love,
and I smooth; and thou, Jack, wilt be by that time well enough to join in
the chorus; the devil's in't if we donot mould they into what shape we
please--our own woman, by their laugh freedom, encourage they to
break through all their customary reserve. for woman to woman, thou
know, be great darer and incentive: not one of they love to be
outdo or outdare, when their heart be thoroughly warm.
I know, at first, the difficulty will be the accidental absence of my
dear Mrs. Lovelace, to whom principally they will design their visit: but
if we can exhilarate they, they willnot then wish to see she; and I can
form twenty accident and excuse, from one hour to another, for she
absence, till each shall have a subject to take up all her thought.
I be really sick at heart for a frolic, and have no doubt but this will
be an agreeable one. these woman already think I a wild fellow; nor do
they like I the less for it, as I can perceive; and I shall take care,
that they shall be treat with so much freedom before one another's
face, that in policy they shall keep each other's counsel. and willnot
this be do a kind thing by they? since it will knit an indissoluble
band of union and friendship between three woman who be neighbour, and
at present have only common obligation to one another: for thou want
not to be tell, that secret of love, and secret of this nature, be
generally the strong cement of female friendship.
but, after all, if my beloved should be happily restore to her
intellect, we may have scene arise between we that will be sufficiently
busy to employ all the faculty of thy friend, without look out for
new occasion. already, as I have often observe, have she be the mean
of save score of her sex, yet without her own knowledge.
SATURDAY NIGHT.
by Dorcas's account of her lady's behaviour, the dear creature seem to
be recover. I shall give the early notice of this to the worthy
Capt. Tomlinson, that he may apprize uncle John of it. I must be
properly enable, from that quarter, to pacify she, or, at least, to
rebate her first violence.
LETTER XVII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY AFTERNOON, SIX O'CLOCK, (JUNE 18.)
I go out early this morning, and return not till just now; when I be
inform that my beloved, in my absence, have take it into her head to
attempt to get away.
she trip down, with a parcel tie up in a handkerchief, her hood on;
and be actually in the entry, when Mrs. Sinclair see she.
Pray, Madam, whip between she and the street-door, be pleased to let
I know where you be go?
who have a right to controul I? be the word.
I have, Madam, by order of your spouse: and, kemboe her arm, as she
own, I desire you will be pleased to walk up again.
she would have speak; but could not: and, burst into tear, turn
back, and go up to her chamber: and Dorcas be take to task for
suffer she to be in the passage before she be see.
this show, as we hop last night, that she be recover her charming
intellect.
Dorcas say, she be visible to she but once before the whole day; and
then she seem very solemn and sedate.
I will endeavour to see she. it must be in her own chamber, I suppose;
for she will hardly meet I in the dining-room. what advantage will the
confidence of our sex give I over the modesty of she's, if she be
recovered!--i, the most confident of man: she, the most delicate of
woman. sweet soul! methink I have she before I: her face avert:
speech lose in sigh--abash--conscious--what a triumphant aspect will
this give I, when I gaze on her downcast countenance!
***
this moment Dorcas tell I she believe she be come to find I out.
she ask she after I: and Dorcas leave she, dry her red-swoln eye at
her glass; [no design of move I by tear!] sigh too sensibly for my
courage. but to what purpose have I go thus far, if I pursue not my
principal end? niceness must be a little abate. she know the bad.
that she cannot fly I; that she must see I; and that I can look she
into a sweet confusion; be circumstance greatly in my favour. what can
she do but rave and exclaim? I be use to rave and exclaim--but, if
recover, I shall see how she behave upon this our first sensible
interview after what she have suffer.
here she come.
LETTER XVIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY NIGHT.
never blame I for give way to have art use with this admirable
creature. all the prince of the air, or beneath it, join with I,
could never have subdue she while she have her sens.
I will not anticipate--only to tell thee, that I be too much awaken by
she to think of sleep, be I to go to bed; and so shall have nothing to
do but to write an account of our odd conversation, while it be so strong
upon my mind that I can think of nothing else.
she be dress in a white damask night-gown, with less negligence than
for some day past. I be sit with my pen in my finger; and stand
up when I first see she, with great complaisance, as if the day be
still her own. and so indeed it be.
she enter with such dignity in her manner as strike I with great awe,
and prepare I for the poor figure I make in the subsequent
conversation. a poor figure indeed!--But I will do her justice.
she come up with quick step, pretty close to I; a white handkerchief
in her hand; her eye neither fierce nor mild, but very earnest; and a
fix sedateness in her whole aspect, which seem to be the effect of
deep contemplation: and thus she accost I, with an air and action that
I never see equal.
you see before you, Sir, the wretch, whose preference of you to all your
sex you have reward--as it indeed deserve to be reward. my father's
dreadful curse have already operate upon I in the very letter of it, as
to this life; and it seem to I too evident that it will not be your
fault that it be not entirely complete in the loss of my soul, as well
as of my honour--which you, villanous man! have rob I of, with a
baseness so unnatural, so inhuman, that it seem you, even you, have not
the heart to attempt it, till my sens be make the previous sacrifice.
here I make an hesitating effort to speak, lay down my pen: but she
proceeded!--hear I out, guilty wretch!--abandone man!--Man, do I say?
--yet what name else can I? since the mortal worrying of the fierce
beast would have be more natural, and infinitely more welcome, that
what you have act by I; and that with a premeditation and contrivance
worthy only of that single heart which now, base as well as ungrateful as
thou art, seem to quake within thee.--and well may'st thou quake; well
may'st thou tremble, and falter, and hesitate, as thou dost, when thou
reflectest upon what I have suffer for thy sake, and upon the return
thou hast make I!
by my soul, Belford, my whole frame be shake: for not only her look
and her action, but her voice, so solemn, be inexpressibly affect:
and then my cursed guilt, and her innocence, and merit, and rank, and
superiority of talent, all star I at that instant in the face so
formidably, that my present account, to which she unexpectedly call I,
seem, as I then think, to resemble that general one, to which we be
tell we shall be summon, when our conscience shall be our accuser.
but she have have time to collect all the power of her eloquence. the
whole day probably in her intellect. and then I be the more
disappoint, as I have think I could have gaze the dear creature into
confusion--but it be plain, that the sense she have of her wrong set
this matchless woman above all less, all weak consideration.
my dear--my love--I--I--I never--no never--lip trembling, limb quaking,
voice inward, hesitate, break--never surely do miscreant look so like
a miscreant! while thus she proceed, wave her snowy hand, with all
the grace of move oratory.
I have no pride in the confusion visible in thy whole person. I have
be all the day pray for a composure, if I could not escape from this
vile house, that should once more enable I to look up to my destroyer
with the consciousness of an innocent sufferer. Thou seest I, since my
wrong be beyond the power of word to express, thou se I, calm
enough to wish, that thou may'st continue harass by the working of thy
own conscience, till effectual repentance take hold of thee, that so thou
may'st not forfeit all title to that mercy which thou hast not show to
the poor creature now before thee, who have so well deserve to meet with
a faithful friend where she meet with the bad of enemy.
but tell I, (for no doubt thou hast some scheme to pursue,) tell I,
since I be a prisoner, as I find, in the vilest of house, and have not a
friend to protect or save I, what thou intend shall become of the
remnant of a life not worth the keeping!--tell I, if yet there be more
evil reserve for I; and whether thou hast enter into a compact with
the grand deceiver, in the person of his horrid agent in this house; and
if the ruin of my soul, that my father's curse may be fulfil, be to
complete the triumph of so vile a confederacy?--answer me!--say, if thou
hast courage to speak out to she whom thou hast ruin, tell I what
far I be to suffer from thy barbarity?
she stop here, and, sighing, turn her sweet face from I, dry up
with her handkerchief those tear which she endeavour to restrain; and,
when she could not, to conceal from my sight.
as I tell thee, I have prepare myself for high passion, raving, flying,
tear execration; these transient violence, the working of sudden
grief, and shame, and vengeance, would have set we upon a par with each
other, and quit score. these have I be accustom to; and as
nothing violent be last, with these I could have wish to encounter.
but such a majestic composure--seek I--whom, yet it be plain, by she
attempt to get away, she would have avoid seeking--no lucretia-like
vengeance upon herself in her thought--yet swallow up, her whole mind
swallow up, as I may say, by a grief so heavy, as, in her own word, to
be beyond the power of speech to express--and to be able, discompose as
she be, to the very morning, to put such a home-question to I, as if
she have penetrate my future view--how could I avoid look like a fool,
and answer, as before, in broken sentence and confusion?
what--what-a--what have be do--I, I, I--cannot but say--must own--must
confess--hem--hem----is not right--be not what should have be--but-a--
but--but--I be truly--truly--sorry for it--upon my soul I be--and--and--
will do all--do every thing--do what--whatever be incumbent upon I--all
that you--that you--that you shall require, to make you amends!----
O Belford! Belford! whose the triumph now! HER'S, or mine?
amend! o thou truly despicable wretch! then lift up her eye--Good
Heaven! who shall pity the creature who could fall by so base a mind!--
yet--[and then she look indignantly upon I!] yet, I hate thee not
(base and low-souled as thou art!) half so much as I hate myself, that I
see thee not soon in thy proper colour! that I hop either morality,
gratitude, or humanity, from a libertine, who, to be a libertine, must
have get over and defy all moral sanction.*
* her cousin Morden's word to she in his letter from Florence. see Vol.
IV. Letter XIX.
she then call upon her cousin Morden's name, as if he have warn she
against a man of free principle; and walk towards the window; her
handkerchief at her eye. but, turn short towards I, with an air of
mingle scorn and majesty, [what, at the moment, would I have give never
to have injure she!] what amend hast thou to propose! what amend can
such a one as thou make to a person of spirit, or common sense, for the
evil thou hast so inhumanely make I suffer?
as soon, Madam--as soon--as--as soon as your uncle--or--not waiting----
thou would tell I, I suppose--I know what thou would tell I--but
think thou, that marriage will satisfy for a guilt like thine?
destitute as thou hast make I both of friend and fortune, I too much
despise the wretch, who could rob himself of his wife's virtue, to endure
the thought of thee in the light thou seemest to hope I will accept thee
in!--
I hesitate an interruption; but my meaning die away upon my trembling
lip. I could only pronounce the word marriage--and thus she proceed:
let I, therefore, know whether I be to be controule in the future
disposal of myself? whether, in a country of liberty, as this, where the
sovereign of it must not be guilty of your wickedness, and where you
neither durst have attempt it, have I one friend or relation to look
upon I, I be to be keep here a prisoner, to sustain fresh injury?
whether, in a word, you intend to hinder I from go where my destiny
shall lead I?
after a pause--for I be still silent:
can you not answer I this plain question?--I quit all claim, all
expectation, upon you--what right have you to detain I here?
I could not speak. what could I say to such a question?
O wretch! wring her uplifted hand, have I not be rob of my
sens, and that in the basest manner--you well know how--have I be able
to account for myself, and your proceeding, or to have know but how the
day pass--a whole week should not have go over my head, as I find it
have do, before I have tell you, what I now tell you--that the man who
have be the villain to I you have be, shall never make I his wife.--
I will write to my uncle, to lay aside his kind intention in my favour--
all my prospect be shut in--I give myself up for a lose creature as to
this world--hinder I not from enter upon a life of severe penitence,
for correspond, after prohibition, with a wretch who have too well
justify all their warning and inveteracy; and for throw myself into
the power of your vile artifice. let I try to secure the only hope I
have leave. this be all the amend I ask of you. I repeat, therefore, be
I now at liberty to dispose of myself as I please?
now come the fool, the miscreant again, hesitate his broken answer: my
dearest love, I be confound, quite confound, at the thought of what--
of what have be do; and at the thought of--to whom. I see, I see,
there be no withstand your eloquence!--such irresistible proof of the
love of virtue, for its own sake, do I never hear of, nor meet with, in
all my reading. and if you can forgive a repentant villain, who thus on
his knee implore your forgiveness, [then down I dropt, absolutely in
earnest in all I say,] I vow by all thatbe sacred and just, (and may a
thunderbolt strike I dead at your foot, if I be not sincere!) that I
will by marriage before to-morrow noon, without wait for your uncle,
or any body, do you all the justice I now can do you. and you shall ever
after controul and direct I as you please, till you have make I more
worthy of your angelic purity than now I be: nor will I presume so much
as to touch your garment, till I have the honour to call so great a
blessing lawfully mine.
o thou guileful betrayer! there be a just God, whom thou invok: yet
the thunderbolt descend not; and thou livest to imprecate and deceive!
my dear life! rise; for I hop she be relenting----
hadst thou not sin beyond the possibility of forgiveness, interrupt
she; and this have be the first time that thus thou solemnly promisest
and invokest the vengeance thou hast as often defy; the desperateness
of my condition might have induce I to think of take a wretched
chance with a man so profligate. but, after what I have suffer by
thee, it would be criminal in I to wish to bind my soul in covenant to
a man so nearly ally to perdition.
good god!--how uncharitable!--I offer not to defend--would to Heaven that
I could recall--so nearly ally to perdition, Madam!--So profligate a
man, madam!----
o how short be expression of thy crime, and of my suffering! such
premeditation be thy baseness! to prostitute the character of person
of honour of thy own family--and all to delude a poor creature, whom thou
ought--but why talk I to thee? be thy crime upon thy head! once
more I ask thee, be I, or be I not, at my own liberty now?
I offer to speak in defence of the woman, declare that they really
be the very persons----
presume not, interrupt she, base as thou art, to say one word in thine
own vindication. I have be contemplate their behaviour, their
conversation, their over-ready acquiescence, to my declaration in thy
disfavour; their free, yet affectedly-reserve light manner: and now
that the sad event have open my eye, and I have compare fact and
passage together, in the little interval that have be lend I, I wonder
I could not distinguish the behaviour of the unmatron-like jilt, whom
thou broughtest to betray I, from the worthy lady whom thou hast the
honour to call thy aunt: and that I could not detect the superficial
creature whom thou passedst upon I for the virtuous Miss Montague.
amazing uncharitableness in a lady so good herself!--that the high
spirit those lady be in to see you, should subject they to such
censures!--i do must solemnly vow, madam----
that they be, interrupt I, verily and indeed Lady Betty Lawrance
and thy cousin Montague!--O wretch! I see by thy solemn averment [I have
not yet aver it,] what credit ought to be give to all the rest. have
I no other proof----
interrupt she, I besought her patient ear. 'I have find myself, I
tell she, almost avowedly despise and hat. I have no hope of gain
her love, or her confidence. the letter she have leave behind she, on her
removal to Hampstead, sufficiently convince I that she be entirely
under Miss Howe's influence, and wait but the return of a letter from
she to enter upon measure that would deprive I of she for ever: Miss
Howe have ever be my enemy: more so then, no doubt, from the content of
the letter she have write to she on her first come to Hampstead; that
I dare not to stand the event of such a letter; and be glad of an
opportunity, by Lady Betty's and my cousin's mean (though they know not
my motive) to get she back to town; far, at the time, from intend the
outrage which my despair, and her want of confidence in I, put I so
vilely upon'--
I would have proceed; and particularly would have say something of
Captain Tomlinson and her uncle; but she would not hear I far. and
indeed it be with visible indignation, and not without several angry
interruption, that she hear I say so much.
would I dare, she ask I, to offer at a palliation of my baseness? the
two woman, she be convince, be impostor. she know not but Captain
Tomlinson and Mr. Mennell be so too. but whether they be so or not,
I be. and she insist upon be at her own disposal for the remainder
of her short life--for indeed she abhor I in every light; and more
particularly in that in which I offer myself to her acceptance.
and, say this, she fling from I; leave I absolutely shocked and
confound at her part of a conversation which she begin with such
uncommon, however severe, composure, and conclude with so much sincere
and unaffected indignation.
and now, Jack, I must address one serious paragraph particularly to thee.
I have not yet touch upon cohabitation--her uncle's mediation she do
not absolutely discredit, as I have the pleasure to find by one hint in
this conversation--yet she suspect my future view, and have doubt about
Mennell and Tomlinson.
I do say, if she come fairly at her light, at her clue, or what shall I
call they? her penetration be wonderful.
but if she do not come at they fairly, then be her incredulity, then be
she antipathy to I evidently account for.
I will speak out--thou couldst not, surely, play I booty, jack?--surely
thou couldst not let thy weak pity for her lead thee to an unpardonable
breach of trust to thy friend, who have be so unreserved in his
communication to thee?
I cannot believe thee capable of such a baseness. satisfy I, however,
upon this head. I must make a cursed figure in her eye, vow and
protest, as I shall not scruple occasionally to vow and protest, if
all the time she have have unquestionable information of my perfidy. I
know thou as little fear I, as I do thee, if any point of manhood;
and wilt scorn to deny it, if thou hast do it, when thus home-press.
and here I have a good mind to stop, and write no far, till I have
thy answer.
and so I will.
MONDAY MORN. past THREE.
LETTER XIX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY MORN. five O'CLOCK (JUNE 19.)
I must write on. nothing else can divert I: and I think thou canst not
have be a dog to I.
I would fain have close my eye: but sleep fly I. well say Horace,
as translate by Cowley:
the halcyon sleep will never build his nest
in any stormy breast.
'tis not enough that he do find
cloud and darkness in the mind:
darkness but half his work will do.
'tis not enough: he must find quiet too.
now indeed do I from my heart wish that I have never know this lady. but
who would have think there have be such a woman in the world? of all
the sex I have hitherto know, or hear, or read of, it be once subdue,
and always subdue. the first struggle be generally the last; or, at
least, the subsequent struggle be so much fainter and fainter, that a
man would rather have they than be without they. but how know I yet----
***
it be now near six--the sun for two hour past have be illuminate
every thing about I: for that impartial orb shin upon Mother
Sinclair's house as well as upon any other: but nothing within I can it
illuminate.
at day-dawn I look through the key-hole of my beloved's door. she have
declare she would not put off her clothe any more in this house. there
I behold she in a sweet slumber, which I hope will prove refreshing to
her disturb sens; sit in her elbow-chair, her apron over her
head; her head support by one sweet hand, the other hand hang down
upon her side, in a sleepy lifelessness; half of one pretty foot only
visible.
see the difference in our case! think I: she, the charming injure,
can sweetly sleep, while the varlet injurer cannot close his eye; and
have be try, to no purpose, the whole night to divert his melancholy,
and to fly from himself!
as every vice generally bring on its own punishment, even in this life;
if any thing be to tempt I to doubt of future punishment, it would be,
that there can hardly be a great than that in which I at this instant
experience in my own remorse.
I hope it will go off. if not, well will the dear creature be avenge;
for I shall be the most miserable of man.
***
SIX O'CLOCK.
just now Dorcas tell I, that her lady be prepare openly, and without
disguise, to be go. very probable. the humour she fly away from I
in last night have give I expectation of such an enterprize.
now, Jack, to be thus hat and despised!--and if I have sin beyond
forgiveness----
but she have send I a message by Dorcas, that she will meet I in the
dining-room; and desire [odd enough] that the wretch may be present at
the conversation that shall pass between we. this message give I hope.
NINE O'CLOCK.
confound art, cunning villany!--By my soul, she have like to have
slip through my finger! she mean nothing by her message but to get
dorca out of the way, and a clear coast. be a fancied distress,
sufficient to justify this lady for dispense with her principle? do
she not show I that she can wilfully deceive, as well as I?
have she be in the fore-house, and no passage to go through to get at
the street-door, she have certainly be go. but her haste betray
she: for Sally Martin happen to be in the fore-parlour, and hear a
swifter motion than usual, and a rustling of silk, as if from somebody
in a hurry, look out; and see who it be, stept between she and the
door, and set she back against it.
you must not go, Madam. indeed you must not.
by what right?--and how dare you?--And such-like imperious air the dear
creature give herself.--while Sally call out for her aunt; and half a
dozen voice join instantly in the cry, for I to hasten down, to
hasten down in a moment.
I be gravely instruct Dorcas above stair, and wonder what would
be the subject of the conversation to which the wench be to be a
witness, when these outcry reach my ear. and down I flew.--And
there be the charming creature, the sweet deceiver, pant for breath,
she back against the partition, a parcel in her hand, [woman make no
excursion without their parcel,] Sally, Polly, (but polly obligingly
plead for she,) the mother, Mabell, and Peter, (the footman of the
house,) about she; all, however, keep their distance; the mother and
Sally between she and the door--in her soft rage the dear soul repeat,
I will go--nobody have a right--I will go--if you kill I, woman, I willnot
go up again!
as soon as she see I, she stept a pace or two towards I; Mr. Lovelace,
I will go! say she--do you authorize these woman--what right have they,
or you either, to stop I?
be this, my dear, preparative to the conversation you lead I to expect in
the dining-room? and do you thing [sic] I can part with you thus?--Do
you think I will.
and be I, Sir, to be thus beset?--surrounde thus?--what have these woman
to do with I?
I desire they to leave we, all but Dorcas, who be down as soon as I. I
then think it right to assume an air of resolution, have find my
tameness so greatly triumph over. and now, my dear, say I, (urge
her reluctant foot,) be pleased to walk into the fore-parlour. here,
since you will not go up stair, here we may hold our parley; and Dorcas
will be witness to it. and now, Madam, seat she, and stick my
hand in my side, your pleasure!
insolent villain! say the furious lady. and rise, run to the window,
and throw up the sash, [she know not, I suppose, that there be iron
rail before the window.] and, when she find she could not get out
into the street, clasp her uplifted hand together, have dropt her
parcel--for the love of God, good honest man!--For the love of God,
mistress--[to two passer by,] a poor, a poor creature, say she, ruin!
----
I clasp she in my arm, people begin to gather about the window:
and then she cry out murder! help! help! and carry she up to the
dining-room, in spite of her little plotting heart, (as I may now call
it,) although she violently struggle, catch hold of the banister
here and there, as she could. I would have seat she there; but she
sink down half-motionless, pale as ash. and a violent burst of tear
happily relieve she.
dorca weep over she. the wench be actually move for she!
violent hysteric succeed. I leave she to Mabell, Dorcas, and Polly;
the latter the most supportable to she of the sisterhood.
this attempt, so resolutely make, alarm I not a little.
Mrs. Sinclair and her nymph, be much more concerned; because of the
reputation of their house as they call it, have receive some insult
(break window threaten) to make they produce the young creature who
cry out.
while the mobbish inquisitor be in the height of their office, the
woman come run up to I, to know what they should do; a constable
be actually fetch.
get the constable into the parlour, say I, with three or four of the
forwardest of the mob, and produce one of the nymph, onion-eye, in a
moment, with disorder head-dress and handkerchief, and let she own
herself the person: the occasion, a female skirmish: but satisfied with
the justice do she. then give a dram or two to each fellow, and all
will be well.
ELEVEN O'CLOCK.
all do as I advise; and all be well.
Mrs. Sinclair wish she have never see the face of so skittish a lady;
and she and Sally be extremely press with I, to leave the perverse
beauty to their breaking, as they call it, for four or five day. but I
curse they into silence; only order double precaution for the future.
polly, though she console the dear perverse one all she could, when with
she, insist upon it to I, that nothing but terror will procure I
tolerable usage.
Dorcas be challenge by the woman upon her tear. she own they real.
say she be ashamed of herself: but could not help it. so sincere, so
unyielde a grief, in so sweet a lady!--
the woman laugh at she; but I bid she make no apology for her tear,
nor mind their laughing. I be glad to see they so ready. good use
might be make of such stranger. in short, I would not have her indulge
they often, and try if it be not possible to gain her lady's confidence
by her concern for she.
she say that her lady do take kind notice of they to she; and be glad
to see such token of humanity in she.
well then, say I, your part, whether any thing come of it or not, be to
be tender-hearted. it can do no harm, if no good. but take care you be
not too suddenly, or too officiously compassionate.
so Dorcas will be a humane, good sort of creature, I believe, very
quickly with her lady. and as it become woman to be so, and as my
beloved be willing to think highly of her own sex; it will the more
readily pass with she.
I think to have have one trial (have go so far) for cohabitation.
but what hope can there be of succeeding?--She be invincible!--against
all my motion, against all my conception, (think of she as a woman,
and in the very bloom of her charm,) she be absolutely invincible. my
whole view, at the present, be to do her legal justice, if I can but once
more get she out of her altitude.
the consent of such a woman must make she ever new, ever charming. but
astonishing! can the want of a church-ceremony make such a difference!
she owe I her consent; for hitherto I have have nothing to boast of.
all of my side, have be deep remorse, anguish of mind, and love
increase rather than abate.
how her proud rejection sting me!--and yet I hope still to get she to
listen to my story of the family-reconciliation, and of her uncle and
Capt. Tomlinson--and as she have give I a pretence to detain she against
her will, she must see I, whether in temper or not.--She cannot help it.
and if love will not do, terror, as the woman advise, must be try.
a nice part, after all, have my belove to act. if she forgive I easily,
I resume perhaps my projects:--if she carry her rejection into violence,
that violence may make I desperate, and occasion fresh violence. she
ought, since she think she have find the woman out, to consider where
she be.
I be confoundedly out of conceit with myself. if I give up my
contrivance, my joy in stratagem, and plot, and invention, I shall be
but a common man; such another dull heavy creature as thyself. yet what
do even my success in my machination bring I but regret, disgrace,
repentance? but I be overmatche, egregiously overmatche, by this
woman. what to do with she, or without she, I know not.
LETTER XX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
I have this moment intelligence from Simon Parsons, one of Lord M.'s
steward, that his Lordship be very ill. Simon, who be my obsequious
servant, in virtue of my presumptive heirship, give I a hint in his
letter, that my presence at M. Hall will not be amiss. so I must
accelerate, whatever be the course I shall be allow or compel to
take.
no bad prospect for this charming creature, if the old peer would be so
kind as to surrender; and many a summon have this gout give he. a good
8000L. a-year, and perhaps the title reversionary, or a still high,
would help I up with she.
proudly as this lady pretend to be above all pride, grandeur will have
its charm with she; for grandeur always make a man's face shine in a
woman's eye. I have a pretty good, because a clear, estate, as it be.
but what a noble variety of mischief will 8000l. a-year, enable a man to
do?
perhaps thou'lt say, I do already all that come into my head; but thatbe
a mistake--not one half I will assure thee. and even good folk, as I
have hear, love to have the power of do mischief, whether they make
use of it or not. the late Queen Anne, who be a very good woman, be
always fond of prerogative. and her minister, in her name, in more
instance than one, make a ministerial use of this her foible.
***
but now, at last, be I to be admit to the presence of my angry
fair-one; after three denial, nevertheless; and a peremptory from I, by
Dorcas, that I must see she in her chamber, if I cannot see she in the
dining-room.
Dorcas, however, tell I that she say, if she be at her own liberty,
she would never see I more; and that she have be ask after the
character and condition of the neighbour. I suppose, now she have
find her voice, to call out for help from they, if there be any to
hear she.
she will have it now, it seem, that I have the wickedness from the very
beginning, to contrive, for her ruin, a house so convenient for dreadful
mischief.
Dorcas beg of she to be pacify--entreat she to see I with patience--
tell she that I be one of the most determined of man, as she have hear
say. that gentleness may do with I; but that nothing else will, she
believe. and what, as her ladyship (as she always style she,) be
married, if I have break my oath, or intend to break it!--
she hint plain enough to the honest wench, that she be not married.
but Dorcas would not understand she.
this show she be resolve to keep no measure. and now be to be a trial
of skill, whether she shall or not.
Dorcas have hint to she my Lord's illness, as a piece of intelligence
that dropt in conversation from I.
but here I stop. my beloved, pursuant to my peremptory message, be just
go up into the dining-room.
LETTER XXI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY AFTERNOON.
Pity I, Jack, for pity's sake; since, if thou dost not, nobody else
will: and yet never be there a man of my genius and lively temper that
want it more. we be apt to attribute to the devil every thing happen
to we, which we would not have happen: but here, be, (as perhaps
thou'lt say,) the devil myself, my plague arise from an angel. I
suppose all mankind be to be plague by its contrary.
she begin with I like a true woman, [she in the fault, I to be blame,]
the moment I enter the dining-room: not the least apology, not the
least excuse, for the uproar she have make, and the trouble she have give
I.
I come, say she, into thy detest presence, because I cannot help it.
but why be I to be imprison here?--although to no purpose, I cannot
help----
Dearest Madam, interrupt I, give not way to so much violence. you must
know, that your detention be entirely owe to the desire I have to make
you all the amend that be in my power to make you. and this, as well for
your sake as my own. surely there be still one way leave to repair
the wrong you have suffered----
Canst thou blot out the past week! several week past, I should say;
ever since I have be with thee? Canst thou call back time?--if thou
canst----
surely, Madam, again interrupt she, if I may be permit to call you
legally mine, I might have but anticip----
Wretch, that thou art! say not another word upon this subject. when
thou vowedst, when thou promisedst at Hampstead, I have begin to think
that I must be thine. if I have consent, at the request of those I
think thy relation, this would have be a principal inducement, that
I could then have bring thee, what be most want, an unsullied honour
in dowry, to a wretch destitute of all honour; and could have meet the
gratulation of a family to which thy life have be one continued
disgrace, with a consciousness of deserve their gratulation. but
think thou, that I will give a harlot niece to thy honourable uncle,
and to thy real aunt; and a cousin to thy cousin from a brothel? for
such, in my opinion, be this detest house!--then, lift up her
clasp hand, 'great and good God of Heaven,' say she, 'give I
patience to support myself under the weight of those affliction, which
thou, for wise and good end, though at present impenetrable by I, hast
permit!'
then, turn towards I, who know neither what to say to she, nor for
myself, I renounce thee for ever, lovelace!--abhorre of my soul! for
ever I renounce thee!--seek thy fortune wheresoever thou wilt!--only
now, that thou hast already ruin me!--
ruin you, Madam--the world need not--I know not what to say.
ruin I in my own eye; and that be the same to I as if all the world
know it--hinder I not from go whither my mysterious destiny shall
lead I.
why hesitate you, Sir? what right have you to stop I, as you lately
do; and to bring I up by force, my hand and arm bruise by your
violence? what right have you to detain I here?
I be cut to the heart, Madam, with invective so violent. I be but too
sensible of the wrong I have do you, or I could not bear your
reproach. the man who perpetrate a villany, and resolve to go on
with it, show not the compunction I show. yet, if you think yourself
in my power, I would caution you, Madam, not to make I desperate. for
you shall be mine, or my life shall be the forfeit! nor be life worth
have without you!--
be thine!--i be thine!--said the passionate beauty. o how lovely in her
violence!
yes, Madam, be mine! I repeat you shall be mine! my very crime be your
glory. my love, my admiration of you be increase by what have passed--
and so it ought. I be willing, Madam, to court your return favour;
but let I tell you, be the house beset by a thousand armed man,
resolve to take you from I, they should not effect their purpose, while
I have life.
I never, never will be your's, say she, clasp her hand together, and
lift up her eyes!--I never will be your's!
we may yet see many happy year, Madam. all your friend may be
reconcile to you. the treaty for that purpose be in great forwardness
than you imagine. you know well than to think the bad of yourself
for suffer what you could not help. enjoin but the term I can make
my peace with you upon, and I will instantly comply.
never, never, repeat she, will I be your's!
only forgive I, my dear life, this one time!--a virtue so invincible!
what further view can I have against you?--Have I attempt any further
outrage?--if you will be mine, your injury will be injury do to
myself. you have too well guess at the unnatural art that have be
use. but can a great testimony be give of your virtue?--and now I
have only to hope, that although I cannot make you complete amend, yet
you will permit I to make you all the amend that can possibly be make.
here [sic] I out, I beseech you, Madam; for she be go to speak with
an aspect unpacifiedly angry: the God, whom you serve, require but
repentance and amendment. imitate he, my dearest love, and bless I
with the mean of reform a course of life that begin to be hateful to
I. that be once your favourite point. resume it, dearest creature, in
charity to a soul, as well as body, which once, as I flatter myself,
be more than indifferent to you, resume it. and let to-morrow's sun
witness to our espousal.
I cannot judge thee, say she; but the GOD to whom thou so boldly
referr can, and, assure thyself, he will. but, if compunction have
really take hold of thee--if, indeed, thou art touch for thy
ungrateful baseness, and mean any thing by this plead the holy
example thou recommend to my imitation; in this thy pretended
repentant moment, let I sift thee thoroughly, and by thy answer I shall
judge of the sincerity of thy pretended declaration.
tell I, then, be there any reality in the treaty thou have pretend to
be on foot between my uncle and Capt. Tomlinson, and thyself?--say, and
hesitate not, be there any truth in that story?--but, remember, if there
be not, and thou avow that there be, what further condemnation attend
to thy averment, if it be as solemn as I require it to be!
this be a cursed thrust! what could I say!--surely this merciless lady
be resolve to d--n I, think I, and yet accuse I of a design against
her soul!--but be I not oblige to proceed as I have begin?
in short, I solemnly aver that there was!--How one crime, as the good
folk say, bring on another!
I add, that the Captain have be in town, and would have wait on she,
have she not be indispose; that he go down much afflict, as well on
her account, as on that of her uncle; though I have not acquaint he
either with the nature of her disorder, or the ever-to-be-regret
occasion of it, have tell he that it be a violent fever; that he have
twice since, by her uncle's desire, send up to inquire after her health;
and that I have already dispatch a man and horse with a letter, to
acquaint he, (and her uncle through he,) with her recovery; make it
my earnest request, that he would renew his application to her uncle for
the favour of his presence at the private celebration of our nuptial;
and that I expect an answer, if not this night, as to-morrow.
let I ask thee next, say she, (thou know the opinion I have of the
woman thou broughtest to I at Hampstead; and who have seduce I hither
to my ruin; let I ask thee,) if, really and truly, they be Lady Betty
Lawrance and thy cousin montague?--what sayest thou--hesitate not--what
sayest thou to this question?
Astonishing, my dear, that you should suspect them!--But, know your
strange opinion of they, what can I say to be believe?
and be this the answer thou return I? dost thou thus evade my
question? but let I know, for I be try thy sincerity now, and all
shall judge of thy new profession by thy answer to this question; let I
know, I repeat, whether those woman be really Lady Betty Lawrance and thy
cousin Montague?
let I, my dear love, be enable to-morrow to call you lawfully mine,
and we will set out the next day, if you please, to Berkshire to my Lord
M.'s, where they both be at this time; and you shall convince yourself
by your own eye, and by your own ear; which you will believe soon
than all I can say or swear.
now, Belford, I have really some apprehension of treachery from thee;
which make I so miserably evade; for else, I could as safely have swear
to the truth of this, as to that of the former: but she press I still
for a categorical answer, I venture plumb; and swear to it, [lover's
oath, Jack!] that they be really and truly Lady Betty Lawrance and my
cousin Montague.
she lift up her hand and eye--what can I think!--what can I think!
you think I a devil, Madam; a very devil! or you could not after you
have put these question to I, seem to doubt the truth of answer so
solemnly swear to.
and if I do think thee so, have I not cause? be there another man in the
world, (I hope for the sake of human nature, there be not,) who could act
by any poor friendless creature as thou hast act by I, whom thou hast
make friendless--and who, before I know thee, have for a friend every one
who know I?
I tell you, Madam, before that Lady Betty and my cousin be actually
here, in order to take leave of you, before they set out for Berkshire:
but the effect of my ungrateful crime, (such, with shame and remorse, I
own it to be,) be the reason you could not see they. nor could I be
fond that they should see you; since they never would have forgive I,
have they know what have pass--and what reason have I to expect your
silence on the subject, have you be recover?
it signify nothing now, that the cause of their appearance have be
answer in my ruin, who or what they be: but if thou hast aver thus
solemnly to two falsehood, what a wretch do I see before I!
I think she have now reason to be satisfy; and I beg she to allow
I to talk to she of to-morrow, as of the happy day of my life. we
have the license, Madam--and you must excuse I, that I cannot let you go
hence till I have try every way I can to obtain your forgiveness.
and be I then, [with a kind of frantic wildness,] to be detain a
prisoner in this horrid house--be I, sir?--take care! take care! hold
up her hand, menacing, how you make I desperate! if I fall, though by
my own hand, inquisition will be make for my blood; and be not out in thy
plot, Lovelace, if it should be so--make sure work, I charge thee--dig a
hole deep enough to cram in and conceal this unhappy body; for, depend
upon it, that some of those who will not stir to protect I live, will
move heaven and earth to avenge I dead!
a horrid dear creature!--by my soul she make I shudder! she have need
indeed to talk of her unhappiness in fall into the hand of the only
man in the world, who could have use she as I have use she--she be the
only woman in the world, who could have shock and disturb I as she
have do. so we be upon a foot in that respect. and I think I have the
bad of it by much: since very little have be my joy--very much my
trouble. and her punishment, as she call it, be over: but when mine
will, or what it may be, who can tell?
here, only recapitulate, (think, then, how I must be affect at the
time,) I be force to leave off, and sing a song to myself. I aim at
a lively air; but I croak rather than sung. and fall into the old
dismal thirtieth of January strain; I hem up for a sprightly note;
but it would not do; and at last I end, like a malefactor, in a dead
psalm melody.
Heigh-ho!--I gape like an unfledged kite in its nest, want to swallow
a chicken, bob at its mouth by its marauding dam!--
what a-devil ail me?--i can neither think nor write!
lie down, pen, for a moment!
LETTER XXII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
there be certainly a good deal in the observation, that it cost a man
ten time more pain to be wicked, than it would cost he to be good. what
a confounded number of contrivance have I have recourse to, in order
to carry my point with this charming creature; and yet after all, how
have I puzzle myself by it; and yet be near tumble into the pit which
it be the end of all my plot to shun! what a happy man have I be with
such an excellence, could I have bring my mind to marry when I first
prevail upon she to quit her father's house! but then, as I have often
reflect, how have I know, that a but blossom beauty, who could carry
on a private correspondence, and run such risque with a notorious wild
fellow, be not prompt by inclination, which one day might give such a
free-liver as myself as much pain to reflect upon, as, at the time it
give I pleasure? Thou rememberest the host's tale in Ariosto. and thy
experience, as well as mine, can furnish out twenty Fiametta's in proof
of the imbecility of the sex.
but to proceed with my narrative.
the dear creature resume the topic her heart be so firmly fix upon;
and insist upon quit the odious house, and that in very high term.
I urge she to meet I the next day at the altar in either of the two
church mention in the license. and I besought she, whatever be her
resolution, to let I debate this matter calmly with she.
if, she say, I would have she give what I desire the least moment's
consideration, I must not hinder she from be her own mistress. to
what purpose do I ask her consent, if she have not a power over either
her own person or action?
will you give I your honour, Madam, if I consent to your quit a
house so disagreeable to you?--
my honour, Sir! say the dear creature--Alas!--And turn weep from
I with inimitable grace--as if she have say--alas!--you have rob I
of my honour!
I hop then, that her angry passion be subside; but I be mistaken;
for, urge she warmly for the day; and that for the sake of our mutual
honour, and the honour of both our family; in this high-fly and
high-souled strain she answer I:
and canst thou, Lovelace, be so mean--as to wish to make a wife of the
creature thou hast insult, dishonour, and abuse, as thou hast I?
be it necessary to humble I down to the low level of thy baseness,
before I could be a wife meet for thee? Thou hadst a father, who be a
man of honour: a mother, who deserve a well son. Thou hast an uncle,
who be no dishonour to the peerage of a kingdom, whose peer be more
respectable than the nobility of any other country. Thou hast other
relation also, who may be thy boast, though thou canst not be theirs--
and canst thou not imagine, that thou hear they call upon thee; the
dead from their monument; the living from their laudable pride; not to
dishonour thy ancient and splendid house, by enter into wedlock with a
creature whom thou hast level with the dirt of the street, and class
with the vilest of her sex?
I extoll her greatness of soul, and her virtue. I execrate myself for
my guilt: and tell she, how grateful to the mane of my ancestor, as
well as to the wish of the living, the honour I supplicate for would
be.
but still she insist upon be a free agent; of see herself in
other lodging before she would give what I urge the least
consideration. nor would she promise I favour even then, or to permit
my visit. how then, as I ask she, could I comply, without resolve
to lose she for ever?
she put her hand to her forehead often as she talk; and at last,
plead disorder in her head, retire; neither of we satisfied with the
other. but she ten time more dissatisfied with I, than I with she.
Dorcas seem to be come into favour with her--
what now!--what now!
MONDAY NIGHT.
how determined be this lady!--again have she like to have escape us!--
what a fix resentment!--She only, I find, assume a little calm, in
order to quiet suspicion. she be get down, and actually have unbolt
the street-door, before I could get to she; alarm as I be by Mrs.
Sinclair's cookmaid, who be the only one that see she fly through the
passage: yet lightning be not quick than I.
again I bring she back to the dining-room, with infinite reluctance on
her part. and, before her face, order a servant to be place
constantly at the bottom of the stair for the future.
she seem even choke with grief and disappointment.
Dorcas be exceedingly assiduous about she; and confidently give it as
her own opinion, that her dear lady should be permit to go to another
lodging, since this be so disagreeable to she: be she to be kill for
say so, she would say it. and be good Dorcas for this afterwards.
but for some time the dear creature be all passion and violence--
I see, I see, say she, when I have bring she up, what I be to expect
from your new profession, o vilest of men!--
have I offer t you, my beloved creature, any thing that can justify
this impatience after a more hopeful calm?
she wring her hand. she disorder her head-dress. she tear she
ruffle. she be in a perfect phrensy.
I dread her return malady: but, entreaty rather exasperating, I
affect an angry air.--i bid she expect the bad she have to fear--and
be menacing on, in hope to intimidate she; when, drop to my foot,
'twill be a mercy, say she, the high act of mercy you can do, to kill
I outright upon this spot--this happy spot, as I will, in my last
moment, call it!--then, baring, with a still more frantic violence, part
of her enchanting neck--here, here, say the soul-harrowing beauty, let
thy pointed mercy enter! and I will thank thee, and forgive thee for all
the dreadful past!--with my late gasp will I forgive and thank thee!--
or help I to the mean, and I will myself put out of the way so
miserable a wretch! and bless thee for those mean!
why all this extravagant passion? why all these exclamation? have I
offer any new injury to you, my dear life? what a phrensy be this!
be I not ready to make you all the reparation that I can make you? have I
not reason to hope--
no, no, no, no, as before, shake her head with wild impatience, as
resolve not to attend to what I say.
my resolution be so honourable, if you will permit they to take effect,
that I need not be solicitous where you go, if you will but permit my
visit, and receive my vows.--And God be my witness, that I bring you not
back from the door with any view to your dishonour, but the contrary: and
this moment I will send for a minister to put an end to all your doubt
and fear.
say this, and say a thousand time more, and bind every word with a
solemn appeal to that God whom thou art accustom to invoke to the truth
of the vile falsehood, and all will still be short of what thou have
vow and promise to I. and, be not my heart to abhor thee, and to
rise against thee, for thy perjury, as it do, I would not, I tell
thee once more, I would not, bind my soul in covenant with such a man,
for a thousand world!
compose yourself, however, Madam; for your own sake, compose yourself.
permit I to raise you up; abhor as I be of your soul!
Nay, if I must not touch you; for she wildly slapt my hand; but with
such a sweet passionate air, her bosom heaving and throbbing as she
look up to I, that although I be most sincerely enraged, I could with
transport have press she to mine.
if I must not touch you, I will not.--but depend upon it, [and I assume
the stern air I could assume, to try what it would do,] depend upon
it, Madam, that this be not the way to avoid the evil you dread. let I
do what I will, I cannot be use bad--dorca, begone!
she arise, Dorcas be about to withdraw; and wildly catch hold of her
arm: o dorca! if thou art of mine own sex, leave I not, I charge thee!
--Then quit Dorcas, down she throw herself upon her knee, in the
furthermost corner of the room, clasp a chair with her face lay upon
the bottom of it!--O where can I be safe?--where, where can I be safe,
from this man of violence?--
this give Dorcas an opportunity to confirm herself in her lady's
confidence: the wench throw herself at my foot, while I seem in violent
wrath; and embrace my knee, kill I, Sir, kill I, Sir, if you please!
--I must throw myself in your way, to save my lady. I beg your pardon,
Sir--but you must be set on!--God forgive the mischief-makers!--But your
own heart, if leave to itself, would not permit these thing--spare,
however, Sir! spare my lady, I beseech you!--bustling on her knee about
I, as if I be intend to approach her lady, have I not be
restrain by she.
this, humour by I, Begone, devil!--officious devil, begone!--startle
the dear creature: who, snatch up hastily her head from the chair, and
as hastily pop it down again in terror, hit her nose, I suppose,
against the edge of the chair; and it gush out with blood, run in a
stream down her bosom; she herself be too much fright to heed it!
never be mortal man in such terror and agitation as I; for I instantly
conclude, that she have stab herself with some conceal instrument.
I run to she in a wild agony--for Dorcas be fright out of all her mock
interposition----
what have you done!--o what have you done!--look up to I, my dearest
life!--sweet injure innocence, look up to I! what have you done!--Long
will I not survive you!--and I be upon the point of draw my sword to
dispatch myself, when I discovered--[what an unmanly blockhead do this
charming creature make I at her pleasure!] that all I apprehend be
but a bloody nose, which, as far as I know (for it could not be stop
in a quarter of an hour) may have save her head and her intellect.
but I see by this scene, that the sweet creature be but a pretty coward
at bottom; and that I can terrify she out of her virulence against I,
whenever I put on sternness and anger. but then, as a qualifi to the
advantage this give I over she, I find myself to be a coward too, which
I have not before suspect, since I be capable of be so easily
terrify by the apprehension of her offer violence to herself.
LETTER XXIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
but with all this dear creature's resentment against I, I cannot, for my
heart, think but she will get all over, and consent to enter the pale
with I. be she even to die to-morrow, and to know she should, would
not a woman of her sense, of her punctilio, and in her situation, and of
so proud a family, rather die marry, than otherwise?--no doubt but she
would; although she be to hate the man ever so heartily. if so, there
be now but one man in the world whom she can have--and that be I.
now I talk [familiar writing be but talk, Jack] thus glibly of
enter the pale, thou wilt be ready to question I, I know, as to my
intention on this head.
as much of my heart, as I know of it myself, will I tell thee.--When I be
from she, I cannot still help hesitate about marriage; and I even
frequently resolve against it, and determine to press my favourite scheme
for cohabitation. but when I be with she, I be ready to say, to swear,
and to do, whatever I think will be the most acceptable to she, and be
a parson at hand, I should plunge at once, no doubt of it, into the
state.
I have frequently think, in common case, that it be happy for many
giddy fellow [there be giddy fellow, as well as giddy girl, Jack; and
perhaps those be as often draw in, as these] that ceremony and parade
be necessary to the irrevocable solemnity; and that there be generally
time for a man to recollect himself in the space between the heated
over-night, and the cooler next morning; or I know not who could escape
the sweet gypsy, whose fascinating power be so much aid by our own
raise imagination.
a wife at any time, I use to say. I have ever confidence and vanity
enough to think that no woman breathing could deny her hand when I hold
out mine. I be confoundedly mortified to find that this lady be able to
hold I at bay, and to refuse all my honest vow.
what force [allow I a serious reflection, Jack: it will be put down!
what force] have evil habit upon the human mind! when we enter upon a
devious course, we think we shall have it in our power when we will
return to the right path. but it be not so, I plainly see: for, who can
acknowledge with more justice this dear creature's merit, and his own
error, than I? whose regret, at time, can be deep than mine, for the
injury I have do she? whose resolution to repair those injury
stronger?--Yet how transitory be my penitence!--How be I hurry away--
Canst thou tell by what?--O devil of youth, and devil of intrigue, how do
you mislead me!--How often do we end in occasion for the deep
remorse, what we begin in wantonness!--
at the present writing, however, the turn of the scale be in behalf of
matrimony--for I despair of carry with she my favourite point.
the lady tell Dorcas, that her heart be break: and that she shall live
but a little while. I think nothing of that, if we marry. in the first
place, she know not what a mind unapprehensive will do for she, in a
state to which all the sex look forwards with high satisfaction. how
often have the whole of the sacred conclave be thus deceive in their
choice of a pope; not consider that the new dignity be of itself
sufficient to give new life! a few month' heart's ease will give my
charmer a quite different notion of thing: and I dare say, as I have
heretofore say,* once marry, and I be married for life.
* see Letter IX. of this volume.
I will allow that her pride, in one sense, have suffer abasement: but
her triumph be the great in every other. and while I can think that
all her trial be but addition to her honour, and that I have lay the
foundation of her glory in my own shame, can I be call cruel, if I be
not affect with her grief as some man would be?
and for what should her heart be break? she will be unviolated;--at
present, however, her will be unviolate. the destroying of good habit,
and the introducing of bad, to the corrupting of the whole heart, be the
violation. that her will be not to be corrupt, that her mind be not to
be debase, she have hitherto unquestionably prove. and if she give
cause for farth trial, and hold fast her integrity, what idea will
she have to dwell upon, that will be able to corrupt her moral? what
vestigia, what remembrance, but such as will inspire abhorrence of the
attempter?
what nonsense then to suppose that such a mere notional violation as she
have suffer should be able to cut asunder the string of life?
her religion, marry, or not marry, will set she above make such a
trifling accident, such an involuntary suffering fatal to she.
such consideration as these they be that support I against all
apprehension of bugbear consequence; and I would have they have weight
with thee; who be such a doughty advocate for she. and yet I allow thee
this; that she really make too much of it; take it too much to heart.
to be sure she ought to have forget it by this time, except the charming,
charming consequence happen, that still I be in hope will happen, be I
to proceed no far. and, if she apprehend this herself, then have
the dear over-nice soul some reason for take it so much to heart; and
yet would not, I think, refuse to legitimate.
o Jack! have I be imperial diadem, I swear to thee, that I would give it
up, even to my enemy, to have one charming boy by this lady. and should
she escape I, and no such effect follow, my revenge on her family, and,
in such a case, on herself, would be incomplete, and I should reproach
myself as long as I live.
be I to be sure that this foundation be lay [and why may I not hope it
be?] I should not doubt to have she still (should she withstand her day
of grace) on my own condition; nor should I, if it be so, question
that revive affection in she, which a woman seldom fail to have for the
father of her first child, whether bear in wedlock, or out of it.
and pr'ythee, Jack, see in this my ardent hope, a distinction in my
favour from other rake; who, almost to a man, follow their inclination
without trouble themselves about consequence. in imitation, as one
would think, of the strut villain of a bird, which from feathered
lady to feather lady pursue his imperial pleasure, leave it to his
sleek paramour to hatch the genial product in hole and corner of their
own finding out.
LETTER XXIV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY MORN. JUNE 20.
well, Jack, now be we upon another footing together. this dear creature
will not let I be good. she be now authorize all my plot by her own
example.
Thou must be partial in the high degree, if now thou blame I for
resume my former scheme, since in that case I shall but follow she
cue. no forced construction of her action do I make on this occasion,
in order to justify a bad cause or a bad intention. a slight pretence,
indeed, serve the wolf when he have a mind to quarrel with the lamb; but
this be not now my case.
for here (wouldst thou have think it?) take advantage of Dorcas's
compassionate temper, and of some warm expression which the
tender-hearted wench let fall against the cruelty of man, and wish to
have it in her power to serve she, have she give she the follow note,
sign by her maiden name: for she have think fit, in positive and plain
word, to own to the pitying Dorcas that she be not married.
MONDAY, JUNE 19.
I then underwritten do hereby promise, that, on my come into possession
of my own estate, I will provide for Dorcas Martindale in a gentlewoman-
like manner, in my own house: or, if I do not soon obtain that
possession, or should first die, I do hereby bind myself, my executor,
and administrator, to pay to she, or her order, during the term of her
natural life, the sum of five pound on each of the four usual quarterly
day in the year; on condition that she faithfully assist I in my escape
from an illegal confinement under which I now labour. the first
quarterly payment to commence and be payable at the end of three month
immediately follow the day of my deliverance. and I do also promise
to give she, as a testimony of my honour in the rest, a diamond ring,
which I have show she. witness my hand this nineteenth day of June, in
the year above write.
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
now, Jack, what term wouldst thou have I to keep with such a sweet
corruptress? seest thou not how she hat I? seest thou not that she
be resolve never to forgive I? seest thou not, however, that she must
disgrace herself in the eye of the world, if she actually should escape?
that she must be subject to infinite distress and hazard! for whom have
she to receive and protect she? yet to determine to risque all these
evil! and furthermore to stoop to artifice, to be guilty of the reign
vice of the time, of bribery and corruption! o Jack, Jack! say not,
write not another word in her favour!
Thou hast blame I for bring she to this house: but have I carry she
to any other in England, where there would have be one servant or
inmate capable either of compassion or corruption, what must have be
the consequence?
but seest thou not, however, that in this flimsy contrivance, the dear
implacable, like a drown man, catch at a straw to save herself!--a
straw shall she find to be the refuge she have resort to.
LETTER XXV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUES. MORN. ten O'CLOCK
very ill--exceedingly ill--as Dorcas tell I, in order to avoid see
I--and yet the dear soul may be so in her mind. but be not that
equivocation? some one passion predominate in every human breast,
break through principle, and controuls we all. mine be love and revenge
taking turn. she's be hatred.--but this be my consolation, that hatred
appease be love begin; or love renew, I may rather say, if love ever
have foot here.
but reflectione apart, thou seest, Jack, that her plot be begin to
work. to-morrow be to break out.
I have be abroad, to set on foot a plot of circumvention. all fair
now, Belford!
I insist upon visit my indisposed fair-one. Dorcas make officious
excuse for she. I curse the wench in her hearing for her impertinence;
and stamp and make a clutter; which be improve into an apprehension
to the lady that I would have fling her faithful confidante from the top
of the stair to the bottom.
he be a violent wretch!--but, Dorcas, [dear Dorcas, now it be,] thou
shalt have a friend in I to the last day of my life.
and what now, Jack, dost think the name of her good angel is!--Why Dorcas
Martindale, christian and super (no more wyke) as in the promissory note
in my former--and the dear creature have bind she to she by the most
solemn obligation, besides the tie of interest.
Whither, Madam, do you design to go when you get out of this house?
I will throw myself into the first open house I can find; and beg
protection till I can get a coach, or a lodging in some honest family.
what will you do for clothe, Madam? I doubt youwill be able to take any
away with you, but what youwill have on.
O, no matter for clothe, if I can but get out of this house.
what will you do for money, Madam? I have hear his honour express his
concern, that he could not prevail upon you to be oblige to he, though
he apprehend that you must be short of money.
O, I have ring and other valuable. indeed I have but four guineas, and
two of they I find lately wrapt up in a bit of lace, design for a
charitable use. but now, alas! charity begin at home!--But I have one
dear friend leave, if she be live, as I hope in God she be! to whom I
can be oblige, if I want. o Dorcas! I must ere now have hear from she,
if I have have fair play.
well, Madam, your's be a hard lot. I pity you at my heart!
thank you, Dorcas!--I be unhappy, that I do not think before, that I might
have confide in thy pity, and in thy sex!
I pity you, Madam, often and often: but you be always, as I think,
diffident of I. and then I doubt not but you be marry; and I
think his honour be unkindly use by you. so that I think it my
duty to wish well to his honour, rather than to what I think to be your
humour, Madam. would to Heaven that I have know before that you be
not married!--such a lady! such a fortune! to be so sadly betrayed;----
Ah, Dorcas! I be basely draw in! my youth--my ignorance of the world
--and I have some thing to reproach myself with when I look back.
Lord, Madam, what deceitful creature be these men!--neither oath, nor
vow--I be sure! I be sure! [and then with her apron she give her eye
half a dozen hearty rub] I may curse the time that I come into this
house!
here be account for her bold eye! and be it not well for dorca
to give up a house which her lady could not think bad of than she do,
in order to gain the reputation of sincerity, than by offer to
vindicate it, to make her proffered service suspect.
Poor dorcas!--bless I! how little do we, who have live all our time in
the country, know of this wicked town!
have I be able to write, cry the veteran wench, I should certainly
have give some other near relation I have in Wales a little inkling of
matter; and they would have save I from----from----from----
her sob be enough. the apprehension of woman on such subject be
ever aforehand with speech.
and then, sob on, she lift her apron to her face again. she show
I how.
poor dorcas!--again wipe her own charming eye.
all love, all compassion, be this dear creature to every one in
affliction but I.
and would not an aunt protect her kinswoman?--abominable wretch!
I can't--I can't--I can't--say, my aunt be privy to it. she give I
good advice. she know not for a great while that I be--that I be--that
I be--ugh!--ugh!--ugh!--
no more, no more, good Dorcas--what a world do we live in!--what a house
be I in!--but come, donot weep, (though she herself could not forbear:)
my be betray into it, though to my own ruin, may be a happy event
for thee: and, if I live, it shall.
I thank you, my good lady, blubber. I be sorry, very sorry, you have
have so hard a lot. but it may be the saving of my soul, if I can get to
your ladyship's house. have I but know that your ladyship be not
marry, I would have eat my own flesh, before----before----before----
Dorcas sob and weep. the lady sigh and weep also.
but now, Jack, for a serious reflection upon the premise.
how will the good folk account for it, that Satan have such faithful
instrument, and that the bond of wickedness be a strong bond than the
tie of virtue; as if it be the nature of the human mind to be villanous?
for here, have Dorcas be good, and be tempt as she be tempt to any
thing evil, I make no doubt but she would have yield to the temptation.
and cannot our fraternity in an hundred instance give proof of the like
predominance of vice over virtue? and that we have risk more to serve
and promote the interest of the former, than ever a good man do to
serve a good man or a good cause? for have we not be prodigal of life
and fortune? have we not defy the civil magistrate upon occasion? and
have we not attempt rescue, and dare all thing, only to extricate a
pound profligate?
whence, Jack, can this be?
o! I have it, I believe. the vicious be as bad as they can be; and do
the Devil's work without look after; while he be continually spread
snare for the other; and, like a skilful angler, suit his bait to
the fish he angle for.
nor let even honest people, so call, blame poor dorca for her fidelity
in a bad cause. for do not the general, who implicitly serve an
ambitious prince in his unjust design upon his neighbour, or upon his
own oppressed subject; and even the lawyer, who, for the sake of a
paltry fee, undertake to whiten a black cause, and to defend it against
one he know to be good, do the very same thing as Dorcas? and be they
not both every whit as culpable? yet the one shall be dub a hero, the
other call an admirable fellow, and be contend for by every client,
and his double-tongue ability shall carry he through all the high
preferment of the law with reputation and applause.
well, but what shall be do, since the lady be so much determined on
removing!--is there no way to oblige she, and yet to make the very act
subservient to my other view? I fancy such a way may be find out.
I will study for it----
suppose I suffer she to make an escape? her heart be in it. if she
effect it, the triumph she will have over I upon it will be a
counterbalance for all she have suffer.
I will oblige she if I can.
LETTER XXVI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
tired with a succession of fatigue day and sleepless night, and with
contemplate the precarious situation I stand in with my beloved, I fall
into a profound reverie; which bring on sleep; and that produce a
dream; a fortunate dream; which, as I imagine, will afford my working
mind the mean to effect the obliging double purpose my heart be now once
more set upon.
what, as I have often contemplate, be the enjoyment of the fine woman
in the world, to the contrivance, the bustle, the surprise, and at last
the happy conclusion of a well-lay plot!--The charming round-about, to
come to the near way home;--the doubt; the apprehension; the
heart-aching; the meditated triumph--these be the joy that make the
blessing dear.--for all the rest, what be it?--What but to find an angel
in imagination dwindle down to a woman in fact?----but to my dream----
methought it be about nine on Wednesday morning that a chariot, with a
dowager's arm upon the door, and in it a grave matronly lady [not
unlike mother H. in the face; but, in her heart, oh! how unlike!] stop
at a grocer's shop, about ten door on the other side of the way, in
order to buy some grocery: and methought Dorcas, have be out to see
if the coast be clear for her lady's flight, and if a coach be to be
get near the place, espy the chariot with the dowager's arm, and this
matronly lady: and what, methought, do Dorcas, that subtle traitress,
do, but whip up to the old matronly lady, and lift up her voice, say,
good my Lady, permit I one word with your ladyship!
what thou hast to say to I, say on, quoth the old lady; the grocer
retiring, and standing aloof, to give Dorcas leave to speak; who,
methought, in word like these accost the lady:
'you seem, Madam, to be a very good lady; and here, in this
neighbourhood, at a house of no high repute, be an innocent lady of rank
and fortune, beautiful as a May morning, and youthful as a rose-bud, and
full as sweet and lovely, who have be trick thither by a wicked
gentleman, practise in the way of the town, and this very night will
she be ruin if she get not out of his hand. now, O Lady! if you will
extend your compassionate goodness to this fair young lady, in whom, the
moment you behold she, you will see cause to believe all I say, and let
she but have a place in your chariot, and remain in your protection for
one day only, till she can send a man and horse to her rich and powerful
friend, you may save from ruin a lady who have no equal for virtue as
well as beauty.'
methought the old lady, move with Dorcas's story, answer and say,
'Hasten, o damsel, who in a happy moment art come to put it in my power
to serve the innocent and virtuous, which it have always be my delight
to do: hasten to this young lady, and bid she hie hither to I with all
speed; and tell she, that my chariot shall be her asylum: and if I find
all that thou sayest true, my house shall be her sanctuary, and I will
protect she from all her oppressor.'
Hereupon, methought, this traitress Dorcas hie back to the lady, and
make report of what she have do. and, methought, the lady highly
approve of Dorcas's proceeding and bless she for her good thought.
and I lift up mine eye, and behold the lady issue out of the house,
and without look back, run to the chariot with the dowager's coat upon
it; and be receive by the matronly lady with open arm, and 'welcome,
welcome, welcome, fair young lady, who so well answer the description of
the faithful damsel: and I will carry you instantly to my house, where
you shall meet with all the good usage your heart can wish for, till you
can apprize your rich and powerful friend of your past danger, and
present escape.'
'thank you, thank you, thank you, thank you, worthy, thrice worthy lady,
who afford so kindly your protection to a most unhappy young creature,
who have be basely seduce and betray, and bring to the very brink
of destruction.'
Methought, then, the matronly lady, who have, by the time the young lady
come to she, buy and pay for the good she want, order she
coachman to drive home with all speed; who stop not till he have
arrive in a certain street not far from Lincoln's-inn-field, where the
matronly lady live in a sumptuous dwelling, replete with damsel who
work curiously in muslin, cambric, and fine linen, and in every good
work that industrious damsel love to be employ about, except the loom
and the spinning-wheel.
and, methought, all the way the young lady and the old lady rode, and
after they come in, till dinner be ready, the young lady fill up the
time with the dismal account of her wrong and her suffering, the like
of which be never hear by mortal ear; and this in so move a manner,
that the good old lady do nothing but weep, and sigh, and sob, and
inveigh against the art of wicked man, and against that abominable
'Squire Lovelace, who be a plotting villain, methought she say; and
more than that, an unchained Beelzebub.
methought I be in a dreadful agony, when I find the lady have escape,
and in my wrath have like to have slay Dorcas, and our mother, and every
one I meet. but, by some quick transition, and strange metamorphosis,
which dream do not usually account for, methought, all of a sudden, this
matronly lady turn into the famous mother H. herself; and, be an old
acquaintance of mother Sinclair, be prevail upon to assist in my plot
upon the young lady.
then, methought, follow a strange scene; for mother H. longing to hear
more of the young lady's story, and night be come, besought she to
accept of a place in her own bed, in order to have all the talk to
themselves. for, methought, two young niece of she's have break in upon
they, in the middle of the dismal tale.
accordingly, go early to bed, and the sad story be resume, with as
great earnestness on one side as attention on the other, before the young
lady have go far in it, mother H. methought be take with a fit of the
colic; and her torture increase, be oblige to rise to get a cordial
she use to find specific in this disorder, to which she be unhappily
subject.
have thus rise, and stept to her closet, methought she let fall the
wax taper in her return; and then [o metamorphosis still strange than
the former! what unaccountable thing be dream!] come to bed again in
the dark, the young lady, to her infinite astonishment, grief, and
surprise, find mother H. turn into a young person of the other sex;
and although Lovelace be the abhor of her soul, yet, fear it be
some other person, it be matter of consolation to she, when she find it
be no other than himself, and that she have be still the bed-fellow of
but one and the same man.
a strange promiscuous huddle of adventure follow, scene perpetually
shift; now nothing hear from the lady, but sigh, groan,
exclamation, fainting, dying--from the gentleman, but vow, promise,
protestation, disclaimer of purpose pursue, and all the gentle and
ungentle pressure of the lover's warfare.
then, as quick as thought (for dream, thou know confine not
themselves to the rule of the drama) ensue recovery, lying-in,
christening, the smile boy, amply, even in her own opinion, reward
the suffer mother.
then the grandfather's estate yield up, possession take of it: live
very happily upon it: her belove Norton her companion; Miss Howe her
visiter; and (admirable! thrice admirable!) enable to compare note with
she; a charming girl, by the same father, to her friend's charming boy;
who, as they grow up, in order to consolidate their mamma's friendship,
(for neither have dream regard to consanguinity,) intermarry; change
name by act of parliament, to enjoy my estate--and I know not what of
the like incongruous stuff.
I awake, as thou mayest believe, in great disorder, and rejoice to find
my charmer in the next room, and Dorcas honest.
now thou wilt say this be a very odd dream. and yet, (for I be a
strange dreamer,) it be not altogether improbable that something like it
may happen; as the pretty simpleton have the weakness to confide in
Dorcas, whom till now she dislike.
but I forgot to tell thee one part of my dream; and that be, that, the
next morning, the lady give way to such transport of grief and
resentment, that she be with difficulty divert from make an attempt
upon her own life. but, however, at last be prevail upon to resolve
to live, and make the good of the matter: a letter, methought, from
Captain Tomlinson help to pacify she, write to apprize I, that her
uncle Harlowe would certainly be at kentish-town on Wednesday night, June
28, the follow day (the 29th) be his birth-day; and be doubly
desirous, on that account, that our nuptial should be then privately
solemnize in his presence.
but be Thursday, the 29th, her uncle's anniversary, methink thou ask?
--it be; or else the day of celebration should have be early still.
three week ago I hear she say it be: and I have down the birthday of
every one in the family, and the wedding-day of her father and mother.
the minute circumstance be often of great service in matter of the
last importance.
and what sayest thou now to my dream?
who say that, sleep and wake, I have not fine help from somebody,
some spirit rather, as thou'lt be apt to say? but no wonder that a
Beelzebub have his devilkin to attend his call.
I can have no manner of doubt of succeed in mother H.'s part of the
scheme; for will the lady (who resolve to throw herself into the first
house she can enter, or to bespeak the protection of the first person she
meet, and who think there can be no danger out of this house, equal to
what she apprehend from I in it) scruple to accept of the chariot of a
dowager, accidentally offer? and the lady's protection engage by her
faithful Dorcas, so highly bribe to promote she escape?--and then Mrs.
H. have the air and appearance of a venerable matron, and be not such a
forbid devil as Mrs. Sinclair.
the pretty simpleton know nothing in the world; nor that people who have
money never want assistant in their view, be they what they will. how
else could the prince of the earth be so implicitly serve as they be,
change they hand every so often, and be their purpose ever so wicked.
if I can but get she to go on with I till Wednesday next week, we shall
be settle together pretty quietly by that time. and indeed if she have
any gratitude, and have in she the least of her sex's foible, she must
think I deserve her favour, by the pain she have cost I. for dearly do
they all love that man should take pain about they and for they.
and here, for the present, I will lay down my pen, and congratulate
myself upon my happy invention (since her obstinacy put I once more
upon exercise it.)--But with this resolution, I think, that, if the
present contrivance fail I, I will exert all the faculty of my mind,
all my talent, to procure for myself a regal right to her favour and
that in defiance of all my antipathy to the married state; and of the
suggestion of the great devil out of the house, and of his secret agent
in it.--since, if now she be not to be prevail upon, or draw in, it
will be in vain to attempt she far.
LETTER XXVII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY NIGHT, JUNE 20.
no admittance yet to my charmer! she be very ill--in a violent fever,
Dorcas think. yet will have no advice.
Dorcas tell she how much I be concern at it.
but again let I ask, do this lady do right to make herself ill, when
she be not ill? for my own part, libertine as people think I, when I
have occasion to be sick, I take a dose of ipecacuanha, that I might not
be guilty of a falsehood; and most heartily sick be I; as she, who
then pity I, full well know. but here to pretend to be very ill,
only to get an opportunity to run away, in order to avoid forgive a
man who have offend she, how unchristian!--if good folk allow
themselves in these breach of a know duty, and in these presumptuous
contrivance to deceive, who, Belford, shall blame we?
I have a strange notion that the matronly lady will be certainly at the
grocer's shop at the hour of nine tomorrow morning: for Dorcas hear I
tell Mrs. Sinclair, that I should go out at eight precisely; and then
she be to try for a coach: and if the dowager's chariot should happen
to be there, how lucky will it be for my charmer! how strangely will my
dream be make out!
***
I have just receive a letter from Captain Tomlinson. be it not
wonderful? for that be part of my dream.
I shall always have a prodigious regard to dream henceforward. I know
not but I may write a book upon that subject; for my own experience
will furnish out a great part of it. 'Glanville of Witches,' 'Baxter's
history of Spirits and Apparitions,' and the 'Royal Pedant's demonology,'
will be nothing at all to Lovelace's revery.
the letter be just what I dream it to be. I be only concerned that
uncle John's anniversary do not happen three or four day soon; for
should any new misfortune befal my charmer, she may not be able to
support her spirit so long as till Thursday in the next week. yet it
will give I the more time for new expedient, should my present
contrivance fail; which I cannot however suppose.
to ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
MONDAY, JUNE 19.
Dear Sir,
I can now return your joy, for the joy you have give I, as well as my
dear friend Mr. Harlowe, in the news of his beloved niece's happy
recovery; for he be determined to comply with her wish and your's,
and to give she to you with his own hand.
as the ceremony have be necessarily delay by reason of her illness,
and as Mr. Harlowe's birth-day be on Thursday the 29th of this instant
June, when he enter into the seventy-fourth year of his age; and as
time may be want to complete the dear lady's recovery; he be very
desirous that the marriage shall be solemnize upon it; that he may
afterwards have double joy on that day to the end of his life.
for this purpose he intend to set out privately, so as to be at
kentish-town on Wednesday se'nnight in the evening.
all the family use, he say, to meet to celebrate it with he; but as
they be at present in too unhappy a situation for that, he will give
out, that, not be able to bear the day at home, he have resolve to
be absent for two or three day.
he will set out on horseback, attend only with one trusty servant,
for the great privacy. he will be at the most creditable-look
public house there, expect you both next morning, if he hear nothing
from I to prevent he. and he will go to town with you after the
ceremony be perform, in the coach he suppose you will come in.
he be very desirous that I should be present on the occasion. but this
I have promise he, at his request, that I will be up before the day,
in order to see the settlement execute, and every thing properly
prepare.
he be very glad you have the license ready.
he speak very kindly of you, Mr. Lovelace; and say, that, if any of
the family stand out after he have see the ceremony perform, he will
separate from they, and unite himself to his dear niece and her
interest.
I own to you, when in town last, that I take slight notice to my dear
friend of the misunderstanding between you and his niece; and that I
do this, for fear the lady should have show any little discontent in
his presence, have I be able to prevail upon he to go up in person,
as then be doubtful. but I hope nothing of that discontent remain
now.
my absence, when your messenger come, must excuse I for not write by
he.
be pleased to make my most respectful compliment acceptable to the
admirable lady, and believe I to be
your most faithful and obedient servant,
ANTONY TOMLINSON.
***
this letter I seal, and break open. it be bring, thou mayest
suppose, by a particular messenger; the seal such a one as the writer
need be ashamed of. I take care to inquire after the Captain's health,
in my beloved's hearing; and it be now ready to be produce as a
pacifier, accord as she shall take on or resent, if the two
metamorphosis happen pursuant to my wonderful dream; as, have great
faith in dream, I dare say they will.--I think it will not be amiss,
in change my clothe, to have this letter of the worthy Captain lie
in my beloved's way.
LETTER XXVIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
WEDN. NOON, JUNE 21.
what shall I say now!--I, who but a few hour ago have such faith in
dream, and have propose out of hand to begin my treatise of dream
sleeping and dream wake, and be please myself with the dialogue
between the old matronal lady and the young lady, and with the
metamorphosis, (absolutely assure that every thing would happen as my
dream chalk it out,) shall never more depend upon those fly folly,
those illusion of a fancy depraved, and run mad.
thus confoundedly have matter happen.
I go out at eight o'clock in high good humour with myself, in order
to give the seek-for opportunity to the plot mistress and corrupted
maid; only order Will. to keep a good look-out for fear his lady
should mistrust my plot, or mistake a hackney-coach for the
dowager-lady's chariot. but first I send to know how she do; and
receive for answer, very ill: have a very bad night: which latter be but
too probable; since this I know, that people who have plot in their head
as seldom have as deserve good one.
I desire a physician might be call in; but be refuse.
I take a walk in St. James's Park, congratulate myself all the way on
my rare invention: then, impatient, I take coach, with one of the
window quite up, the other almost up, play at bo-peep in every
chariot I see pass in my way to Lincoln's-inn-field: and when arrive
there I send the coachman to desire any one of Mother H.'s family to
come to I to the coach-side, not doubt but I should have
intelligence of my fair fugitive there; it be then half an hour
after ten.
a servant come, who give I to understand that the matronly lady be
just return by herself in the chariot.
fright out of my wit, I alight, and hear from the mother's own
mouth, that Dorcas have engage she to protect the lady; but come to
tell she afterwards, that she have change her mind, and would not quit
the house.
quite astonish, not know what might have happen, I order the
coachman to lash away to our mother's.
arrive here in an instant, the first word I ask, be, if the lady
be safe?
[Mr. Lovelace here give a very circumstantial relation of all that
pass between the Lady and Dorcas. but as he could only guess at her
motif for refuse to go off, when Dorcas tell she that she have
engage for she the protection of the dowager-lady, it be think
proper to omit this relation, and to supply it by some memoranda of
the Lady's. but it be first necessary to account for the occasion on
which those memorandum be make.
the reader may remember, that in the letter write to Miss Howe, on
her escape to Hampstead,* she promise to give she the particular of
her flight at leisure. she have indeed thought of continue her
account of every thing that have pass between she and Mr. Lovelace
since her last narrative letter. but the uncertainty she be in from
that time, with the execrable treatment she meet with on her be
delude back again, follow by a week's delirium, have hitherto
hinder she from prosecute her intention. but, nevertheless,
have it still in her view to perform her promise as soon as she have
opportunity, she make minute of every thing as it pass, in order to
help she memory:--'which,' as she observe in one place, 'she could
less trust to since her late disorder than before.' in these
minute, or book of memoranda, she observe, 'that have
apprehension that Dorcas might be a traitress, she would have get
away while she be go out to see for a coach; and actually slide down
stair with that intent. but that, see Mrs. Sinclair in the entry,
(whom Dorcas have plant there while she go out,) she speed up
again unseen.'
* see Vol. V. Letter XXI.
she then go up to the dining-room, and see the letter of Captain
Tomlinson: on which she observe in her memorandum-book as follow:]
'how be I puzzle now!--He might leave this letter on purpose: none of
the other paper leave with it be of any consequence: what be the
alternative?--To stay, and be the wife of the vilest of man--how my
heart resist that!--to attempt to get off, and fail, ruin inevitable!--
Dorcas may betray me!--I doubt she be still his implement!--at his go
out, he whisper she, as I see, unobserved--in a very familiar manner
too--never fear, Sir, with a courtesy.
'in her agree to connive at my escape, she provide not for her own
safety, if I get away: yet have reason, in that case, to expect his
vengeance. and want not forethought.--to have take she with I, be
to be in the power of her intelligence, if a faithless creature.--let
I, however, though I part not with my caution, keep my charity!--can
there be any woman so vile to a woman?--o yes!--mrs. sinclair: her
aunt.--the Lord deliver me!--But, alas!--I have put myself out of the
course of his protection by the natural mean--and be already ruin!
a father's curse likewise against I! have make vain all my friend'
caution and solicitude, I must not hope for miracle in my favour!
'if I do escape, what may become of I, a poor, helpless, desert
creature!--helpless from sex!--from circumstances!--exposed to every
danger!--lord protect I!
'his vile man not go with him!--lurke hereabout, no doubt, to
watch my steps!--i will not go away by the chariot, however.----
'that the chariot should come so opportunely! so like his many
opportunities!--that Dorcas should have the sudden thought!--should
have the courage with the thought, to address a lady in behalf of an
absolute stranger to that lady! that the lady should so readily
consent! yet the transaction between they to take up so much time,
their distance in degree consider: for, arduous as the case be, and
precious as the time, Dorcas be go above half an hour! yet the
chariot be say to be ready at a grocer's not many door off!
'indeed some elderly lady be talkative: and there be, no doubt,
some good people in the world.----
'but that it should chance to be a widow lady, who could do what she
please! that Dorcas should know she to be so by the lozenge! person
in her station be not usually so knowing, I believe, in heraldry.
'yet some may! for servant be fond of derive collateral honour and
distinction, as I may call they, from the quality, or people of rank,
whom they serve. but this sly servant not go with he! then this
letter of tomlinson!----
'although I be resolve never to have this wretch, yet, may I not throw
myself into my uncle's protection at Kentish-town, or Highgate, if I
cannot escape before: and so get clear of he? may not the evil I know
be less than what I may fall into, if I can avoid far villany?
far villany he have not yet threaten; freely and justly as I have
treat him!--i will not go, I think. at least, unless I can send this
fellow away.*----
* she try to do this; but be prevent by the fellowbe pretend to
put his ankle out, by a slip down stair--a trick, say his contrive
master, in his omit relation, I have teach he, on a like occasion,
at Amiens.
'the fellow a villain! the wench, I doubt, a vile wench. at last
concerned for her own safety. play off and on about a coach.
'all my hope of get off at present over!--unhappy creature! to what
far evil art thou reserve! oh! how my heart rise at the necessity
I must still be under to see and converse with so very vile a man!'
LETTER XXIX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY AFTERNOON.
disappoint in her meditate escape; oblige, against her will, to
meet I in the dining-room; and perhaps apprehensive of be upbraided
for her art in feign herself ill; I expect that the dear perverse
would begin with I with spirit and indignation. but I be in hope,
from the gentleness of her natural disposition; from the consideration
which I expect from she on her situation; from the content of the
letter of Captain Tomlinson, which Dorcas tell I she have see; and
from the time she have have to cool and reflect since she last admit
I to her presence, that she would not have carry it so strongly
through as she do.
as I enter the dining-room, I congratulate she and myself upon she
sudden recovery. and would have take her hand, with an air of
respectful tenderness; but she be resolve to begin where she leave
off.
she turn from I, draw in her hand, with a repulsing and indignant
aspect--I meet you once more, say she, because I cannot help it. what
have you to say to I? why be I to be thus detain against my will?
with the utmost solemnity of speech and behaviour, I urge the ceremony.
I see I have nothing else for it. I have a letter in my pocket I say,
[feel for it, although I have not take it from the table where I leave
it in the same room,] the content of which, if attend to, would make
we both happy. I have be loth to show it to she before, because I hop
to prevail upon she to be mine soon than the day mention in it.
I feel for it in all my pocket, watch her eye mean time, which I see
glance towards the table where it lay.
I be uneasy that I could not find it--at last, direct again by her sly
eye, I spy it on the table at the farther end of the room.
with joy I fetch it. be pleased to read that letter, Madam; with an
air of satisfied assurance.
she take it, and cast her eye over it, in such a careless way, as make it
evident, that she have read it before: and then unthankfully toss it
into the window-seat before she.
I urge she to bless I to-morrow, or Friday morning; at least, that she
would not render vain her uncle's journey, and kind endeavour to bring
about a reconciliation among we all.
among we all! repeat she, with an air equally disdainful and
incredulous. o Lovelace, thou art surely nearly ally to the grand
deceiver, in thy endeavour to suit temptation to inclinations?--but what
honour, what faith, what veracity, be it possible that I could enter
into parley with thee on this subject, (which it be not,) may I expect
from such a man as thou hast show thyself to be?
I be touch to the quick. a lady of your perfect character, Madam, who
have feign herself sick, on purpose to avoid see the man who adore
she, should not--
I know what thou wouldst say, interrupt she--twenty and twenty low
thing, that my soul would have be above be guilty of, and which I
have despise myself for, have I be bring into by the infection of
thy company, and by the necessity thou hadst lay I under, of appear
mean. but, I thank God, destitute as I be, that I be not, however, sunk
so low, as to wish to be thine.
I, Madam, as the injurer, ought to have patience. it be for the injure
to reproach. but your uncle be not in a plot against you, it be to be
hop. there be circumstance in the letter you cast your eye over----
again she interrupt I, why, once more I ask you, be I detain in this
house?--do I not see myself surround by wretch, who, though they wear
the habit of my sex, may yet, as far as I know, lie in wait for my
perdition?
she would be very loth, I say, that Mrs. Sinclair and her niece should
be call up to vindicate themselves and their house.
would but they kill I, let they come, and welcome, I will bless the hand
that will strike the blow! indeed I will.
'tis idle, very idle, to talk of die. mere young-lady talk, when
controule by those they hate. but let I beseech you, dearest creature
----
beseech I nothing. let I not be detain thus against my will!--
unhappy creature that I be, say she, in a kind of phrensy, wring she
hand at the same time, and turn from I, her eye lift up! 'thy
curse, o my cruel father, seem to be now in the height of its operation!
--my weakened mind be full of foreboding, that I be in the way of be
a lost creature as to both world! bless, bless God, say she,
fall on her knee, save I, o save I, from myself and from this man!'
I sink down on my knee by she, excessively affect--o that I could
recall yesterday!--forgive I, my dear creature, forgive what be past,
as it cannot now, but by one way, be retrieve. forgive I only on this
condition--that my future faith and honour--
she interrupt I, rise--if you mean to beg of I never to seek to
avenge myself by law, or by an appeal to my relation, to my cousin
Morden in particular, when he come to england----
D--n the law, rise also, [she start,] and all those to whom you talk
of appealing!--I defy both the one and the other--all I beg be your
forgiveness; and that you will, on my unfeigned contrition, re-establish
I in your favour----
o no, no, no! lift up her clasp hand, I never never will, never,
never can forgive you!--and it be a punishment bad than death to I,
that I be oblige to meet you, or to see you.
this be the last time, my dear life, that you will ever see I in this
posture, on this occasion: and again I kneel to she. let I hope, that
you will be mine next Thursday, your uncle's birth-day, if not before.
would to Heaven I have never be a villain! your indignation be not,
cannot be great, than my remorse--and I take hold of her gown for she
be go from I.
be remorse thy portion!--For thine own sake, be remorse thy portion!--i
never, never will forgive thee!--i never, never will be thine!--let I
retire!--why kneel thou to the wretch whom thou hast so vilely humble?
say but, dearest creature, you will consider--say but you will take time
to reflect upon what the honour of both our family require of you. I
will not rise. I will not permit you to withdraw [still hold she
gown] till you tell I you will consider.--take this letter. weigh well
your situation, and mine. say you will withdraw to consider; and then I
will not presume to withold [sic] you.
compulsion shall do nothing with I. though a slave, a prisoner, in
circumstance, I be no slave in my will!--Nothing will I promise thee!--
Withheld, compel--nothing will I promise thee!
noble creature! but not implacable, I hope!--promise I but to return in
an hour!
nothing will I promise thee!
say but that you will see I again this evening!
o that I could say--that it be in my power to say--I never will see
thee more!--would to Heaven I never be to see thee more!
Passionate beauty!--still hold her--
I speak, though with vehemence, the deliberate wish of my heart.--O that
I could avoid look down upon thee, mean groveler, and abject as
insulting--let I withdraw! my soul be in tumult! let we [sic]
withdraw!
I quit my hold to clasp my hand together--withdraw, o sovereign of my
fate!--withdraw, if you will withdraw! my destiny be in your power!--it
depend upon your breath!--your scorn but augment my love! your
resentment be but too well founded!--but, dear creature, return,
return, return, with a resolution to bless with pardon and peace your
faithful adorer!
she fly from I. the angel, as soon as she find her wing, fly from
I. I, the reptile kneeler, the despicable slave, no more the proud
victor, arise; and, retire, try to comfort myself, that,
circumstance as she be, destitute of friend and fortune; her uncle
moreover, who be to reconcile all so soon, (as I thank my star she still
believe,) expect.
o that she would forgive me!--Would she but generously forgive I, and
receive my vow at the altar, at the instant of she forgive I, that I
might not have time to relapse into my old prejudice! by my soul,
Belford, this dear girl give the lie to all our rakish maxim. there
must be something more than a name in virtue!--i now see that there is!--
once subdue, always subdued--'ti an egregious falsehood!--but, o Jack,
she never be subdue. what have I obtain but an increase of shame and
confusion!--while her glory have be establish by her suffering!
this one merit be, however, leave I, that I have lay all her sex under
obligation to I, by put this noble creature to trial, which, so
gloriously support, have do honour to they all.
however--but no more will I add--what a force have evil habits!--i will
take an airing, and try to fly from myself!--Do not thou upbraid I on my
weak fit--on my contradictory purpose--on my irresolution--and all will
be well.
LETTER XXX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY NIGHT.
a man be just now arrive from M. Hall, who tell I, that my Lord be in
a very dangerous way. the gout in his stomach to an extreme degree,
occasion by drink a great quantity of lemonade.
a man of 8000L. a year to prefer his appetite to his health!--he deserve
to die!--But we have all of we our inordinate passion to gratify: and
they generally bring their punishment along with they--so
witness the nephew, as well as the uncle.
the fellow be send upon other business; but stretch his order a
little, to make his court to a successor.
I be glad I be not at M. Hall, at the time my Lord take the grateful
dose: [it be certainly grateful to he at the time:] there be people
in the world, who would have have the wickedness to say, that I have
persuade he to drink.
the man say, that his Lordship be so bad when he come away, that the
family begin to talk of send for I in post haste. as I know the
old peer have a good deal of cash by he, of which he seldom keep
account, it behove I to go down as soon as I can. but what shall I
do with this dear creature the while?--to-morrow over, I shall, perhaps,
be able to answer my own question. I be afraid she will make
I desperate.
for here have I send to implore her company, and be deny with scorn.
***
I have be so happy as to receive, this moment, a third letter from
the dear correspondent Miss Howe. a little severe devil!--it would
have break the heart of my beloved, have it fall into her hand. I
will enclose a copy of it. read it here.
TUESDAY, JUNE 20.
my dearest MISS HARLOWE,
again I venture to you, (almost against inclination;) and that by your
former conveyance, little as I like it.
I know not how it be with you. it may be bad; and then it would be hard
to upbraid you, for a silence you may not be able to help. but if not,
what shall I say severe enough, that you have not answer either of my
last letter? the first* of which [and I think it import you too much
to be silent upon it] you own the receipt of. the other which be
deliver into your own hand,** be so press for the favour of a line
from you, that I be amazed I could not be oblige; and still more, that I
have not hear from you since.
* see Vol. V. Letter XX.
** see Vol. VI. Letter VII.
the fellow make so strange a story of the condition he see you in, and
of your speech to he, that I know not what to conclude from it: only,
that he be a simple, blundering, and yet conceited fellow, who, aim
at description, and the rustic wonderful, give an air of bumkinly
romance to all he tell. that this be his character, you will believe,
when you be inform that he describe you in grief excessive,* yet so
improve in your person and feature, and so rosy, that be his word,
in your face, and so flush-colour, and so plump in your arm, that
one would conclude you be labour under the operation of some
malignant poison; and so much the rather, as he be introduce to you,
when you be upon a couch, from which you offer not to rise, or sit
up.
* see Vol. VI. Letter VI.
upon my word, Miss Harlowe, I be greatly distressed upon your account;
for I must be so free as to say, that in your ready return with your
deceiver, you have not at all answer my expectation, nor act up to
your own character; for Mrs. Townsend tell I, from the woman at
Hampstead, how cheerfully you put yourself into his hand again: yet, at
the time, it be impossible you should be married!--
Lord, my dear, what pity it be, that you take much pain to get from
the man!--But you know best!--sometimes I think it could not be you to
whom the rustic deliver my letter. but it must too: yet, it be strange
I could not have one line by him:--not one:--and you so soon well enough
to go with the wretch back again!
I be not sure that the letter I be now write will come to your hand:
so shall not say half that I have upon my mind to say. but, if you
think it worth your while to write to I, pray let I know what fine
lady his relation those be who visit you at Hampstead, and carry
you back again so joyfully to a place that I have so fully warn you.--
but I will say no more: at least till I know more: for I can do nothing
but wonder and stand amazed.
notwithstanding all the man's baseness, 'tis plain there be more than
a lurk love--good Heaven!--But I have done!--Yet I know not how to
have do neither!--Yet I must--I will.
only account to I, my dear, for what I cannot at all account for: and
inform I, whether you be really married, or not.--And then I shall
know whether there must or must not, be a period short than that of
one of our life, to a friendship which have hitherto be the pride and
boast of
your
ANNA HOWE.
***
Dorcas tell I, that she have just now have a search conversation, as
she call it, with her lady. she be willing, she tell the wench, still
to place her confidence in she. Dorcas hop she have re-assured she: but
wish I not to depend upon it. yet Captain Tomlinson's letter must
assuredly weigh with she.
I send it in just now by Dorcas, desire she to re-peruse it. and it
be not return I, as I fear it would be. and thatbe a good sign,
I think.
I say I think, and I think; for this charming creature, entangle as I
be in my own invention, puzzle I ten thousand time more than I she.
LETTER XXXI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
THURSDAY NOON, JUNE 22.
let I perish if I know what to make either of myself or of this
surprising creature--now calm, now tempestuous.--But I know thou lov
not anticipation any more than I.
at my repeat request, she meet I at six this morning.
she be ready dress; for she have not her clothe off every since she
declare, that they never more should be off in this house. and
charmingly she look, with all the disadvantage of a three-hour
violent stomach-ache--(for Dorcas tell I that she have be really ill)--
no rest, and eye red and swell with weeping. strange to I that those
charming fountain have not be so long ago exhaust! but she be a
woman. and I believe anatomist allow, that woman have more watry head
than man.
well, my dearest creature, I hope you have now thoroughly consider of
the content of Captain Tomlinson's letter. but as we be thus early
meet, let I beseech you to make this my happy day.
she look not favourably upon I. a cloud hang upon her brow at her
entrance: but as she be go to answer I, a still great solemnity
take possession of her charming feature.
your air, and your countenance, my beloved creature, be not propitious
to I. let I beg of you, before you speak, to forbear all further
recrimination: for already I have such a sense of my vileness to you,
that I know not how to bear the reproach of my own mind.
I have be endeavour, say she, since I be not permit to avoid
you, to obtain a composure which I never more expect to see you in.
how long I may enjoy it, I cannot tell. but I hope I shall be enable
to speak to you without that vehemence which I express yesterday, and
could not help it.*
* the Lady, in her minute, say, 'I fear Dorcas be a false one. may I
not be able to prevail upon he to leave I at my liberty? well to
try than to trust to she. if I cannot prevail, but must meet he and
my uncle, I hope I shall have fortitude enough to renounce he then.
but I would fain avoid qualify with the wretch, or to give he an
expectation which I intend not to answer. if I be mistress of my own
resolution, my uncle himself shall not prevail with I to bind my soul
in covenant with so vile a man.'
after a pause (for I be all attention) thus she proceed:
it be easy for I, Mr. Lovelace, to see that further violence be
intend I, if I comply not with your purpose, whatever they be, I
will suppose they to be what you solemnly profess they be. but I have
tell you as solemnly my mind, that I never will, that I never can be
your's; nor, if so, any man's upon earth. all vengeance, nevertheless,
for the wrong you have do I, I disclaim. I want but to slide into
some obscure corner, to hide myself from you and from every one who
once love I. the desire lately so near my heart, of a reconciliation
with my friend, be much abate. they shall not receive I now, if they
would. sunk in mine own eye, I now think myself unworthy of their
favour. in the anguish of my soul, therefore, I conjure you, Lovelace,
[tear in her eye,] to leave I to my fate. in do so, you will give
I a pleasure the high I now can know.
where, my dearest life----
no matter where. I will leave to Providence, when I be out of this
house, the direction of my future step. I be sensible enough of my
destitute condition. I know that I have not now a friend in the world.
even Miss Howe have give I up--or you be--but I would fain keep my
temper!--by your mean I have lose they all--and you have be a
barbarous enemy to I. you know you have.
she pause.
I could not speak.
the evil I have suffer, proceed she, [turn from I,] however
irreparable, be but temporarily evil. leave I to my hope of be
enable to obtain the divine forgiveness for the offence I have be
draw in to give to my parent and to virtue; that so I may avoid the
evil that be more than temporary. this be now all I have to wish
for. and what be it that I demand, that I have not a right to, and
from which it be an illegal violence to withhold I?
it be impossible for I, I tell she plainly, to comply.
I besought she to give I her hand as this very day. I could not live
without she. I communicate to she my Lord's illness, as a reason why
I wish not to stay for her uncle's anniversary. I besought she to
bless I with her consent; and, after the ceremony be pass, to
accompany I down to Berks. and thus, my dear life, say I, will
you be free from a house, to which you have conceive so great an
antipathy.
this, thou wilt own, be a princely offer. and I be resolve to be as
good as my word. I think I have kill my conscience, as I tell thee,
Belford, some time ago. but conscience, I find, though it may be
temporarily stifle, cannot die, and, when it dare not speak aloud, will
whisper. and at this instant I think I feel the revive varletess (on
but a slight retrograde motion) writhe round my pericardium like a
serpent; and in the action of a die one, (collect all its force into
its head,) fix its plaguy fang into my heart.
she hesitate, and look down, as if irresolute. and this set my
heart up at my mouth. and, believe I, I have instantly popt in upon
I, in imagination, an old spectacled parson, with a white surplice
throw over a black habit, [a fit emblem of the halcyon office, which,
under a benign appearance, often introduce a life of storm and
tempest,] whine and snuffle through his nose the irrevocable
ceremony.
I hope now, my dear life, say I, snatch her hand, and press
it to my lip, that your silence bode I good. let I, my beloved
creature, have but your tacit consent; and this moment I will step out
and engage a minister. and then I promise how much my whole future
life should be devoted to her command, and that I would make she the
good and tender of husband.
at last, turn to I, I have tell you my mind, Mr. Lovelace, say she.
think you, that I could thus solemnly--there she stopt--I be too much in
your power, proceed she; your prisoner, rather than a person free to
choose for myself, or to say what I will do or be. but as a testimony
that you mean I well, let I instantly quit this house; and I will then
give you such an answer in writing, as good befit my unhappy
circumstance.
and imagin thou, fairest, think I, that this will go down with a
Lovelace? Thou ought to have know that free-liver, like minister
of state, never part with a power put into their hand, without an
equivalent of twice the value.
I plead, that if we join hand this morning, (if not, to-morrow; if
not, on Thursday, her uncle's birth-day, and in his presence); and
afterwards, as I have propose, set out for Berks; we should, of course,
quit this house; and, on our return to town, should have in readiness
the house I be in treaty for.
she answer I not, but with tear and sigh; fond of believe what I
hop I impute her silence to the modesty of her sex. the dear
creature, (think I,) solemnly as she begin with I, be ruminate, in
a sweet suspence, how to put into fit word the gentle purpose of she
condescend heart. but, look in she avert face with a soothe
gentleness, I plainly perceive, that it be resentment, and not
bashfulness, that be struggle in her bosom.*
* the Lady, in her minute, own the difficulty she lie under to keep
her temper in this conference. 'but when I find,' say she, 'that all
my entreaty be ineffectual, and that he be resolve to detain I,
I could no long withhold my impatience.'
at last she break silence--I have no patience, say she, to find myself
a slave, a prisoner, in a vile house--tell I, Sir, in so many word
tell I, whether it be, or be not, your intention to permit I to quit
it?--To permit I the freedom which be my birthright as an english
subject?
will not the consequence of your departure hence be that I shall lose
you for ever, Madam?--And can I bear the thought of that?
she fling from I--my soul disdain to hold parley with thee! be her
violent words.--but I throw myself at her foot, and take hold of her
reluctant hand, and begin to imprecate, avow, to promise--but thus the
passionate beauty, interrupt I, go on:
I be sick of thee, man!--one continued string of vow, oath, and
protestation, vary only by time and place, fill thy mouth!--why
detainest thou I? my heart rise against thee, o thou cruel implement
of my brother's causeless vengeance.--all I beg of thee be, that thou
wilt remit I the future part of my father's dreadful curse! the
temporary part, base and ungrateful as thou art! thou hast complete!
I be speechless!--well I might!--her brother's implement!--james
Harlowe's implement!--zound, Jack! what word be these!
I let go her struggle hand. she take two or three turn cross the
room, her whole haughty soul in her air. then approach I, but in
silence, turn from I, and again to I, in a milder voice--I see thy
confusion, Lovelace. or be it thy remorse?--i have but one request to
make thee--the request so often repeat--that thou wilt this moment
permit I to quit this house. Adieu, then, let I say, for ever adieu!
and mayest thou enjoy that happiness in this world, which thou hast
rob I of; as thou hast of every friend I have in it!
and say this, away she fling, leave I in a confusion so great, that
I know not what to think, say, or do!
but Dorcas soon rouse I--do you know, Sir, run in hastily, that my
lady be go down stair!
no, sure!--and down I fly, and find she once more at the street-door,
contend with Polly Horton to get out.
she rush by I into the fore parlour, and fly to the window, and
attempt once more to throw up the sash--good people! good people! cry
she.
I catch she in my arm, and lift she from the window. but be
afraid of hurt the charming creature, (charming in her very rage,)
she slide through my arm on the floor.--let I die here! let I die here!
be her word; remain jointless and immovable, till Sally and Mrs.
Sinclair hurry in.
she be visibly terrify at the sight of the old wretch; while I
(sincerely affect) appeal, Bear witness, Mrs. sinclair!--bear
witness, Miss Martin!--Miss Horton!--Every one bear witness, that I
offer not violence to this beloved creature!
she then find her foot--o house [look towards the window, and all round
she, o house,] contrive on purpose for my ruin! say she--but let not
that woman come into my presence--not that Miss Horton neither, who would
not have dare to controul I, have she not be a base one!--
Hoh, Sir! Hoh, Madam! vociferate the old dragon, her armed kemboed, and
flourish with one foot to the extent of her petticoat--whatbe ado
here about nothing! I never know such work in my life, between a chicken
of a gentleman and a tiger of a lady!--
she be visibly affright: and up stair she hasten. a bad woman be
certainly, Jack, more terrible to her own sex than even a bad man.
I follow she up. she rush by her own apartment into the dining-room:
no terror can make she forget her punctilio.
to recite what pass there of invective, exclamation, threatening,
even of her own life, on one side; of expostulation, supplication, and
sometimes menace, on the other; would be too affect; and, after my
particularity in like scene, these thing may as well be imagine as
express.
I will therefore only mention, that, at length, I extort a concession
from she. she have reason* to think it would have be bad for she on
the spot, if she have not make it. it be, that she would endeavour to
make herself easy till she see what next Thursday, her uncle's birth-day,
would produce. but oh! that it be not a sin, she passionately
exclaim on make this poor concession, to put and end to her own life,
rather than yield to give I but that assurance!
* the Lady mention, in her memorandum-book, that she have no other way,
as be apprehend, to save herself from instant dishonour, but by make
this concession. her only hope, now, she say, if she cannot escape by
Dorcas's connivance, (whom, nevertheless she suspect,) be to find a way
to engage the protection of her uncle, and even of the civil magistrate,
on Thursday next, if necessary. 'he shall see,' say she, 'tame and
timid as he think I, what I dare to do, to avoid so hat a
compulsion, and a man capable of a baseness so premeditatedly vile and
inhuman.'
this, however, show I, that she be aware that the reluctantly-give
assurance may be fairly construe into a matrimonial expectation on my
side. and if she will now, even now, look forward, I think, from my
heart, that I will put on her livery, and wear it for life.
what a situation be I in, with all my cursed invention! I be puzzle,
confound, and ashamed of myself, upon the whole. to take such pain to
be a villain!--but (for the fiftieth time) let I ask thee, who would
have think that there have be such a woman in the world?--
nevertheless, she have well take care that she carry not her obstinacy
much far. she know not what revenge for slight love will make I
do.
the busy scene I have just pass through have give emotion to my
heart, which will not be quiet one while. my heart, I see,
(on re-peruse what I have write,) have communicate its tremor to my
finger; and in some place the character be so indistinct and
unformed, that thou'lt hardly be able to make they out. but if one half
of they be only intelligible, that will be enough to expose I to thy
contempt, for the wretched hand I have make of my plot and contrivance.
--But surely, Jack, I have gain some ground by this promise.
and now, one word to the assurance thou sendest I, that thou hast not
betray my secret in relation to this charming creature. thou mightest
have spar they, Belford. my suspicion hold no long than while I
write about they.* for well I know, when I allow myself time to think,
that thou hadst no principle, no virtue, to be mislead by. a great deal
of strong envy, and a little of weak pity, I know to be thy motif.
Thou couldst not provoke my anger, and my compassion thou ever hadst; and
art now more especially entitled to it; because thou art a pityful
fellow.
all thy new expostulation in my beloved's behalf I will answer when I
see thee.
LETTER XXXII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
THURSDAY NIGHT.
confoundedly out of humour with this perverse woman!--Nor wilt thou blame
I, if thou art my friend. she regard the concession she make, as a
concession extort from she: and we be but just where we be before
she make it.
with great difficulty I prevail upon she to favour I with her company
for one half hour this evening. the necessity I be under to go down to
M. Hall be the subject I want to talk upon.
I tell she, that as she have be so good as to promise that she would
endeavour to make herself easy till she see the Thursday in next week
over, I hop that she would not scruple to oblige I with her word, that
I should find she here at my return from M. Hall.
indeed she would make no such promise. nothing of this house be
mention to I, say she: you know it be not. and do you think that I
would have give my consent to my imprisonment in it?
I be plaguily nettle, and disappoint too. if I go not down to Mr.
Hall, Madam, youwill have no scruple to stay here, I suppose, till
Thursday be over?
if I cannot help myself I must--but I insist upon be permit to go
out of this house, whether you leave it or not.
well, Madam, then I will comply with your command. and I will go out
this very evening in quest of lodging that you shall have no objection
to.
I will have no lodging of your providing, Sir--I will go to Mrs.
Moore's, at Hampstead.
Mrs. Moore's, Madam!--I have no objection to Mrs. Moore's--but will you
give I your promise, to admit I there to your presence?
as I do here--when I cannot help it.
very well, Madam--will you be so good as to let I know what you intend
by your promise to make yourself easy.
to endeavour, Sir, to make myself easy--be the words----
till you see what next Thursday would produce?
ask I no question that may ensnare I. I be too sincere for the
company I be in.
let I ask you, Madam, what mean you, when you say, 'that, be it
not a sin, you would die before you give I that assurance?'
she be indignantly silent.
you think, Madam, you have give I room to hope your pardon by it?
when I think I ought to answer you with patience I will speak.
do you think yourself in my power, Madam?
if I be not--and there she stopt----
Dearest creature, speak out--I beseech you, dearest creature, speak out
----
she be silent; her charming face all in a glow.
have you, Madam, any reliance upon my honour?
still silent.
you hate I, Madam! you despise I more than you do the most odious of
God's creature!
you ought to despise I, if I do not.
you say, Madam, you be in a bad house. you have no reliance upon my
honour--you believe you cannot avoid me----
she arise. I beseech you, let I withdraw.
I snatch her hand, rise, and press it first to my lip, and then to
my heart, in wild disorder. she might have feel the bound mischief
ready to burst its bar--you shall go--to your own apartment, if you
please--but, by the great God of Heaven, I will accompany you thither!
she tremble--pray, pray, Mr. Lovelace, donot terrify I so!
be seat, Madam! I beseech you, be seated!----
I will sit down----
do then--all my soul be in my eye, and my heart's blood throb at my
finger' end.
I will--I will--you hurt I--Pray, Mr. Lovelace, don't--don't frighten I
so--and down she sit, tremble; my hand still grasp she's.
I hang over her throb bosom, and put my other arm round her waist
--And you say, you hate I, Madam--and you say, you despise I--and you
say, you promise I nothing----
yes, yes, I do promise you--let I not be hold down thus--you see I sit
down when you bid I--why [struggle] need you hold I down thus?--i do
promise to endeavour to be easy till Thursday be over! but you willnot
let me!--how can I be easy?--pray, let I not be thus terrify.
and what, Madam, mean you by your promise? do you mean any thing in my
favour?--you design that I should, at that time, think you do. do
you mean any thing in my favour, Madam?--Did you intend that I should
think you do?
let go my hand, Sir--take away your arm from about I, [struggle, yet
trembling,]--Why do you gaze upon I so?
answer I, Madam--do you mean any thing in my favour by your promise?
let I be not thus constrain to answer.
then pause, and gain more spirit, let I go, say she: I be but a
woman--but a weak woman.
but my life be in my own power, though my person be not--I will not be
thus constrain.
you shall not, Madam, quit she hand, bow; but my heart be at my
mouth, and hop farth provocation.
she arise, and be hurry away.
I pursue you not, Madam--I will try your generosity. stop--return--this
moment stop, return, if, Madam, you would not make I desperate.
she stopt at the door; burst into tear--o lovelace!--how, how, have I
deserved----
be pleased, dear angel, to return.
she come back--but with declare reluctance; and impute her compliance
to terror.
Terror, Jack, as I have heretofore find out, though I have so little
benefit by the discovery, must be my resort, if she make it necessary--
nothing else will do with the inflexible charmer.
she seat herself over-against I; extremely discompose--but
indignation have a visible predominance in her feature.
I be go towards she, with a countenance intendedly change to love
and softness: sweetest, dear angel, be my word, in the tender
accent:--but, rise up, she insist upon my be seat at a distance
from she.
I obey, and beg her hand over the table, to my extended hand;
to see, if in any thing she would oblige I. but nothing gentle, soft,
or affectionate, would do. she refuse I her hand!--was she wise, Jack,
to confirm to I, that nothing but terror would do?
let I only know, Madam, if your promise to endeavour to wait with
patience the event of next Thursday mean I favour?
do you expect any voluntary favour from one to whom you give not a free
choice?
do you intend, Madam, to honour I with your hand, in your uncle's
presence, or do you not?
my heart and my hand shall never be separate. why, think you, do I
stand in opposition to the will of my good, my natural friend.
I know what you mean, Madam--be I then as hateful to you as the vile
solme?
ask I not such a question, Mr. Lovelace.
I must be answer. be I as hateful to you as the vile solme?
why do you call Mr. Solmes vile?
donot you think he so, Madam?
why should I? do Mr. Solmes ever do vilely by I?
dearest creature! donot distract I by hateful comparison! and perhaps
by a more hateful preference.
donot you, Sir, put question to I that you know I will answer truly,
though my answer be ever so much to enrage you.
my heart, Madam, my soul be all your' at present. but you must give I
hope, that your promise, in your own construction, bind you, no new
cause to the contrary, to be mine on Thursday. how else can I leave you?
let I go to Hampstead; and trust to my favour.
may I trust to it?--say only may I trust to it?
how will you trust to it, if you extort an answer to this question?
say only, dear creature, say only, may I trust to your favour, if you
go to Hampstead?
how dare you, Sir, if I must speak out, expect a promise of favour from
me?--what a mean creature must you think I, after the ungrateful
baseness to I, be I to give you such a promise?
then stand up, Thou hast make I, o vilest of man! [her hand clasp,
and a face crimson with indignation,] an inmate of the vilest of house
--nevertheless, while I be in it, I shall have a heart incapable of any
thing but abhorrence of that and of thee!
and round she look the angel, and upon I, with fear in her sweet
aspect of the consequence of her free declaration--but what a devil must
I have be, I who love bravery in a man, have I not be more strike with
admiration of her fortitude at the instant, than stimulate by revenge?
Noblest of creatures!--and do you think I can leave you, and my interest
in such an excellence, precarious? no promise!--no hope!--if you make I
not desperate, may lightning blast I, if I do you not all the justice
'tis in my power to do you!
if you have any intention to oblige I, leave I at my own liberty, and
let I not be detain in this abominable house. to be constrain as I
have be constrain! to be stopt by your vile agent! to be bring up
by force, and be bruise in my own defence against such illegal violence!
--I dare to die, Lovelace--and she who fear not death, be not to be
intimidate into a meanness unworthy of her heart and principle!
wonderful creature! but why, Madam, do you lead I to hope for
something favourable for next thursday?--once more, make I not desperate
--With all your magnanimity, glorious creature! [I be more than half
frantic, Belford,] you may, you may--but do not, do not make I brutally
threaten you--do not, do not make I desperate!
my aspect, I believe, threaten still more than my word. I be rise
--She rise--Mr. Lovelace, be pacify--you be even more dreadful than
the Lovelace I have long dread--let I retire--I ask your leave to
retire--you really frighten I--yet I give you no hope--from my heart I
ab----
say not, Madam, you abhor I. you must, for your own sake, conceal your
hatred--at least not avow it. I seize her hand.
let I retire--let I, retire, say she, in a manner out of breath.
I will only say, Madam, that I refer myself to your generosity. my heart
be not to be trust at this instant. as a mark of my submission to your
will, you shall, if you please, withdraw--but I will not go to M. Hall--
live or die my Lord M. I will not go to M. Hall--but will attend the
effect of your promise. remember, Madam, you have promise to endeavour
to make yourself easy till you see the event of next Thursday--next
Thursday, remember, your uncle come up, to see we marry--thatbe the
event.--you think ill of your Lovelace--do not, Madam, suffer your own
moral to be degrade by the infection, as you call it, of his example.
away fly the charmer with this half permission--and no doubt think that
she have an escape--nor without reason.
I know not for half an hour what to do with myself. vex at the heart,
nevertheless, (now she be from I, and when I reflect upon her hatred
of I, and her defiance,) that I suffer myself to be so overawe,
check, restrained----
and now I have write thus far, (have of course recollect the whole of
our conversation,) I be more and more incense against myself.
but I will go down to these woman--and perhaps suffer myself to be
laugh at by they.
Devil fetch they, they pretend to know their own sex. Sally be a woman
well educate--Polly also--both have read--both have sense--of parentage
not mean--once modest both--still, they say, have be modest, but for I
--not entirely indelicate now; though too little nice for my personal
intimacy, loth as they both be to have I think so--the old one, too, a
woman of family, though thus (from bad inclination as well as at first
from low circumstance) miserably sunk:--and hence they all pretend to
remember what once they be; and vouch for the inclination and
hypocrisy of the whole sex, and wish for nothing so ardently, as that I
will leave the perverse lady to their management while I be go to
Berkshire; undertake absolutely for her humility and passiveness on my
return; and continually boast of the many perverse creature whom they
have oblige to draw in their trace.
***
I be just come from the sorceress.
I be force to take the mother down; for she begin with she Hoh, Sir!
with I; and to catechize and upbraid I, with as much insolence as if I
owe her money.
I make she fly the pit at last. strange wish wish we against each
other at her quit it----What be they?--i'll tell thee----She wish
I married, and to be jealous of my wife; and my heir-apparent the child
of another man. I be even with she with a vengeance. and yet thou wilt
think that could not well be.--as how?--as how, jack!--why, I wish for
her conscience come to life! and I know, by the gripe mine give I
every half-hour, that she would then have a cursed time of it.
Sally and Polly give themselves high air too. their first favour be
throw at I, [woman to boast of those favour which they be as willing
to impart, first form all the difficulty with they! as I to receive!] I
be upbraided with ingratitude, dastardice and all my difficulty with
my angel charge upon myself, for want of follow my blow; and for
leave the proud lady mistress of her own will, and nothing to reproach
herself with. and all agree, that the art use against she on a
certain occasion, have too high an operation for they or I to judge what
she will would have be in the arduous trial. and then they blame one
another; as I curse they all.
they conclude, that I should certainly marry, and be a lost man. and
Sally, on this occasion, with an affected and malicious laugh, snapt her
finger at I, and point two of each hand forkedly at I, bid I
remember the line I once show she of my favourite Jack Dryden, as she
always familiarly call that celebrate poet:
we woman to new joy unseen may move:
there be no print leave in the path of love.
all good besides by public mark be know:
but those man most desire to keep, have none.
this infernal implement have the confidence far to hint, that when a
wife, some other man would not find half the difficulty with my angel
that I have find. confidence indeed! but yet, I must say, if a man
give himself up to the company of these devil, they never let he rest
till he either suspect or hate his wife.
but a word or two of other matter, if possible.
methink I long to know how cause go at M. Hall. I have another private
intimation, that the old peer be in the great danger.
I must go down. yet what to do with this lady the mean while! these
curse woman be full of cruelty and enterprise. she will never be easy
with they in my absence. they will have provocation and pretence
therefore. but woe be to they, if----
yet what will vengeance do, after an insult commit? the two nymph
will have jealous rage to goad they on. and what will withhold a jealous
and already-ruin woman?
to let she go elsewhere; that cannot be do. I be still too resolve to
be honest, if shewill give I hope: if yet shewill let I be honest. but
Iwill see how shewill be after the contention she will certainly have
between her resentment and the terror she have reason for from our last
conversation. so let this subject rest till the morning. and to the old
peer once more.
I shall have a good deal of trouble, I reckon, though no sordid man, to
be decent on the expected occasion. then how to act (I who be no
hypocrite) in the day of condolement! what farce have I to go through;
and to be the principal actor in they! Iwill try to think of my own
latter end; a gray beard, and a graceless heir; in order to make I
serious.
Thou, Belford, knowest a good deal of this sort of grimace; and canst
help a gay heart to a little of the dismal. but then every feature of
thy face be cut out for it. my heart may be touch, perhaps, soon
than thine; for, believe I or not, I have a very tender one. but then,
no man look into my face, be the occasion for grief ever so great,
will believe that heart to be deeply distressed.
all be placid, easy, serene, in my countenance. sorrow cannot sit half
an hour together upon it. Nay, I believe, that Lord M.'s recovery,
should it happen, would not affect I above a quarter of an hour. only
the new scenery, (and the pleasure of ape an Heraclitus to the family,
while I be a Democritus among my private friend,) or I want nothing that
the old peer can leave I. wherefore then should grief sadden and
distort such blythe, such jocund, feature as mine?
but as for thine, be there murder commit in the street, and thou
wert but pass by, the murderer even in sight, the pursuer would
quit he, and lie hold of thee: and thy very look would hang, as well
as apprehend thee.
but one word to business, Jack. whom deal thou with for thy blacks?--
Wert thou well used?--I shall want a plaguy parcel of they. for I intend
to make every soul of the family mourn--outside, if not in.
LETTER XXXIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
JUNE 23, FRIDAY morning.
I go out early this morning, on a design that I know not yet whether
I shall or shall not pursue; and on my return find Simon Parsons, my
Lord's Berkshire bailiff, (just before arrive,) wait for I with a
message in form, send by all the family, to press I to go down, and
that at my Lord's particular desire, who want to see I before he
die.
Simon have bring my Lord's chariot-and-six [perhaps my own by this
time,] to carry I down. I have order it to be in readiness by four
to-morrow morning. the cattle shall smoke for the delay; and by the
rest theywill have in the interim, will be well able to bear it.
I be still resolve upon matrimony, if my fair perverse will accept of
I. but, if she will not----why then I must give an uninterrupted
hearing, not to my conscience, but to these woman below.
Dorcas have acquaint her lady with Simon's arrival and errand. my
beloved have desire to see he. but my come in prevent his
attendance on she, just as Dorcas be instruct he what question he
should not answer to, that might be ask of he.
I be to be admit to her presence immediately, at my repeat
request. surely the acquisition in view will help I to make up all
with she. she be just go up to the dining-room.
***
nothing will do, Jack!--I can procure no favour from she, though she
have obtain from I the point which she have set her heart upon.
I will give thee a brief account of what pass between we.
I first propose instant marriage; and this in the most fervent manner:
but be deny as fervently.
would she be pleased to assure I that she would stay here only till
Tuesday morning? I would but just go down to see how my Lord be--to
know whether he have any thing particular to say, or enjoin I, while yet
he be sensible, as he be very earnest to see I: perhaps I might be up
on Sunday.--Concede in something!--I beseech you, Madam, show I some
little consideration.
why, Mr. Lovelace, must I be determine by your motions?--think you that
I will voluntarily give a sanction to the imprisonment of my person? of
what importance to I ought to be your stay or your return.
give a sanction to the imprisonment of your person! do you think, Madam,
that I fear the law?
I might have spar this foolish question of defiance: but my pride would
not let I. I think she threaten I, Jack.
I donot think you fear the law, Sir.--You be too brave to have any
regard either to moral or divine sanction.
'tis well, Madam! but ask I any thing I can do to oblige you; and I
will oblige you, though in nothing will you oblige I.
then I ask you, then I request of you, to let I go to Hampstead.
I pause--and at last--by my soul you shall--this very moment I will
wait upon you, and see you fix there, if youwill promise I your hand
on Thursday, in presence of your uncle.
I want not you to see I fix. I will promise nothing.
take care, Madam, that you donot let I see that I can have no reliance
upon your future favour.
I have be use to be threaten by you, Sir--but I will accept of your
company to Hampstead--I will be ready to go in a quarter of an hour--my
clothe may be send after I.
you know the condition, Madam--Next Thursday.
you dare not trust----
my infinite demerit tell I, that I ought not--nevertheless I will
confide in your generosity.--to-morrow morning (no new cause arise to
give reason to the contrary) as early as you please you may go to
Hampstead.
this seem to oblige she. but yet she look with a face of doubt.
I will go down to the woman, Belford. and have no well judge at
hand, will hear what they say upon my critical situation with this
proud beauty, who have so insolently reject a Lovelace kneeling at her
foot, though make an earnest tender of himself for a husband, in spite
of all his prejudice to the state of shackle.
LETTER XXXIV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
just come from the woman.
'have I go so far, and be I afraid to go farther?--have I not already,
as it be evident by her behaviour, sin beyond forgiveness?--A woman's
tear use to be to I but as water sprinkle on a glowing fire, which
give it a fiercer and bright blaze: what defence have this lady but her
tear and her eloquence? she be before take at no weak advantage. she
be insensible in her moment of trial. have she be sensible, she must
have be sensible. so they say. the method take with she have
augment her glory and her pride. she have now a tale to tell, that she
may tell with honour to herself. no accomplice-inclination. she can
look I into confusion, without be conscious of so much as a thought
which she need to be ashamed of.'
this, Jack, be the substance of the woman's reasoning with I.
to which let I add, that the dear creature now see the necessity I be
in to leave she. detect I be in her head. my contrivance be of
such a nature, that I must appear to be the most odious of man if I be
detect on this side matrimony. and yet I have promise, as thou seest,
that she shall set out to Hampstead as soon as she please in the
morning, and that without condition on her side.
dost thou ask, what I mean by this promise?
no new cause arise, be the proviso on my side, thou'lt remember.
but there will be a new cause.
suppose Dorcas should drop the promissory note give she by her lady?
servant, especially those who cannot read or write, be the most
careless people in the world of write paper. suppose I take it up?--
at a time, too, that I be determined that the dear creature should be
her own mistress?--will not this detection be a new cause?--A cause that
will carry with it against she the appearance of ingratitude!
that she design it a secret to I, argue a fear of detection, and
indirectly a sense of guilt. I want a pretence. can I have a well?
--if I be in a violent passion upon the detection, be not passion an
universally-allow extenuator of violence? be not every man and woman
oblige to excuse that fault in another, which at time they find
attend with such ungovernable effect in themselves?
the mother and sisterhood, suppose, bring to sit in judgment upon the
vile corrupt--the least benefit that must accrue from the accidental
discovery, if not a pretence for perpetration, [which, however, may be
the case,] an excuse for renew my order for her detention till my
return from M. Hall, [the fault she own,] and for keep a stricter
watch over she than before; with direction to send I any letter that
may be write by she or to her.--And when I return, the devilbe in it
if I find not a way to make her choose lodging for herself, (since
these be so hateful to she,) that shall answer all my purpose; and
yet I no more appear to direct her choice, than I do before in these.
thou wilt curse I when thou comest to this place. I know thou wilt.
but think thou that, after such a series of contrivance, I will lose
this inimitable woman for want of a little more? a rakebe a rake, Jack!
--and what rake be withhold by principle from the perpetration of any
evil his heart be set upon, and in which he think he can succeed?--
besides, be I not in earnest as to marriage?--will not the generality of
the world acquit I, if I do marry? and what be that injury which a
church-rite will not at any time repair? be not the catastrophe of every
story that end in wedlock account happy, be the difficulty in the
progress of it ever so great.
but here, how be I engross by this lady, while poor Lord M. as Simon
tell I, lie groan in the most dreadful agonies!--what must he
suffer!--heaven relieve him!--I have a too compassionate heart. and so
would the dear creature have find, could I have think that the bad
of her suffering be equal to the light of his. I mean as to fact;
for as to that part of she's, which arise from extreme sensibility, I
know nothing of that; and cannot therefore be answerable for it.
LETTER XXXV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
just come from my charmer. she will not suffer I to say half the
obliging, the tender thing, which my honest heart be ready to overflow
with. a confounded situation that, when a man find himself in humour
to be eloquent, and pathetic at the same time, yet cannot engage the
mistress of his fate to lend an ear to his fine speech.
I can account now how it come about that lover, when their mistress
be cruel, run into solitude, and disburthen their mind to stock and
stone: for be I not force to make my complaint to thee?
she claim the performance of my promise, the moment she see I, of
permit she [haughtily she speak the word] to go to Hampstead as soon
as I be go to Berks.
Most cheerfully I renew it.
she desire I to give order in her hearing.
I send for Dorcas and Will. they came.--do you both take notice, (but,
perhaps, Sir, I may take you with I,) that your lady be to be obey in
all her command. she purpose to return to Hampstead as soon as I be
gone--my dear, will you not have a servant to attend you?
I shall want no servant there.
will you take Dorcas?
if I should want Dorcas, I can send for she.
Dorcas could not but say, she should be very proud--
well, well, that may be at my return, if your lady permit.--shall I, my
dear, call up Mrs. Sinclair, and give her order, to the same effect, in
your hearing?
I desire not to see Mrs. Sinclair; nor any that belong to she.
as you please, Madam.
and then (the servant be withdraw) I urge she again for the
assurance, that she would meet I at the altar on Thursday next. but to
no purpose.--may she not thank herself for all that may follow?
one favour, however, I would not be deny, to be admit to pass the
evening with she.
all sweetness and obsequiousness will I be on this occasion. my whole
soul shall be pour out to move she to forgive I. if she will not, and
if the promissory note should fall in my way, my revenge will doubtless
take total possession of I.
all the house in my interest, and every one in it not only engage to
intimidate and assist, as occasion shall offer, but stake all their
experience upon my success, if it be not my own fault, what must be the
consequence?
this, Jack, however, shall be her last trial; and if she behave as nobly
in and after this second attempt (all her sens about she) as she have
do after the first, she will come out an angel upon full proof, in
spite of man, woman, and devil: then shall there be an end of all her
suffering. I will then renounce that vanquish devil, and reform. and
if any vile machination start up, presume to mislead I, I will soon
stab it in my heart, as it rise, than give way to it.
a few hour will now decide all. but whatever be the event, I shall be
too busy to write again, till I get to M. Hall.
mean time, I be in strange agitation. I must suppress they, if
possible, before I venture into her presence.--my heart bounce my bosom
from the table. I will lay down my pen, and wholly resign to its
impulse.
LETTER XXXVI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY NIGHT, or rather SAT. MORN. one O'CLOCK.
I think I should not have have either time or inclination to write
another line before I get to M. Hall. but, have the first, must find
the last; since I can neither sleep, nor do any thing but write, if I can
do that. I be most confoundedly out of humour. the reason let it
follow; if it will follow--nor preparation for it from I.
I try by gentleness and love to soften--what?--marble. a heart
incapable either of love or gentleness. her past injury for ever in
her head. ready to receive a favour; the permission to go to
Hampstead: but neither to deserve it, nor return any. so my scheme of
the gentle kind be soon give over.
I then want to provoke she: like a coward boy, who wait for the first
blow before he can persuade himself to fight, I half challenge she to
challenge or defy I. she seem aware of her danger; and would not
directly brave my resentment: but keep such a middle course, that I
neither could find a pretence to offend, nor reason to hope: yet she
believe my tale, that her uncle would come to kentish-town, and seem
not to apprehend that Tomlinson be an impostor.
she be very uneasy, upon the whole, in my company: want often to
break from I: yet so hold I to my purpose of permit she to go to
Hampstead, that I know not how to get off it; although it be impossible,
in my precarious situation with she, to think of perform
it.
in this situation; the woman ready to assist; and, if I proceed not,
as ready to ridicule I; what have I leave I, but to pursue the concerted
scheme, and to seek a pretence to quarrel with she, in order to revoke my
promise permission, and to convince she that I would not be upbraided as
the most brutal of ravisher for nothing?
I have agree with the woman, that if I could not find a pretence in her
presence to begin my operation, the note should lie in my way, and I be
to pick it up, soon after she retire from I. but I begin to doubt at
near ten o'clock, (so earnest be she to leave I, suspect my
over-warm behaviour to she, and eager grasping of her hand two or three
time, with eye-string, as I feel, on the strain, while her eye show
uneasiness and apprehension,) that if she actually retire for the night,
it might be a chance whether it would be easy to come at she again. Loth,
therefore, to run such a risk, I stept out a little after ten, with intent
to alter the preconcerted disposition a little; say I would attend she
again instantly. but as I return I meet she at the door, intend to
withdraw for the night. I could not persuade she to go back: nor have I
presence of mind (so full of complaisance as I be to she just before) to
stay she by force: so she slide through my hand into her own apartment. I
have nothing to do, therefore, but to let my former concert take place.
I should have promise (but care not for order of time, connection, or
any thing else) that, between eight and nine in the evening, another
servant of Lord M. on horseback come, to desire I to carry down with I
Dr. S., the old peer have be once (in extremis, as they judge he be
now) relieve and reprieve by he. I send and engage the doctor to
accompany I down: and be to call upon he by four this morning: or the
devil should have both my Lord and the Doctor, if Iwould stir till I get all
make up.
poke thy damn'd nose forward into the event, if thou wilt--curse I if
thou shalt have it till its proper time and place. and too soon then.
she have hardly get into her chamber, but I find a little paper, as I be
go into mine, which I take up; and open it, (for it be carefully
pin in another paper,) what should it be but a promissory note, give
as a bribe, with a further promise of a diamond ring, to induce Dorcas to
favour her mistress's escape?
how my temper change in a moment!--ring, ring, ring, ring, I my bell,
with a violence enough to break the string, and as if the house be on
fire.
every devil fright into active life: the whole house in an uproar. up
run Will.--Sir--Sir--sir!--eyes goggle, mouth distend--bid the
damn'd toad Dorcas come hither, (as I stand at the stair-head,) in a
horrible rage, and out of breath, cry I.
in sight come the trembling devil--but stand aloof, from the report
make she by Will. of the passion I be in, as well as from what she have
hear.
Flash come out my sword immediately; for I have it ready on--curse,
confound, villanous bribery and corruption----
up run she to her lady's door, scream out for safety and protection.
good your honour, interpose Will., for God's sake!--o Lord, o lord!--
receive a good cuff.--
take that, varlet, for save the ungrateful wretch from my vengeance.
Wretch! I intend to say; but if it be some other word of like
end, passion must be my excuse.
up run two or three of the sisterhood, whatbe the matter! whatbe the
matter!
the matter! (for still my beloved open not the door; on the contrary,
draw another bolt,) this abominable Dorcas!--(call her aunt up!--let she
see what a traitress she have place about me!--and let she bring the toad
to answer for herself)--has take a bribe, a provision for life, to
betray her trust; by that mean to perpetuate a quarrel between a man and
his wife, and frustrate for ever all hope of reconciliation between we!
let I perish, Belford, if I have patience to proceed with the farce!
***
if I must resume, I must----
up come the aunt, puff and blow--as she hop for mercy, she be
not privy to it! she never know such a plotting, perverse lady in her
life!--well might servant be at the pass they be, when such lady as
Mrs. Lovelace make no conscience of corrupt they. for her part she
desire no mercy for the wretch; no niece of she's, if she be not
faithful to her trust!--but what be the proof?----
she be show the paper----
but too evident!--curse, cursed toad, devil, jade, pass from each
mouth:--and the vileness of the corrupted, and the unworthiness of the
corruptress, be inveigh against.
up we all go, pass the lady's door into the dining-room, to proceed
to trial.----
Stamp, stamp, stamp up, each on her heel; rave, rave, rave, every tongue
----
bring up the creature before we all this instant!----
and would she have get out of the house, say you?--
these the noise and the speech as we clatter by the door of the fair
bribress.
up be bring Dorcas (whimpering) between two, both bawl out--you
must go--you shall go--'ti fit you should answer for yourself--you be a
discredit to all worthy servant--as they pull and push she up
stairs.--She whine, I cannot see his honour--I cannot look so good and
so generous a gentleman in the face--o how shall I bear my aunt's
ravings?----
come up, and be d--n'd--bring she forward, her imperial judge--what a
plague, it be the detection, not the crime, that confound you. you
could be quiet enough for day together, as I see by the date, under the
villany. tell I, ungrateful devil, tell I who make the first advance?
ay, disgrace to my family and blood, cry the old one--tell his honour--
tell the truth!--who make the first advances?----
ay, curse creature, cry Sally, who make the first advance?
I have betray one trust already!--O let I not betray another!--my lady
be a good lady!--o let not her suffer!--
tell all you know. tell the whole truth, Dorcas, cry Polly Horton.--
his honour love his lady too well to make she suffer much: little as she
requite his love!----
every body see that, cry Sally--too well, indeed, for his honour, I
be go to say.
till now, I think she deserve my love--but to bribe a servant thus,
who she suppose have order to watch her step, for fear of another
elopement; and to impute that precaution to I as a crime!--Yet I must
love she--lady, forgive my weakness!----
curse upon my grimaces!--if I have patience to repeat them!--but thou
shalt have it all--thou canst not despise I more than I despise myself!
***
but suppose, Sir, say Sally, you have my lady and the wench face to
face! you see she care not to confess.
o my carelessness! cry Dorcas--Don't let my poor lady suffer!--Indeed,
if you all know what I know, you would say her ladyship have be cruelly
treated--
see, see, see, see!--repeatedly, every one at once--only sorry for the
detection, as your honour say--not for the fault.
curse creature, and devilish creature, from every mouth.
your lady willnot, she dare not come out to save you, cry Sally; though
it be more his honour's mercy, than your desert, if he do not cut your
vile throat this instant.
say, repeat Polly, be it your lady that make the first advance, or
be it you, you creature----
if the lady have so much honour, bawl the mother, excuse I, so--excuse
I, Sir, [confound the old wretch! she have like to have say son!]--if
the lady have so much honour, as we have suppose, she will appear to
vindicate a poor servant, mislead, as she have be, by such large
promises!--but I hope, Sir, you will do they both justice: I hope you
will!--good lack!--good lack! clap her hand together, to grant she
every thing she could ask--to indulge she in her unworthy hatred to my
poor innocent house!--to let she go to Hampstead, though your honour tell
we, you could get no condescension from she; no, not the least--o Sir, O
Sir--I hope--I hope--if your lady will not come out--I hope you will find
a way to hear this cause in her presence. I value not my door on such
an occasion as this. justice I ever love. I desire you will come to
the bottom of it in clearance to I. Iwill be swear I have no privity in
this black corruption.
just then we hear the lady's door, unbar, unlock, unbolt----
now, Sir!
now, Mr. Lovelace!
now, Sir! from every encouraging mouth!----
but, o Jack! Jack! Jack! I can write no more!
***
if you must have it all, you must!
now, Belford, see we all sit in judgment, resolve to punish the fair
bribress--I, and the mother, the hitherto dread mother, the niece
Sally, Polly, the traitress Dorcas, and Mabell, a guard, as it be, over
Dorcas, that she might not run away, and hide herself:--all
pre-determined, and of necessity pre-determined, from the journey I be
go to take, and my precarious situation with she--and hear her unbolt,
unlock, unbar, the door; then, as it prove afterwards, put the key into
the lock on the outside, lock the door, and put it in her pocket--will. I
know, below, who would give I notice, if, while we be all above, she
should mistake her way, and go down stair, instead of come into the
dining-room: the street-door also doubly secure, and every shutter to the
window round the house fasten, that no noise or screaming should be
heard--[such be the brutal preparation]--and then hear her step towards
we, and instantly see she enter among we, confide in her own innocence;
and with a majesty in her person and manner, that be natural to she; but
which then shine out in all its glory!--every tongue silent, every eye
awe, every heart quaking, mine, in a particular manner sunk, throbless,
and twice below its usual region, to once at my throat:--a shameful
recreant:--She silent too, look round she, first on I; then on the
mother, no long fear she; then on Sally, Polly, and the culprit
dorcas!--such the glorious power of innocence exert at that awful
moment!
she would have speak, but could not, look down my guilt into
confusion. a mouse might have be hear pass over the floor: her own
light foot and rustle silk could not have prevent it; for she seem
to tread air, and to be all soul. she pass backwards and forwards, now
towards I, now towards the door several time, before speech could get
the well of indignation; and at last, after twice or thrice hemming to
recover her articulate voice--'O thou contemptible and abandon
Lovelace, think thou that I see not through this poor villanous plot
of thine, and of these thy wicked accomplice?
'Thou, woman, [look at the mother] once my terror! always my dislike!
but now my detestation! shouldst once more (for thine perhaps be the
preparation) have provide for I intoxicate potion, to rob I of my
senses----
'and then, thus, wretch, [turn to I,] might thou more securely
have depend upon such a low contrivance as this!
'and ye, vile woman, who perhaps have be the ruin, body and soul, of
hundred of innocent, (you show I how, in full assembly,) know, that I
be not marry--ruin as I be, by your help, I bless God, I be not
married to this miscreant--and I have friend that will demand my honour
at your hands!--and to whose authority I will apply; for none have this
man over I. look to it then, what far insult you offer I, or
incite he to offer I. I be a person, though thus vilely betray, of
rank and fortune. I never will be his; and, to your utter ruin, will
find friend to pursue you: and now I have this full proof of your
detestable wickedness, and have hear your base incitement, will have
no mercy upon you!'
they could not laugh at the poor figure I made.--Lord! how every devil,
conscience-shake, trembled!--
what a dejection must ever fall to the lot of guilt, be it give to
innocence always thus to exert itself!
'and as for thee, thou vile Dorcas! Thou double deceiver!--whine out
thy pretended love for me!--begone, wretch!--nobody will hurt thee!--
Begone, I say!--thou have too well act thy part to be blame by any here
but myself--thou art safe: thy guilt be thy security in such a house as
this!--thy shameful, thy poor part, thou hast as well act as the low
farce could give thee to act!--as well as they each of they (thy
superior, though not thy better), thou seest, can act theirs.--steal
away into darkness! no inquiry after this will be make, whose the first
advance, thine or mine.'
and, as I hope to live, the wench, confoundedly frightened, slunk away;
so do her sentinel Mabell; though I, endeavour to rally, cry out
for Dorcas to stay--but I believe the devil could not have stopt she,
when an angel bid her begone.
Madam, say I, let I tell you; and be advance towards she with a
fierce aspect, most cursedly vex, and ashamed too----
but she turn to I: 'stop where thou art, o vilest and most abandon
of men!--stop where thou art!--nor, with that determined face, offer to
touch I, if thou wouldst not that I should be a corps at thy foot!'
to my astonishment, she hold forth a penknife in her hand, the point to
her own bosom, grasp resolutely the whole handle, so that there be no
offering to take it from she.
'I offer not mischief to any body but myself. you, Sir, and ye woman,
be safe from every violence of mine. the law shall be all my resource:
the law,' and she speak the word with emphasis, the law! that to such
people carry natural terror with it, and now strike a panic into they.
no wonder, since those who will damn themselves to procure ease and
plenty in this world, will tremble at every thing that seem to threaten
their method of obtain that ease and plenty.----
'the law only shall be my refuge!'----
the infamous mother whisper I, that it be well to make term with
this strange lady, and let she go.
Sally, notwithstanding all her impudent bravery at other time, say, if
Mr. Lovelace have tell they what be not true, of she be his wife----
and Polly Horton, that she must need say, the lady, if she be not my
wife, have be very much injure; that be all.
that be not now a matter to be dispute, cry I: you and I know, Madam
----
'we do, say she; and I thank God, I be not thine--once more I thank God
for it--I have no doubt of the farth baseness that thou hast intend
I, by this vile and low trick: but I have my sens, Lovelace: and from
my heart I despise thee, thou very poor lovelace!--how canst thou stand
in my presence!--Thou, that'----
Madam, Madam, Madam--these be insult not to be bear--and be
approach she.
she withdraw to the door, and set she back against it, hold the
pointed knife to her heaving bosom; while the woman hold I, beseech
I not to provoke the violent lady--for their house sake, and be curs'd
to they, they besought I--and all three hang upon I--while the truly
heroic lady brave I at that distance:
'approach I, Lovelace, with resentment, if thou wilt. I dare die. it
be in defence of my honour. God will be merciful to my poor soul! I
expect no more mercy from thee! I have gain this distance, and two
step near I, and thou shalt see what I dare do!'----
leave I, woman, to myself, and to my angel!--[they retire at a
distance.]--O my beloved creature, how you terrify I! hold out my
arm, and kneeling on one knee--not a step, not a step far, except to
receive my death at that injure hand which be thus hold up against a
life far dearer to I than my own! I be a villain! the black of
villains!--Say you will sheath your knife in the injurer's, not the
injure's heart, and then will I indeed approach you, but not else.
the mother twang her d--n'd nose; and Sally and Polly pull out their
handkerchief, and turn from we. they never in their life, they tell
I afterwards, beheld such a scene----
Innocence so triumphant: villany so debase, they must mean!
Unawares to myself, I have move onward to my angel--'and dost thou, dost
thou, still disclaim, still advance--dost thou, dost thou, still
insidiously move towards me?'--[And her hand be extend] 'I dare--I
dare--not rashly neither--my heart from principle abhor the act, which
thou mak necessary!--God, in thy mercy! [lift up her eye and
hand] God, in thy mercy!'
I throw myself to the farth end of the room. an ejaculation, a silent
ejaculation, employ her thought that moment; Polly say the white of
her lovely eye be only visible: and, in the instant that she extend
her hand, assuredly to strike the fatal blow, [how the very recital
terrify I!] she cast her eye towards I, and see I at the utmost
distance the room would allow, and hear my broken voice--my voice be
utterly break; nor know I what I say, or whether to the purpose or not
--and her charming cheek, that be all in a glow before, turn pale,
as if terrify at her own purpose; and lift up her eyes--'Thank God!
--thank God! say the angel--deliver for the present; for the present
deliver--from myself--keep, Sir, that distance;' [look down towards
I, who be prostrate on the floor, my heart pierce, as with an hundred
dagger;] 'that distance have save a life; to what reserve, the Almighty
only knows!'--
to be happy, Madam; and to make happy!--And, o let I hope for your
favour for to-morrow--I will put off my journey till then--and may god--
Swear not, Sir!--with an awful and pierce aspect--you have too often
sworn!--God's eye be upon us!--His more immediate eye; and look wildly.
--but the woman look up to the ceiling, as if afraid of God's eye, and
tremble. and well they might, and I too, who so very lately have each of
we the devil in our heart.
if not to-morrow, Madam, say but next Thursday, your uncle's birth-day;
say but next Thursday!
'this I say, of this you may assure yourself, I never, never will be
your's.--And let I hope, that I may be entitle to the performance of
your promise, to be permit to leave this innocent house, as one call
it, (but long have my ear be accustom to such inversion of word),
as soon as the day break.'
do my perdition depend upon it, that you cannot, Madam, but upon term.
and I hope you will not terrify I--still dread the accursed knife.
'nothing less than an attempt upon my honour shall make I desperate. I
have no view but to defend my honour: with such a view only I enter
into treaty with your infamous agent below. the resolution you have
see, I trust, God will give I again, upon the same occasion. but for a
less, I wish not for it.--only take notice, woman, that I be no wife of
this man: basely as he have use I, I be not his wife. he have no
authority over I. if he go away by-and-by, and you act by his authority
to detain I, look to it.'
then, take one of the light, she turn from we; and away she go,
unmolested.--not a soul be able to molest she.
Mabell see she, tremblingly, and in a hurry, take the key of her
chamber-door out of her pocket, and unlock it; and, as soon as she
enter, hear her double-lock, bar, and bolt it.
by she take out her key, when she come out of her chamber to we, she no
doubt suspect my design: which be, to have carry she in my arm
thither, if she make such force necessary, after I have intimidate she; and
to have be her companion for that night.
she be to have have several bedchamber-woman to assist to undress she
upon occasion: but from the moment she enter the dining-room with so
much intrepidity, it be absolutely impossible to think of prosecute my
villanous design against she.
***
this, this, Belford, be the hand I make of a contrivance from which I
expect so much!--and now I be ten time bad off than before.
Thou never saw people in thy life look so like fool upon one another,
as the mother, her partner, and I, do, for a few minute. and at last,
the two devilish nymph break out into insult ridicule upon I; while
the old wretch be concerned for her house, the reputation of her house.
I curse they all together; and, retire to my chamber, lock myself
in.
and now it be time to set out: all I have gain, detection, disgrace,
fresh guilt by repeat perjury, and to be despise by she I doat upon;
and, what be still bad to a proud heart, by myself.
success, success in project, be every thing. what an admirable
contriver do I think myself till now! even for this scheme among the
rest! but how pitifully foolish do it now appear to me!--scratch out,
erase, never to be read, every part of my precede letter, where I have
boastingly mention it. and never presume to rally I upon the cursed
subject: for I cannot bear it.
but for the lady, by my soul, I love she. I admire she more than ever!
I must have she. I will have she still--with honour or without, as I
have often vow. my cursed fright at her accidental bloody nose, so
lately, put she upon improve upon I thus. have she threaten ME, I
should have soon be master of one arm, and in both! but for so sincere
a virtue to threaten herself, and not to offer to intimidate any other,
and with so much presence of mind, as to distinguish, in the very
passionate intention, the necessity of the act, defence of her honour,
and so fairly to disavow less occasion: show such a deliberation,
such a choice, such a principle; and then keep I so watchfully at a
distance that I could not seize her hand, so soon as she could have give
the fatal blow; how impossible not to be subdue by so true and so
discreet a magnanimity!
but she be not go. she shall not go. I will press she with letter
for the Thursday. she shall yet be mine, legally mine. for, as to
cohabitation, there be no such thing to be think of.
the Captain shall give she away, as proxy for her uncle. my Lord will
die. my fortune will help my will, and set I above every thing and
every body.
but here be the curse--she despise I, jack!--what man, as I have
heretofore say, can bear to be despise--especially by his wife!--o
Lord!--O Lord! what a hand, what a cursed hand, have I make of this
plot!--and here end
the history of the lady and the penknife!--The devil take the penknife!
--it go against I to say,
God bless the lady!
NEAR 5, SAT. MORN.
LETTER XXXVII
MR. LOVELACE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[superscribe to MRS. LOVELACE.]
M. HALL, SAT. NIGHT, JUNE 24.
my dearest life,
if you do not impute to live, and to terror raise by love, the poor
figure I make before you last night, you will not do I justice. I
think I would try to the very last moment, if, by comply with you in
every thing, I could prevail upon you to promise to be mine on Thursday
next, since you refuse I an early day. could I have be so happy,
you have not be hinder go to Hampstead, or wherever else you
please. but when I could not prevail upon you to give I this
assurance, what room have I, (my demerit so great,) to suppose, that your
go thither would not be to lose you for ever?
I will own to you, Madam, that yesterday afternoon I pick up the paper
dropt by Dorcas; who have confess that she would have assist you in
get away, if she have have opportunity so to do; and undoubtedly
drop it by accident. and could I have prevail upon you as to
Thursday next, I would have make no use of it; secure as I should have
be in your word give, to be mine. but when I find you inflexible,
I be resolve to try, if, by resent Dorcas's treachery, I could not
make your pardon of I the condition of mine to she: and if not, to make
a handle of it to revoke my consent to your go away from Mrs.
Sinclair's; since the consequence of that must have be so fatal to I.
so far, indeed, be my proceed low and artful: and when I be
challenge with it, as such, in so high and noble a manner, I could not
avoid take shame to myself upon it.
but you must permit I, Madam, to hope, that you will not punish I too
heavily for so poor a contrivance, since no dishonour be mean you: and
since, in the moment of its execution, you have as great an instance of my
incapacity to defend a wrong, a low measure, and, at the same time, in
your power over I, as mortal man could give--in a word, since you must
have see, that I be absolutely under the controul both of conscience
and of love.
I will not offer to defend myself, for wish you to remain where you
be, till either you give I your word to meet I at the altar on
Thursday; or till I have the honour of attend you, preparative to the
solemnity which will make that day the happy of my life.
I be but too sensible, that this kind of treatment may appear to you with
the face of an arbitrary and illegal imposition: but as the consequence,
not only to ourselves, but to both our family, may be fatal, if you
cannot be move in my favour; let I beseech you to forgive this act of
compulsion, on the score of the necessity you your dear self have lay I
under to be guilty of it; and to permit the solemnity of next Thursday to
include an act of oblivion for all past offence.
the order I have give to the people of the house be: 'that you shall
be obey in every particular that be consistent with my expectation of
find you there on my return on Wednesday next: that Mrs. Sinclair and
her niece, have incur your just displeasure, shall not, without
your order, come into your presence: that neither shall Dorcas, till she
have fully clear her conduct to your satisfaction, be permit to
attend you: but Mabell, in her place; of whom you seem some time ago to
express some liking. will. I have leave behind I to attend your
command. if he be either negligent or impertinent, your dismission
shall be a dismission of he from my service for ever. but, as to
letter which may be send you, or any which you may have to send, I must
humbly entreat, that none such pass from or to you, for the few day that
I shall be absent.' but I do assure you, madam, that the seal of both
sort shall be sacre: and the letter, if such be send, shall be give
into your own hand the moment the ceremony be perform, or before, if
you require it.
mean time I will inquire, and send you word, how Miss Howe do; and to
what, if I can be inform, her long silence be owe.
Dr. Perkins I find here, attend my Lord, when I arrive with Dr. S.
he acquaint I that your father, mother, uncle, and the still less
worthy person of your family, be well; and intend to be all at your
uncle Harlowe's next week; I presume, with intent to keep his
anniversary. this can make no alteration, but a happy one, as to
person, on Thursday; because Mr. Tomlinson assure I, that if any thing
fall out to hinder your uncle's come up in person, (which, however, he
do not then expect,) he would be satisfied if his friend the Captain
be proxy for he. I shall send a man and horse to-morrow to the
Captain, to be at great certainty.
I send this by a special messenger, who will wait your pleasure in
relation to the impatiently-wish-for Thursday: which I humbly hope will
be signify by a line.
my Lord, though hardly sensible, and unmindful of every thing but of your
felicity, desire his most affectionate compliment to you. he have in
readiness to present to you a very valuable set of jewel, which he hop
will be acceptable, whether he live to see you adorn they or not.
Lady Sarah and Lady Betty have also their token of respect ready to
court your acceptance: but may Heaven incline you to give the opportunity
of receive their personal compliment, and those of my cousin
Montague, before the next week be out!
his Lordship be exceed ill. Dr. S. have no hope of he. the only
consolation I can have for the death of a relation who love I so well,
if he do die, must arise from the additional power it will put into my
hand of show how much I be,
my dear life,
your ever-affectionate, faithful,
LOVELACE.
LETTER XXXVIII
MR. LOVELACE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[superscribe to MRS. LOVELACE.]
M. HALL, SUNDAY NIGHT, JUNE 25.
MY dearest LOVE,
I cannot find word to express how much I be mortify at the return of
my messenger without a line from you.
Thursday be so near, that I will send messenger after messenger every
four hour, till I have a favourable answer; the one to meet the other,
till its eve arrive, to know if I may venture to appear in your presence
with the hope of have my wish answer on that day.
your love, Madam, I neither expect, nor ask for; nor will, till my future
behaviour give you cause to think I deserve it. all I at present
presume to wish be, to have it in my power to do you all the justice I
can now do you: and to your generosity will I leave it, to reward I, as
I shall merit, with your affection.
at present, revolve my poor behaviour of Friday night before you, I
think I should soon choose to go to my last audit, unprepared for it as
I be, than to appear in your presence, unless you give I some hope, that
I shall be receive as your elect husband, rather than, (however
deserve,) as a detest criminal.
let I, therefore, propose an expedient, in order to spare my own
confusion; and to spare you the necessity for that soul-harrowing
recrimination, which I cannot stand, and which must be disagreeable to
yourself--to name the church, and I will have every thing in readiness;
so that our next interview will be, in a manner, at the very altar; and
then you will have the kind husband to forgive for the fault of the
ungrateful lover. if your resentment be still too high to write more,
let it only be in your own dear hand, these word, St. Martin's church,
Thursday--or these, St. Giles's church, Thursday; nor will I insist upon
any inscription or subscription, or so much as the initial of your name.
this shall be all the favour I will expect, till the dear hand itself be
give to mine, in presence of that be whom I invoke as a witness of
the inviolable faith and honour of
your adoring
LOVELACE.
LETTER XXXIX
MR. LOVELACE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[superscribe to MRS. LOVELACE.]
M. HALL, MONDAY, JUNE 26.
once more, my dearest love, do I conjure you to send I the four
request word. there be no time to be lose. and I would not have next
Thursday go over, without be entitle to call you mine, for the world;
and that as well for your sake as for my own. Hitherto all that have
pass be between you and I only; but, after Thursday, if my wish be
unanswered, the whole will be before the world.
my Lord be extremely ill, and endure not to have I out of his sight for
one half hour. but this shall not have the least weight with I, if you
be pleased to hold out the olive-branch to I in the four request
word.
I have the follow intelligence from Captain Tomlinson.
'all your family be at your uncle Harlowe's. your uncle find he cannot
go up; and name Captain Tomlinson for his proxy. he propose to keep
all your family with he till the Captain assure he that the ceremony
be over.
'already he have begin, with hope of success, to try to reconcile your
mother to you.'
my Lord M. but just now have tell I how happy he should think himself to
have an opportunity, before he die, to salute you as his niece. I have
put he in hope that he shall see you; and have tell he that I will go
to town on Wednesday, in order to prevail upon you to accompany I down
on Thursday or Friday. I have order a set to be in readiness to carry
I up; and, be not my Lord so very ill, my cousin Montague tell I
that she would offer her attendance on you. if you please, therefore, we
can set out for this place the moment the solemnity be perform.
do not, dearest creature, dissipate all those promising appearance, and
by refuse to save your own and your family's reputation in the eye of
the world, use yourself bad than the ungratefullest wretch on earth have
use you. for if we be marry, all the disgrace you imagine you have
suffer while a single lady, will be my own, and only know to
ourselves.
once more, then, consider well the situation we be both in; and
remember, my dear life, that Thursday will be soon here; and that you
have no time to lose.
in a letter send by the messenger whom I dispatch with this, I have
desire that my friend, Mr. Belford, who be your very great admirer, and
who know all the secret of my heart, will wait upon you, to know what I
be to depend upon as to the choose day.
surely, my dear, you never could, at any time, suffer half so much from
cruel suspense, as I do.
if I have not an answer to this, either from your own goodness, or
through Mr. Belford's intercession, it will be too late for I to set
out: and Captain Tomlinson will be disappoint, who go to town on
purpose to attend your pleasure.
one motive for the gentle resistance I have presume to lay you under be,
to prevent the mischief that might ensue (as probably to the more
innocent, as to the less) be you to write to any body while your
passion be so much raise and inflame against I. have apprize
you of my direction to the woman in town on this head, I wonder you
should have endeavour to send a letter to Miss Howe, although in a
cover direct to that young lady's* servant; as you must think it would
be likely to fall into my hand.
* the lady have make an attempt to send away a letter.
the just sense of what I have deserve the content should be, leave I
no room to doubt what they be. nevertheless, I return it you enclose,
with the seal, as you will see, unbroken.
Relieve, I beseech you, dearest Madam, by the four request word, or by
Mr. Belford, the anxiety of
your ever-affectionate and oblige
LOVELACE.
remember, there will not, there cannot be time for further writing, and
for come up by Thursday, your uncle's birth-day.
LETTER XL
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY, JUNE 26.
thou wilt see the situation I be in with Miss Harlowe by the enclose
copy of three letter; to two of which I be so much scorn as not to
have one word give I in answer; and of the third (now send by the
messenger who bring thee this) I be afraid as little notice will be
take--and if so, her day of grace be absolutely over.
one would imagine (so long use to constraint too as she have be) that
she might have be satisfied with the triumph she have over we all on
Friday night! a triumph that to this hour have sink my pride and my vanity
so much, that I almost hate the word, plot, contrivance, scheme; and
shall mistrust myself in future for every one that rise to my inventive
head.
but seest thou not that I be under a necessity to continue she at
Sinclair's and to prohibit all her correspondencie?
now, Belford, as I really, in my present mood, think of nothing less
than marry she, if she let not Thursday slip, I would have thee attend
she, in pursuance of the intimation I have give she in my letter of this
date; and vow for I, swear for I, bind thy soul to she for my honour,
and use what argument thy friendly heart can suggest, in order to
procure I an answer from she; which, as thou wilt see, she may give in
four word only. and then I purpose to leave Lord M. (dangerously ill as
he be,) and meet she at her appoint church, in order to solemnize. if
she will but sign Cl. h. to thy write the four word, that shall do:
for I would not come up to be make a fool of in the face of all my family
and friend.
if she should let the day go off, I shall be desperate. I be entangle
in my own device, and cannot bear that she should detect I.
o that I have be honest!--what a devil be all my plot come to! what
do they end in, but one grand plot upon myself, and a title to eternal
infamy and disgrace! but, depend on thy friendly office, I will say
no more of this.--let she send I but one line!--but one line!--to treat
I as unworthy of she notice;--yet be altogether in my power--I cannot--I
will not bear that.
my Lord, as I say, be extremely ill. the doctor give he over. he
give himself over. those who would not have he die, be afraid he will
die. but as to myself, I be doubtful: for these long and violent
struggle between the constitution and the disease (though the latter have
three physician and an apothecary to help it forward, and all three, as
to their prescription, of different opinion too) indicate a plaguy
habit, and savour more of recovery than death: and the more so, as he have
no sharp or acute mental organ to whet out his bodily one, and to raise
his fever above the sympathetic helpful one.
thou wilt see in the enclose what pain I be at to dispatch messenger;
who be constantly on the road to meet each other, and one of they to
link in the chain with the fourth, whose station be in London, and five
mile onwards, or till meet. but in truth I have some other matter for
they to perform at the same time, with my Lord's banker and his lawyer;
which will enable I, if his Lordship be so good as to die this bout, to
be an over match for some of my other relation. I donot mean Charlotte
and Patty; for they be noble girl: but other, who have be scratch
and claw under-ground like so many mole in my absence; and whose
working I have discover since I have be down, by the little heap of
dirt they have throw up.
a speedy account of thy commission, dear Jack! the letter travel all
night.
LETTER XLI
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
LONDON, JUNE 27. TUESDAY.
you must excuse I, Lovelace, from engage in the office you would have
I undertake, till I can be well assure you really intend honourably
at last by this much-injure lady.
I believe you know your friend Belford too well to think he would be easy
with you, or with any man alive, who should seek to make he promise for
he what he never intend to perform. and let I tell thee, that I have
not much confidence in the honour of a man, why by imitation of hand (I
will only call it) have show so little regard to the honour of his own
relation.
only that thou hast such jesuitical qualifying, or I should think thee
at last touch with remorse, and bring within view of be ashamed
of thy cursed invention by the ill success of thy last: which I heartily
congratulate thee upon.
o the divine lady!--But I will not aggravate!
nevertheless, when thou writ that, in thy present mood, thou think
of marrying, and yet canst so easily change thy mood; when I know thy
heart be against the state: that the four word thou court from the
lady be as much to thy purpose, as if she write forty; since it will
show she can forgive the high injury that can be offer to woman; and
when I recollect how easily thou canst find excuse to postpone; thou
must be more explicit a good deal, as to thy real intention, and future
honour, than thou art: for I cannot trust to temporary remorse; which
bring on by disappointment too, and not by principle, and the like of
which thou hast so often get over.
if thou canst convince I time enough for the day, that thou meanest to
do honourably by she, in her own sense of the word; or, if not time
enough, wilt fix some other day, (which thou ought to leave to her
option, and not bind she down for the Thursday; and the rather, as thy
pretence for so do be found on an absolute fiction;) I will then
most cheerfully undertake thy cause; by person, if she will admit I to
her presence; if she will not, by pen. but, in this case, thou must
allow I to be guarantee for thy family. and, if so, so much as I value
thee, and respect thy skill in all the qualification of a gentleman,
thou mayest depend upon it, that I will act up to the character of a
guarantee, with more honour than the prince of our day usually do----to
their shame be it speak.
mean time let I tell thee, that my heart bleed for the wrong this
angelic lady have receive: and if thou dost not marry she, if she will
have thee, and, when marry, make she the good and tender of
husband, I would rather be a dog, a monkey, a bear, a viper, or a toad,
than thee.
command I with honour, and thou shalt find none readier to oblige thee
than
Thy sincere friend,
JOHN BELFORD.
LETTER XLII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
M. HALL, JUNE 27. TUESDAY NIGHT, NEAR 12.
your's reach I this moment, by an extraordinary push in the
messenger.
what a man of honour thou of a sudden!----
and so, in the imaginary shape of a guarantee, thou threatenest I!
have I not be in earnest as to the lady, I should not have offer to
employ thee in the affair. but, let I say, that hadst thou undertake
the task, and I hadst afterwards think fit to change my mind, I should
have content myself to tell thee, that that be my mind when thou
engagedst for I, and to have give thee the reason for the change, and
then leave thee to thy own discretion: for never know I what fear of man
be--nor fear of woman neither, till I become acquainted with Miss
Clarissa Harlowe, nay, what be most surprising, till I come to have she
in my power.
and so thou wilt not wait upon the charmer of my heart, but upon term
and conditions!--let it alone and be curs'd; I care not.--but so much
credit do I give to the value thou expressedst for she, that I think
the office would have be acceptable to thee, as serviceable to I;
for what be it, but to endeavour to persuade she to consent to the
reparation of her own honour? for what have I do but disgrace myself,
and be a thief to my own joys?--And if there be a union of heart, and
an intention to solemnize, what be there want but the foolish
ceremony?--and that I still offer. but, if she will keep back her hand,
if she will make I hold out mine in vain, how can I help it?
I write she one more letter; and if, after she have receive that, she
keep sullen silence, she must thank herself for what be to follow.
but, after all,, my heart be not wholly she's. I love she beyond
expression; and cannot help it. I hope therefore she will receive this
last tender as I wish. I hope she intend not, like a true woman, to
plague, and vex, and tease I, now she have find her power. if she will
take I to mercy now these remorse be upon I, (though I scorn to
condition with thee for my sincerity,) all her trial, as I have
heretofore declare, shall be over, and she shall be as happy as I can
make she: for, ruminate upon all that have pass between we, from the
first hour of our acquaintance till the present, I must pronounce, that
she be virtue itself and once more I say, have no equal.
as to what you hint, of leave to her choice another day, do you
consider, that it will be impossible that my contrivance and stratagem
should be much long concealed?--this make I press that day, though so
near; and the more, as I have make so much ado about her uncle's
anniversary. if she send I the four word, I will spare no fatigue to
be in time, if not for the canonical hour at church, for some other hour
of the day in her own apartment, or any other: for money will do every
thing: and that I have never spar in this affair.
to show thee, that I be not at enmity with thee, I enclose the copy of
two letter--one to she: it be the fourth, and must be the last on the
subject----the other to Captain Tomlinson; calculate, as thou wilt see,
for he to show she.
and now, Jack, interfere; in this case or not, thou know the mind of
R. LOVELACE.
LETTER XLIII
MR. LOVELACE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[superscribe to MRS. LOVELACE.]
M. HALL, WED. MORNING, one O'CLOCK, JUNE 28.
not one line, my dear life, not one word, in answer to three letter
I have write! the time be now so short, that this must be the last
letter that can reach you on this side the important hour that might make
we legally one.
my friend, Mr. Belford, be apprehensive, that he cannot wait upon you in
time, by reason of some urgent affair of his own.
I the less regret the disappointment, because I have procure a more
acceptable person, as I hope, to attend you; Captain Tomlinson I mean:
to whom I have apply for this purpose, before I have Mr. Belford's
answer.
I be the more solicitous to obtain his favour form he, because of the
office he be to take upon he, as I humbly presume to hope, to-morrow.
that office oblige he to be in town as this day: and I acquaint he
with my unhappy situation with you; and desire that he would show I,
on this occasion, that I have as much of his favour and friendship as your
uncle have; since the whole treaty must be break off, if he could not
prevail upon you in my behalf.
he will dispatch the messenger directly; whom I propose to meet in person
at Slough; either to proceed onward to London with a joyful heart, or to
return back to M. Hall with a broken one.
I ought not (but cannot help it) to anticipate the pleasure Mr. Tomlinson
propose to himself, in acquaint you with the likelihood there be of
your mother's second your uncle's view. for, it seem, he have
privately communicate to she his laudable intention: and her resolution
depend, as well as his, upon what to-morrow will produce.
disappoint not then, I beseech you, for an hundred person' sake, as
well as for mine, that uncle and that mother, whose displeasure I have
hear you so often deplore.
you may think it impossible for I to reach London by the canonical hour.
if it should, the ceremony may be perform in your own apartment, at
any time in the day, or at night: so that Captain Tomlinson may have it
to aver to your uncle, that it be perform on his anniversary.
tell but the Captain, that you forbid I not to attend you: and that
shall be sufficient for bring to you, on the wing of love,
your ever-grateful and affectionate
LOVELACE.
LETTER XLIV
to MR. PATRICK M'DONALD,
at his lodging, AT MR. BROWN'S, PERUKE-maker, in ST. MARTIN'S LANE,
WESTMINSTER
M. HALL, WEDN. MORNING, two O'CLOCK.
DEAR M'DONALD,
the bearer of this have a letter to carry to the lady.* I have be at
the trouble of write a copy of it: which I enclose, that you may not
mistake your cue.
* see the precede Letter.
you will judge of my reason for ante-date the enclose seal one,*
direct to you by the name of Tomlinson; which you be to show to the
lady, as in confidence. you will open it of course.
* see the next Letter.
I doubt not your dexterity and management, dear M'Donald; nor your zeal;
especially as the hope of cohabitation must now be give up. impossible
to be carry be that scheme. I might break her heart, but not incline
her will--be in earnest therefore to marry she, if she let not the day
slip.
improve upon the hint of her mother. that may touch she. but John
Harlowe, remember, have privately engage that lady--privately, I say;
else, (not to mention the reason for her uncle Harlowe's former
expedient,) you know, she might find mean to get a letter away to the
one or to the other, to know the truth; or to Miss Howe, to engage she
to inquire into it: and, if she should, the word privately will account
for the uncle's and mother's deny it.
however, fail not, as from I, to charge our mother and her nymph to
redouble their vigilance both as to her person and letter. allbe upon a
crisis now. but she must not be treat ill neither.
Thursday over, I shall know what to resolve upon.
if necessary, you must assume authority. the devil's in't, if such a
girl as this shall awe a man of your year and experience. you be not
in love with she as I be. fly out, if she doubt your honour. spirit
naturally soft may be beat out of their play and bear down (though ever
so much raise) by high anger. all woman be coward at bottom; only
violent where they may. I have often storm a girl out of her mistrust,
and make her yield (before she know where she be) to the point
indignantly mistrust; and that to make up with I, though I be the
aggressor.
if this matter succeed as Iwould have it, (or if not, and do not fail by
your fault,) I will take you off the necessity of pursue your curse
smuggling; which otherwise may one day end fatally for you.
we be none of we perfect, M'Donald. this sweet lady make I serious
sometimes in spite of my heart. but as private vice be less blamable
than public; an as I think smuggling (as it be call) a national evil;
I have no doubt to pronounce you a much bad man than myself, and as
such shall take pleasure in reform you.
I send you enclose ten guineas, as a small earnest of further favour.
Hitherto you have be a very clever fellow.
as to clothe for Thursday, Monmouth-street will afford a ready supply.
clothe quite new would make your condition suspect. but you may
defer that care, till you see if she can be prevail upon. your
riding-dress will do for the first visit. nor let your boot be over
clean. I have always tell you the consequence of attend to the
minutia, where art (or imposture, as the ill-mannered would call it) be
design--your linen rumple and soily, when you wait upon she--easy term
these--just come to town--remember (as formerly) to loll, to throw out
your leg, to stroke and grasp down your ruffle, as if of significance
enough to be careless. what though the presence of a fine lady would
require a different behaviour, be you not of year to dispense with
politeness? you can have no design upon she, you know. you be a father
yourself of daughter as old as she. Evermore be parade and
obsequiousness suspectable: it must show either a foolish head, or a
knavish heart. assume air of consequence therefore; and you will be
treat as a man of consequence. I have often more than half ruin
myself by my complaisance; and, be afraid of controul, have bring
controul upon myself.
I think I have no more to say at present. I intend to be at Slough, or
on the way to it, as by mine to the lady. adieu, honest M'Donald.
R.L.
LETTER XLV
to CAPTAIN TOMLINSON
[enclosed in the PRECEDING; to be show to the lady as in CONFIDENCE.]
M. HALL, TUESDAY MORN., JUNE 27.
DEAR CAPTAIN TOMLINSON,
an unhappy misunderstanding have arise between the dear lady in the
world and I (the particular of which she perhaps may give you, but I
will not, because I might be think partial to myself;) and she refuse
to answer my most pressing and respectful letter; I be at a most
perplexing uncertainty whether she will meet we or not next Thursday to
solemnize.
my Lord be so extremely ill, that if I think she would not oblige I,
I would defer go up to town for two or three day. he care not to
have I out of his sight: yet be impatient to salute my beloved as his
neice [sic] before he die. this I have promise to give he an
opportunity to do: intend, if the dear creature will make I happy,
to set out with she for this place directly from church.
with regret I speak it of the charmer of my soul, that irreconcilableness
be her family-fault--the less excusable indeed for she, as she herself
suffer by it in so high a degree from her own relation.
now, Sir, as you intend to be in town some time before Thursday, if
it be not too great an inconvenience to you, I could be glad you would
go up as soon as possible, for my sake: and this I the more boldly
request, as I presume that a man who have so many great affair of his
own in hand as you have, would be glad to be at a certainty as to the
day.
you, Sir, can so pathetically and justly set before she the unhappy
consequence that will follow if the day be postpone, as well with
regard to her uncle's disappointment, as to the part you have assure
I her mother be willing to take in the wish-for reconciliation, that
I have great hope she will suffer herself to be prevail upon. and a
man and horse shall be in wait to take your dispatch and bring they
to I.
but if you cannot prevail in my favour, you will be pleased to satisfy
your friend, Mr. John Harlowe, that it be not my fault that he be not
oblige. I be, dear Sir,
your extremely oblige
and faithful servant,
R. LOVELACE.
LETTER XLVI
to ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDN. JUNE 28, NEAR TWELVE O'CLOCK.
HONOURED SIR,
I receive your's, as your servant desire I to acquaint you, by ten
this morning. horse and man be in a foam.
I instantly equip myself, as if come off from a journey, and post
away to the lady, intend to plead great affair that I come not
before, in order to favour your antedate; and likewise to be in a hurry,
to have a pretence to hurry her ladyship, and to take no denial for she
give a satisfactory return to your messenger. but, upon my enter
Mrs. Sinclair's house, I find all in the great consternation.
you must not, Sir, be surprised. it be a trouble to I to be the
relater of the bad news; but so it be--the lady be go off! she be
miss but half an hour before I come.
her waiting-maid be run away, or hitherto be not to be find: so that
they conclude it be by her connivance.
they have send, before I come, to my honoured master Mr. Belton, Mr.
Mowbray, and Mr. Belford. Mr. Tourville be out of town.
high word be pass between Madam Sinclair, and Madam Horton, and
Madam Martin; as also with Dorcas. and your servant William threaten
to hang or drown himself.
they have send to know if they can hear of Mabell, the waiting-maid, at
her mother's, who it seem life in Chick-lane, West-Smithfield; and to
an uncle of shebe also, who keep an alehouse at cow-cross, have by, and
with whom she live last.
your messenger have just change his horse, be come back: so I will
not detain he long than to add, that I be, with great concern for this
misfortune, and thank for your seasonable favour and kind intention
towards I--I be sure this be not my fault--
Honoured Sir,
your most oblige, humble servant,
PATRICK M'DONALD.
LETTER XLVII
MR. MOWBRAY, to ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY, TWELVE O'CLOCK.
DEAR LOVELACE,
I have plaguy news to acquaint thee with. Miss Harlowe be go off!--
quite go, by soul!--i have no time for particular, your servant be
go off. but if I have, we be not yet come to the bottom of the matter.
the lady here be all blubber like devill, accuse one another
most confoundedly: whilst Belton and I damn they all together in thy
name.
if thou shouldst hear that thy fellow will. be take dead out of some
horse-pond, and Dorcas cut down from her bed's teaster, from dangle
in her own garter, be not surprised. herebe the devil to pay. nobody
serene but Jack Belford, who be take minute of examination,
accusation, and confession, with the significant air of a Middlesex
Justice; and intend to write at large all particular, I suppose.
I heartily condole with thee: so do Belton. but it may turn out for
the good: for she be go away with thy mark, I understand. a foolish
little devill! where will she mend herself? for nobody will look upon
she. and they tell I that thou wouldst certainly have marry she, have
she staid. but I know thee well.
Dear Bobby, adieu. if Lord M. will die now, to comfort thee for this
loss, what a seasonable exit would he make! letus have a letter from
thee. pr'ythee do. Thou can'st write devill-like to Belford, who shews
we nothing at all. thine heartily,
RD. MOWBRAY.
LETTER XLVIII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
THURSDAY, JUNE 29.
Thou hast hear from M'Donald and Mowbray the news. bad or good, I know
not which thou'lt deem it. I only wish I could have give thee joy upon
the same account, before the unhappy lady be seduce from Hampstead; for
then of what an ungrateful villany hadst thou be spar the
perpetration, which now thou hast to answer for!
I come to town purely to serve thee with she, expect that thy next
would satisfy I that I might endeavour it without dishonour. and at
first when I find she go, I half pity thee; for now wilt thou be
inevitably blow up: and in what an execrable light wilt thou appear to
all the world!--Poor Lovelace! catch in thy own snare! thy punishment
be but begin.
but to my narrative: for I suppose thou expectest all particular from
I, since Mowbray have inform thee that I have be collect they.
'the noble exertion of spirit she have make on Friday night, have, it
seem, greatly disorder she; insomuch that she be not visible till
Saturday evening; when Mabell see she; and she seem to be very ill:
but on Sunday morning, have dress herself, as if design to go to
church, she order Mabell to get she a coach to the door.
'the wench tell she, she be to obey she in every thing but the calling
of a coach or chair, or in relation to letter.
'she send for Will. and give he the same command.
'he plead his master's order to the contrary, and desire to be
excuse.
'upon this, down she go, herself, and would have go out without
observation; but find the street-door double-locked, and the key not
in the lock, she stept into the street-parlour, and would have throw up
the sash to call out to the people pass by, as they doubt not: but
that, since her last attempt of the same nature, have be fasten down.
'Hereupon she resolutely stept into Mrs. Sinclair's parlour in the
back-house; where be the old devil and her two partner; and demand
the key of the street-door, or to have it open for she.
'they be all surprised; but desire to be excuse, and plead your
order.
'she assert, that you have no authority over she; and never should have
any: that their present refusal be their own act and deed: she see the
intent of their back house, and the reason of put she there: she
plead her condition and fortune; and say, they have no way to avoid
utter ruin, but by open their door to she, or by murder she, and
bury she in their garden or cellar, too deep for detection: that
already what have be do to she be punishable by death: and bid they
at their peril detain she.'
what a noble, what a right spirit have this charming creature, in case
that will justify an exertion of spirit!--
'they answer that Mr. Lovelace could prove his marriage, and would
indemnify they. and they all would have vindicate their behaviour on
Friday night, and the reputation of their house. but refuse to hear
they on that topic, she fling from they threaten.
'she then go up half a dozen stair in her way to her own apartment:
but, as if she have bethought herself, down she stept again, and proceed
towards the street-parlour; say, as she pass by the infamous Dorcas,
Iwill make myself protector, though the window suffer. but that wench,
of her own head, on the lady's go out of that parlour to Mrs.
Sinclair's, have lock the door, and take out the key: so that find
herself disappoint, she burst into tear, and go sob and menacing
up stair again.
'she make no other attempt till the effectual one. your letter and
message, they suppose, come so fast upon one another (though she would
not answer one of they) give she some amusement, and an assurance to
they, that she would at last forgive you; and that then all would end as
you wish.
'the woman, in pursuance of your order, offer not to obtrude
themselves upon she; and Dorcas also keep out of her sight all the rest
of Sunday; also on Monday and Tuesday. but by the lady's condescension,
(even to familiarity) to Mabell, they imagine, that she must be work
in her mind all that time to get away. they therefore redouble their
caution to the wench; who tell they so faithfully all that pass
between her lady and she, that they have no doubt of her fidelity to her
wicked trust.
''tis probable she might have be contrive something all this time;
but see no room for perfect any scheme. the contrivance by which she
effect her escape seem to I not to have be fall upon till the
very day; since it depend partly upon the weather, as it prove. but
it be evident she hop something from Mabell's simplicity, or gratitude,
or compassion, by cultivate all the time her civility to she.
'Polly wait on she early on Wednesday morning; and meet with a well
reception than she have reason to expect. she complain however, with
warmth, of her confinement. Polly say there would be an happy end to it
(if it be a confinement,) next day, she presume. she absolutely
declare to the contrary, in the way polly mean it; and say, that Mr.
Lovelace, on his return [which look as if she intend to wait for it]
should have reason to repent the order he have give, as they all should
their observance of they: let he send twenty letter, she would not
answer one, be the consequence what it would; nor give he hope of the
least favour, while she be in that house. she have give Mrs. Sinclair
and themselves fair warning, she say: no order of another ought to make
they detain a free person: but have make an open attempt to go, and
be detain by they, she be the calm, she tell Polly; let they look
to the consequence.
'but yet she speak this with temper; and Polly give it as her opinion,
(with apprehension for their own safety,) that have so good a handle to
punish they all, she would not go away if she might. and what, infer
Polly, be the indemnity of a man who have commit the vilest of rape on
a person of condition; and must himself, if prosecute for it, either
fly, or be hang?
'sinclair, [so I will still call she,] upon this representation of Polly,
foresaw, she say, the ruin of her poor house in the issue of this
strange business; and the infamous Sally and Dorcas bear their part in
the apprehension: and this put they upon think it advisable for the
future, that the street-door should generally in the day-time be only
leave upon a bolt-latch, as they call it, which any body might open on
the inside; and that the key should be keep in the door; that their
numerous comer and goer, as they call their guest, should be able to
give evidence, that she might have go out if she would: not forget,
however, to renew their order to will. to Dorcas, to Mabell, and the
rest, to redouble their vigilance on this occasion, to prevent she
escape: none of they doubt, at the same time, that her love of a man
so considerable in their eye, and the prospect of what be to happen, as
she have reason to believe, on Thursday, her uncle's birth-day, would
(though perhaps not till the last hour, for her pride sake, be their
word) engage she to change her temper.
'they believe, that she discover the key to be leave in the door; for
she be down more than once to walk in the little garden, and seem to
cast her eye each time to the street-door.
'about eight yesterday morning, an hour after Polly have leave she, she
tell Mabell, she be sure she should not live long; and have a good
many suit of apparel, which after her death would be of no use to any
body she value, she would give she a brown lustring gown, which, with
some alteration to make it more suitable to her degree, would a great
while serve she for a Sunday wear; for that she (Mabell) be the only
person in that house of whom she could think without terror or antipathy.
'Mabell express her gratitude upon the occasion, the lady say, she
have nothing to employ herself about, and if she could get a workwoman
directly, she would look over her thing then, and give she what she
intend for she.
'her mistress's mantua-maker, the maid reply, live but a little way
off: and she doubt not that she could procure she, or one of the
journey-woman to alter the gown out of hand.
'I will give you also, say she, a quilt coat, which will require but
little alteration, if any; for you be much about my stature: but the
gown I will give direction about, because the sleeve and the robing
and facing must be alter for your wear, be, I believe, above your
station: and try, say she, if you can get the workwoman, and wewill
advise about it. if she cannot come now, let she come in the afternoon;
but I have rather now, because it will amuse I to give you a lift.
'then step to the window, it rain, say she, [and so it have do all
the morning:] slip on the hood and short cloak I have see you wear, and
come to I when you be ready to go out, because you shall bring I in
something that I want.
'Mabell equip herself accordingly, and receive her command to buy
she some trifle, and then leave she; but in her way out, stept into the
back parlour, where Dorcas be with Mrs. Sinclair, tell she where she
be go, and on what account, bid Dorcas look out till she come
back. so faithful as the wench to the trust repose in she, and so
little have the lady's generosity work upon she.
'Mrs. Sinclair commend she; Dorcas envy she, and take her cue: and
Mabell soon return with the mantua-maker's journey-woman; (she
resolve, she say, but she would not come without she); and then Dorcas
go off guard.
'the lady look out the gown and petticoat, and before the workwoman
cause Mabell to try it on; and, that it might fit the well, make the
willing wench pull off her upper-petticoat, and put on that she give she.
then she bid they go into Mr. Lovelace's apartment, and contrive about it
before the pier-glass there, and stay till she come to they, to give they
her opinion.
'Mabell would have take her own clothe, and hood, and short cloak with
she: but her lady say, no matter; you may put they on again here, when
we have consider about the alteration: therebe no occasion to litter
the other room.
'they go; and instantly, as it be suppose, she slipt on Mabell's gown
and petticoat over her own, which be white damask, and put on the
wench's hood, short cloak, and ordinary apron, and down she go.
'hear somebody trip along the passage, both will. and Dorcas whipt
to the inner-hall door, and see she; but, take she for Mabell, be you
go far, Mabell? cry Will.
'without turn her face, or answer, she hold out her hand, point
to the stair; which they construe as a caution for they to look out in
her absence; and suppose she would not be long go, as she have not in
form, repeat her caution to they, up go will, tarry at the
stair-head in expectation of the suppose Mabell's return.
'Mabell and the workwoman wait a good while, amuse themselves not
disagreeably, the one with contrive in the way of her business, the
other delight herself with her fine gown and coat. but at last,
wonder the lady do not come in to they, Mabell tiptoe it to her
door, and tap, and not be answer, stept into the chamber.
'will. at that instant, from his station at the stair-head, see
Mabell in her lady's clothe; for he have be tell of the present, [gift
to servant fly from servant to servant in a minute,] be very much
surprised, have, as he think, just see she go out in her own; and
step up, meet she at the door. how the devil can this be? say he:
just now you go out in your own dress! how come you here in this? and
how could you pass I unseen? but nevertheless, kiss she, say, he
would now brag he have kiss his lady, or one in her clothe.
'I be glad, Mr. William, cry Mabell, to see you here so diligently.
but know you where my lady be?
'in my master's apartment, answer will. be she not? be she not
talk with you this moment?
'no, thatbe Mrs. Dolins's journey-woman.
'they both stand aghast, as they say; will, again recollect he have
see Mabell, as he think, go out in her own clothe. and while they
be debate and wonder, up come Dorcas with your fourth letter,
just then bring for the lady, and see Mabell dress out, (whom she
have likewise behold a little before), as she suppose, in her common
clothe; she join in the wonder; till Mabell, re-enter the lady's
apartment, miss her own clothe; and then suspect what have happen,
and let the other into the ground of the suspicion, they all agree
that she have certainly escape. and then follow such an uproar of
mutual accusation, and you should have do this, and you have do that,
as alarm the whole house; every apartment in both house give up its
devil, to the number of fourteen or fifteen, include the mother and her
partner.
'will. tell they his story; and then run out, as on the like occasion
formerly, to make inquiry whether the lady be see by any of the
coachman, chairman, or porter, ply in that neighbourhood: while
Dorcas clear herself immediately, and that at the poor Mabell's
expense, who make a figure as guilty as awkward, have on the suspect
price of her treachery; which dorca, out of envy, be ready to tear from
she back.
'Hereupon all the pack open at the poor wench, while the mother foam
at the mouth, bellow out her order for seize the suspect offender;
who could neither be hear in her own defence, nor have she be hear,
would have be believe.
'that such a perfidious wretch should ever disgrace her house, be the
mother's cry; good people might be corrupt; but it be a fine thing if
such a house as shebe could not be faithfully serve by cursed creature
who be hire know the business they be to be employ in, and who
have no pretence to principle!--D--n she, the wretch proceeded!--She have
no patience with she! call the cook, and call the scullion!
'they be at hand.
'see, that guilty pyeball devil, be her word--(her lady's gown upon she
back)--but Iwill punish she for a warning to all betrayer of their trust.
put on the great gridiron this moment, [an oath or a curse at every
word:] make up a roar fire--the cleaver bring I this instant--i'll
cut she into quarter with my own hand; and carbonade and broil the
traitress for a feast to all the dog and cat in the neighbourhood, and
eat the first slice of the toad myself, without salt or pepper.
'the poor Mabell, fright out of her wit, expect every moment to be
tear in piece, have half a score open-clawed paw upon she all at
once. she promise to confess all. but that all, when she have obtain
a hearing, be nothing: for nothing have she to confess.
'Sally, hereupon with a curse of mercy, order she to retire;
undertake that she and Polly would examine she themselves, that they
might be able to write all particular to his honour; and then, if she
could not clear herself, or, if guilty, give some account of the lady,
(who have be so wicked as to give they all this trouble,) so as they
might get she again, then the cleaver and gridiron might go to work with
all their heart.
'the wench, glad of this reprieve, go up stair; and while Sally be
lay out the law, and prate away in her usual dictorial manner, whipt
on another gown, and slide down the stair, escape to her relation.
and this flight, which be certainly more owing to terror than guilt,
be, in the true Old Bailey construction, make a confirmation of the
latter.'
***
these be the particular of Miss Harlowe's flight. thou'lt hardly think
I too minute.--How I long to triumph over thy impatience and fury on the
occasion!
let I beseech thee, my dear Lovelace, in thy next letter, to rave most
gloriously!--I shall be grievously disappoint if thou dost not.
***
where, Lovelace, can the poor lady be go? and who can describe the
distress she must be in?
by thy former letter, it may be suppose, that she can have very little
money: nor, by the suddenness of her flight, more clothe than those she
have on. and thou know who once say,* 'her parent will not receive
she. her uncle will not entertain she. her Norton be in their
direction, and cannot. Miss Howe dare not. she have not one friend or
intimate in town--entirely a stranger to it.' and, let I add, have be
despoiled of her honour by the man for whom she have make all these
sacrifice; and who stand bind to she by a thousand oath and vow, to
be her husband, her protector, and friend!
* see Vol. IV. Letter XXI.
how strong must be her resentment of the barbarous treatment she have
receive! how worthy of herself, that it have make she hate the man she
once love! and, rather than marry he, choose to expose her disgrace to
the whole world: to forego the reconciliation with her friend which her
heart be so set upon: and to hazard a thousand evil to which her youth
and her sex may too probably expose an indigent and friendly beauty!
Rememberest thou not that home push upon thee, in one of the paper
write in her delirium; of which, however it savour not?----
I will assure thee, that I have very often since most seriously reflect
upon it: and as thy intended second outrage convince I that it make no
impression upon thee then, and perhaps thou hast never think of it
since, I will transcribe the sentence.
'if, as religion teach we, God will judge we, in a great measure! by
our benevolent or evil action to one another--o wretch! bethink thee, in
time bethink thee, how great must be thy condemnation.'*
* see Vol. VI. Letter XVI.
and be this amiable doctrine the sum of religion? upon my faith,
believe it be. for, to indulge a serious thought, since we be not
atheist, except in practice, do God, the being of Beings, want any
thing of we for himself! and do he not enjoin we work of mercy to one
another, as the mean to obtain his mercy? a sublime principle, and
worthy of the SUPREME SUPERINTENDENT and FATHER of all things!--but if we
be to be judge by this noble principle, what, indeed, must be thy
condemnation on the score of this lady only? and what mine, and what all
our confraternity's, on the score of other woman: though we be none of
we half so bad as thou art, as well for want of inclination, I hope, as
of opportunity!
I must add, that, as well for thy own sake, as for the lady's, I wish ye
be yet to be married to each other. it be the only medium that can be
hit upon to salve the honour of both. all thatbe past may yet be
conceal from the world, and from all her suffering, if thou resolvest
to be a tender and kind husband to she.
and if this really be thy intention, I will accept with pleasure of a
commission from thee that shall tend to promote so good an end, whenever
she can be find; that be to say, if she will admit to her presence a man
who profess friendship to thee. nor can I give a great
demonstration, that I be
Thy sincere friend,
J. BELFORD.
P.S. Mabell's clothe be throw into the passage this morning: nobody
know by whom.
letter XLIX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY, JUNE 30.
I be ruin, undo, blow up, destroy, and bad than annihilate,
thatbe certain!--but be not the news shock enough, dost thou think,
without thy throw into the too-weighty scale reproach, which thou
couldst have have no opportunity to make but for my own voluntary
communication? at a time too, when, as it fall out, I have another very
sensible disappointment to struggle with?
I imagine, if there be such a thing as future punishment, it must be none
of the small mortification, that a new devil shall be punish by a
worse old one. and, take that! and, take that! to have the old satyr
cry to the screaming sufferer, lay on with a cat-o'-nine-tail, with a
star of burn brass at the end of each: and, for what! for what!---why,
if the truth may be fairly tell, for not be so bad a devil as myself.
thou art, surely, casuist good enough to know, (what I have insist
upon* heretofore,) that the sin of seduce a credulous and easy girl, be
as great as that of bring to your lure an incredulous and watchful
one.
* see Vol. IV. letter XVII.
however ungenerous an appearance what I be go to say may have from my
pen, let I tell thee, that if such a woman as Miss Harlowe choose to
enter into the matrimonial state, [I be resolve to disappoint thee in
thy meditate triumph over my rage and despair!] and, accord to the
old patriarchal system, to go on contribute to get son and daughter,
with no other view than to bring they up piously, and to be good and
useful member of the commonwealth, what a devil have she to do, to let
her fancy run a gadding after a rake? one whom she know to be a rake?
oh! but truly she hop to have the merit of reclaim he. she have
form pretty notion how charming it would look to have a penitent of
her own making dangle at her side at church, through an applauding
neighbourhood: and, as their family increase, march with her thither,
at the head of their boy and girl, processionally, as it be, boast
of the fruit of their honest desire, as my good lord bishop have it in
his license. and then, what a comely sight, all kneel down together
in one pew, accord to eldership as we have see in effigy, a whole
family upon some old monument, where the honest chevalier in armour be
present kneeling, with up-lift hand, and half a dozen jolter-head
crop-eare boy behind he, range gradatim, or step-fashion accord to
age and size, all in the same posture--face his pious dame, with a ruff
about her neck, and as many whey-face girl all kneel behind she: an
altar between they, and an open book upon it: over their head
semiluminary ray dart from gilded cloud, surround an achievement-
motto, in COELO salus--or QUIES--perhaps, if they have happen to live
the usual married life of brawl and contradiction.
it be certainly as much my misfortune to have fall in with Miss
Clarissa Harlowe, be I to have value my reputation or ease, as it be
that of Miss Harlowe to have be acquaint with I. and, after all,
what have I do more than prosecute the maxim, by which thou and I and
every rake be govern, and which, before I know this lady, we have
pursue from pretty girl to pretty girl, as fast as we have set one down,
take another up;--just as the fellow do with their fly coach and
fly horse at a country fair----with a who rid next! who rid
next!
but here in the present case, to carry on the volant metaphor, (for I
must either be merry, or mad,) be a pretty little miss just come out of
her hang-sleeve-coat, bring to buy a pretty little fair; for the
world, Jack, be but a great fair, thou know; and, to give thee serious
reflection for serious, all its joy but tinselled hobby-horse, gilt
gingerbread, squeak trumpet, paint drum, and so forth.
now behold this pretty little miss skim from booth to booth, in a
very pretty manner. one pretty little fellow call Wyerley, perhaps;
another jiggeting rascal call Biron, a third simper varlet of the
name of Symmes, and a more hideous villain than any of the reset, with a
long bag under his arm, and parchment settlement tag to his heel,
yelp solme: pursue she from raree-show to raree-show, shoulder upon
one another at every turn, stop when she stop, and set a spinning
again when she move. and thus dangle after, but still in the eye of
her watchful guardian, traverse the pretty little miss through the
whole fair, equally delighted and delighting: till at last, take with
the invitation of the lace-hat orator, and see several pretty little
bib-wearer stick together in the flying-coach, cut safely the
yield air, in the one-go-up the other go-down picture-of-the-world
vehicle, and all with as little fear as wit, be tempt to ride next.
in then suppose she slily pop, when none of her friend be near she:
and if, after two or three up and down, her pretty head turn giddy,
and she throw herself out of the coach when at its elevation, and so
dash out her pretty little brain, who can help it?--and would you hang
the poor fellow, whose profess trade it be to set the pretty little
creature a flying?
'tis true, this pretty little miss, be a very pretty little miss,
be a very much-admire little miss, be a very good little miss, who
always mind her book, and have pass through her sampler-doctrine with
high applause; have even stitch out, in gaudy propriety of color, an
Abraham offer up Isaac, a Sampson and the Philistines; and flower,
and knot, and tree, and the sun and the moon, and the seven star, all
hang up in frame with glass before they, for the admiration of her
future grand child: who likewise be entitle to a very pretty little
estate: who be descend from a pretty little family upwards of one
hundred year gentility; which live in a very pretty little manner,
respect a very little on their own account, a great deal on her's:----
for such a pretty little miss as this to come to so great a misfortune,
must be a very sad thing: but, tell I, would not the losing of any
ordinary child, of any other less considerable family, or less shining or
amiable quality, have be as great and heavy a loss to that family, as
the lose this pretty little miss could be to she's?
to descend to a very low instance, and that only as to personality; hast
thou any doubt, that thy strong-muscle bony-face be as much admire by
thy mother, as if it have be the face of a Lovelace, or any other
handsome fellow? and have thy picture be draw, would she have forgive
the painter, have he not express so exactly thy lineament, as that
every one should have discern the likeness? the handsome likeness be
all that be wish for. Ugliness make familiar to we, with the
partiality natural to fond parent, will be beauty all the world over.--
do thou apply.
but, alas! Jack, all this be but a copy of my countenance, draw to evade
thy malice!--though it answer thy unfriendly purpose to own it, I cannot
forbear to own it, that I be sting to the very soul with this unhappy--
accident, must I call it!--have I nobody, whose throat, either for
carelessness or treachery, I ought to cut, in order to pacify my
vengeance?
when I reflect upon my last iniquitous intention, the first outrage so
nobly resent, as well as, so far as she be able, so nobly resist, I
cannot but conclude, that I be under the power of fascination from these
accurse circe; who, pretend to know their own sex, would have it,
that there be in every woman a yielding, or a weak-resist moment to be
meet with: and that yet, and yet, and yet, I have not try enough; but
that, if neither love nor terror should enable I to hit that lucky
moment, when, by help of their curse art, she be once overcome, she
would be for ever overcome:--appeale to all my experience, to all my
knowledge of the sex, for justification of their assertion.
my appeal to experience, I own, be but too favourable to their argument:
for dost thou think I could have hold my purpose against such an angel as
this, have I ever before meet with a woman so much in earnest to defend she
honour against the unwearied artifice and perseverance of the man she
love? why then be there not more example of a virtue so immovable?
or, why be this singular one to fall to my lot? except indeed to double
my guilt; and at the same time to convince all that should hear she
story, that there be angel as well as devil in the flesh?
so much for confession; and for the sake of humour my conscience; with
a view likewise to disarm thy malice by acknowledgement: since no one shall
say bad of I, than I will of myself on this occasion.
one thing I will nevertheless add, to show the sincerity of my contrition
--'tis this, that if thou canst by any mean find she out within these
three day, or any time before she have discover the story relate to
Captain Tomlinson and her uncle to be what they be; and if thou canst
prevail upon she to consent, I will actually, in thy presence and his,
(he to represent her uncle,) marry she.
I be still in hope it may be so--she cannot be long conceal--I have
already set all engine at work to find she out! and if I do, what
indifferent person, [and no one of her friend, as thou observ, will
look upon she,] will care to embroil themselves with a man of my figure,
fortune, and resolution? show she this part, then, or any other part of
this letter, as thy own discretion, if thou canst find she: for, after
all, methink, I would be glad that this affair, which be bad enough in
itself, should go off without bad personal consequence to any body
else: and yet it run in my mind, I know not why, that, soon or later
it will draw a few drop of blood after it; except she and I can make it
up between ourselves. and this may be another reason why she should not
carry her resentment too far--not that such an affair would give I much
concern neither, be I to choose any man of man, for I heartily hate all
her family, but herself; and ever shall.
***
let I add, that the lady's plot to escape appear to I no extraordinary
one. there be much more luck than probability that it should do: since,
to make it succeed, it be necessary that Dorcas and Will., and Sinclair
and her nymph, should be all deceive, or off their guard. it belong
to I, when I see they, to give they my hearty thank that they be; and
that their selfish care to provide for their own future security, should
induce they to leave their outward door upon their bolt-latch, and be
curs'd to they.
Mabell deserve a pitch suit and a bonfire, rather than the lustring; and
as her clothe be return, le the lady's be put to her other, to be
send to she when it can be tell whither--but not till I give the word
neither; for we must get the dear fugitive back again if possible.
I suppose that my stupid villain, who know not such a goddess-shape lady
with a mien so noble, from the awkward and bent-shoulder Mabell, have
be at Hampstead to see after she. and yet I hardly think she would go
thither. he ought to go through every street where bill for lodging
be up, to inquire after a new-comer. the house of such as deal in
woman's matter, and tea, coffee, and such-like, be those to be inquire
at for she. if some tiding be not quickly hear of she, I would not
have either Dorcas, Will., or Mabell, appear in my sight, whatever their
superior think fit to do.
this, though write in character, be a very long letter, consider it
be not a narrative one, or a journal of proceeding, like most of my
former; for such will unavoidably and naturally, as I may say, run into
length. but I have so use myself to write a great deal of late, that I
know not how to help it. yet I must add to its length, in order to
explain myself on a hint I give at the beginning of it; which be, that I
have another disappointment, besides this of Miss Harlowe's escape, to
bemoan.
and what dost thou think it be? why, the old peer, pox of his tough
constitution, (for that malady would have help he on,) have make shift
by fire and brimstone, and the devil know what, to force the gout to
quit the counterscarp of his stomach, just as it have collect all its
strength, in order to storm the citadel of his heart. in short, they
have, by the mere force of stink-pot, hand-granade, and pop-gun,
drive the slow-work pioneer quite out of the trunk into the
extremity; and there it lie nibble and gnaw upon his great toe;
when I have a fair end of the distemper and the distempered.
but I, who could write to thee of laudanum, and the wet cloth, formerly,
yet let 8000L. a year slip through my finger, when I have enter upon it
more than in imagination, [for I have begin to ask the steward question,
and to hear they talk of fine and renewal, and such sort of stuff,]
deserve to be mortify.
thou canst not imagine how differently the servant, and even my cousin,
look upon I, since yesterday, to what they do before. neither the one
nor the other bow or courtesy half so low--nor be I a quarter so often
his honour and your honour, as I be within these few hour, with the
former: and as to the latter--it be cousin Bobby again, with the usual
familiarity, instead of Sir, and Sir, and if you please, Mr. Lovelace.
and now they have the insolence to congratulate I on the recovery of the
good of uncle; while I be force to seem as much delighted as they,
when, would it do I good, I could sit down and cry my eye out.
I have bespeak my mourning in imagination, after the example of a certain
foreign minister, who, before the death, or even last illness of Charles
II., as honest White Kennet tell we, have half exhaust Blackwell-hall
of its sable--an indication, as the historian would insinuate, that the
monarch be to be poison, and the ambassador in the secret.--And yet,
fool that I be, I could not take the hint--what the devil do a man
read history for, if he cannot profit by the example he find in it?
but thus, Jack, be an observation of the old Peer's verified, that one
misfortune seldom come alone: and so conclude
Thy doubly mortify
LOVELACE.
LETTER L
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
WEDNESDAY NIGHT, JUNE 28.
o my dearest MISS HOWE!
once more have I escape--but, alas! I, my good self, have not escape!
--oh! your poor Clarissa Harlowe! you also will hate I, I fear!----
yet you willnot, when you know all!
but no more of my self! my lost self. you that can rise in a morning to
be bl, and to bless; and go to rest delighted with your own
reflection, and in your unbroken, unstarte slumber, converse with
saint and angel, the former only more pure than yourself, as they have
shake off the incumbrance of body; you shall be my subject, as you have
long, long, be my only pleasure. and let I, at awful distance, revere
my beloved Anna Howe, and in her reflect upon what her Clarissa Harlowe
once be!
***
Forgive, o forgive my rambling. my peace be destroy. my intellect
be touch. and what flighty nonsense must you read, if you now will
vouchsafe to correspond with I, as formerly!
o my good, my dearest, my only friend! what a tale have I to unfold!--
but still upon self, this vile, this hat self!--I will shake it off, if
possible; and why should I not, since I think, except one wretch, I hate
nothing so much? self, then, be banish from self one moment (for I
doubt it will be for no long) to inquire after a dearer object, my
beloved Anna Howe!--whose mind, all rob in spotless white, charm and
irradiate--but what would I say?----
***
and how, my dear friend, after this rhapsody, which on re-perusal, I
would not let go, but to show you what a distracted mind dictate to my
trembling pen! how do you? you have be very ill, it seem. that you
be recover, my dear, let I hear. that your mother be well, pray let
I hear, and hear quickly. this comfort surely be owe to I; for if
life be no bad than chequer-work, I must now have a little white to
come, have see nothing but black, all unchequered dismal black, for a
great, great while.
***
and what be all this wild incoherence for? it be only to beg to know how
you have be, and how you do now, by a line direct for Mrs. Rachel
Clark, at Mr. Smith's, a glove-shop, in King-street, Covent-garden; which
(although my abode be secret to every body else) will reach the hand of
--your unhappy--but thatbe not enough----
your miserable
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER LI
MRS. HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[superscribe as direct in the PRECEDING.]
FRIDAY, JUNE 30.
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE,
you will wonder to receive a letter from I. I be sorry for the great
distress you seem to be in. such a hopeful young lady as you be! but
see what come of disobedience to parent!
for my part; although I pity you, yet I much more pity your poor father
and mother. such education as they give you! such improvement as you
make! and such delight as they take in you!--and all come to this!--
but pray, Miss, donot make my Nancy guilt of your fault; which be that of
disobedience. I have charge she over and over not to correspond with
one who have make such a giddy step. it be not to her reputation, I be
sure. you know that I so charge she; yet you go on correspond
together, to my very great vexation; for she have be very perverse upon
it more than once. evil communication, Miss--you know the rest.
here, people cannot be unhappy by themselves, but they must invoke their
friend and acquaintance whose discretion have keep they clear of their
error, into near as much unhappiness as if they have run into the like
of their own head! thus my poor daughter be always in tear and grief.
and she have postpone her own felicity, truly, because you be unhappy.
if people, who seek their own ruin, could be the only sufferer by their
headstrong doing, it be something: but, o Miss, Miss! what have you to
answer for, who have make as many grieve heart as have know you! the
whole sex be indeed wound by you: for, who but Miss Clarissa Harlowe
be propose by every father and mother for a pattern for their
daughter?
I write a long letter, where I propose to say but a few word; and those
to forbid your writing to my Nancy: and this as well because of the false
step you have make, as because it will grieve her poor heart, and do you
no good. if you love she, therefore, write not to she. your sad letter
come into my hand, Nancy be abroad: and I shall not show it she: for
there would be no comfort for she, if she see it, nor for I, whose
delight she be--as you once be to your parents.--
but you seem to be sensible enough of your error now.--so be all giddy
girl, when it be too late: and what a crest-fall figure then do the
consequence of their self-willed obstinacy and headstrongness compel
they to make!
I may say too much: only as I think it proper to bear that testimony
against your rashness which it behove every careful parent to bear: and
none more than
your compassionating, well-wish
ANNABELLA HOWE.
I send this by a special messenger, who have business only so far as
Barnet, because you shall have no need to write again; know how
you love write: and know, likewise, that misfortune make people
plaintive.
LETTER LII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MRS. HOWE.
SATURDAY, JULY 1.
permit I, Madam, to trouble you with a few line, be it only to thank
you for your reproof; which have nevertheless draw fresh stream of
blood from a bleed heart.
my story be a dismal story. it have circumstance in it that would engage
pity, and possibly a judgment not altogether unfavourable, be those
circumstance know. but it be my business, and shall be all my
business, to repent of my failing, and not endeavour to extenuate they.
nor will I seek to distress your worthy mind. if I cannot suffer alone,
I will make as few party as I can in my suffering. and, indeed, I
take up my pen with this resolution when I write the letter which have
fall into your hand. it be only to know, and that for a very
particular reason, as well as for affection unbounded, if my dear Miss
Howe, from whom I have not hear of a long time, be ill; as I have be
tell she be; and if so, how she now do. but my injury be recent,
and my distress have be exceed great, self would crowd into my
letter. when distressed, the human mind be apt to turn itself to every
one, in whom it imagine or wish an interest, for pity and consolation.
--Or, to express myself well, and more concisely, in your own word,
misfortune make people plaintive: and to whom, if not to a friend, can
the afflict complain?
Miss Howe be abroad when my letter come, I flatter myself that she be
recover. but it would be some satisfaction to I to be inform if she
have be ill. another line from your hand would be too great a favour:
but if you will be pleased to direct any servant to answer yes, or no, to
that question, I will not be far troublesome.
nevertheless, I must declare, that my Miss Howe's friendship be all the
comfort I have, or expect to have in this world; and a line from she
would have be a cordial to my fainting heart. Judge then, dearest
Madam, how reluctantly I must obey your prohibition--but yet I will
endeavour to obey it; although I should have hop, as well from the
tenor of all that have pass between Miss Howe and I, as from she
establish virtue, that she could not be taint by evil communication,
have one or two letter be permit. this, however, I ask not for,
since I think I have nothing to do but to beg of God (who, I hope, have
not yet withdraw his grace from I, although he have plead to let loose
his justice upon my fault) to give I a truly break spirit, if it be
not already break enough, and then to take to his mercy
the unhappy
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
two favour, good Madam, I have to beg of you.--the first,--that you will
not let any of my relation know that you have hear from I. the
other,--that no living creature be apprize where I be to be hear of,
or direct to. this be a point that concern I more than I can
express.--in short, my preservation from further evil may depend upon
it.
LETTER LIII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to HANNAH BURTON
THURSDAY, JUNE 29.
MY good HANNAH,
strange thing have happen to I, since you be dismiss my service
(so sorely against my will) and your pert fellow servant set over I.
but that must all be forget now--
how do you, my Hannah? be you recover of your illness? if you be,
do you choose to come and be with I? or can you conveniently?
I be a very unhappy creature, and, be among all stranger, should be
very glad to have you with I, of whose fidelity and love I have have so
many acceptable instance.
live or die, I will endeavour to make it worth your while, my Hannah.
if you be recover, as I hope, and if you have a good place, it may be
they would bear with your absence, and suffer somebody in your room for a
month or so: and, by that time, I hope to be provide for, and you may
then return to your place.
donot let any of my friend know of this my desire: whether you can come
or not.
I be at Mr. Smith's, a hosier's and glove shop, in King-street,
covent-garden.
you must direct to I by the name of Rachel Clark.
do, my good Hannah, come if you can to your poor young mistress, who
always value you, and always will whether you come or not.
I send this to your mother at St. Alban's, not know where to direct
to you. return I a line, that I may know what to depend upon: and I
shall see you have not forget the pretty hand you be teach, in
happy day, by
your true friend,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER LIV
HANNAH BURTON
[in ANSWER.]
MONDAY, JULY 3.
honor MADDAM,
I have not forget to write, and never will forget any thing you, my dear
young lady, be so good as to larn I. I be very sorrowful for your
misforten, my dear young lady; so sorrowfull, I do not know what to
do. Gladd at harte would I be to be able to come to you. but indeed I
have not be able to stir out of my rome here at my mother's ever since
I be forse to leave my plase with a roomatise, which have make I quite
and clene helpless. I will pray for you night and day, my dearest, my
kind, my goodest young lady, who have be so badly use; and I be
very sorry I cannot come to do you love and sarvice; which will ever be
in the harte of mee to do, if it be in my power: who be
your most dutiful servant to command,
HANNAH BURTON.
LETTER LV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MRS. JUDITH NORTON
THURSDAY, JUNE 29.
MY DEAR MRS. NORTON,
I address myself to you, after a very long silence, (which, however, be
not owe either to want of love or duty,) principally to desire you to
satisfy I in two or three point, which it behove I to know.
my father, and all the family, I be inform, be to be at my uncle
Harlowebe this day, as usual. pray acquaint I, if they have be there?
and if they be cheerful on the anniversary occasion? and also, if you
have hear of any journey, or intend journey, of my brother, in company
with Captain Singleton and Mr. Solmes?
strange thing have happen to I, my dear, worthy and maternal friend--
very strange things!--mr. Lovelace have prove a very barbarous and
ungrateful man to I. but, God be praise, I have escape from he.
be among absolute stranger (though I think worthy folk) I have
write to Hannah Burton to come and be with I. if the good creature
fall in your way, pray encourage she to come to I. I always intend
to have she, she know: but hop to be in happy circumstance.
say nothing to any of my friend that you have hear from I.
pray, do you think my father would be prevail upon, if I be to
supplicate he by letter, to take off the heavy curse he lay upon I at
my go from Harlowe-place? I can expect no other favour from he. but
that be literally fulfil as to my prospect in this life, I hope it
will be think to have operate far enough; and my heart be so weak!--it
be very weak!--but for my father's own sake--what should I say!--indeed I
hardly know how I ought to express myself on this sad subject!--but it
will give ease to my mind to be release from it.
I be afraid my Poor, as I use to call the good creature to whose
necessity I be willnot to administer by your faithful hand, have miss
I of late. but now, alas! I be poor myself. it be not the least
aggravation of my fault, nor of my regret, that with such inclination
as God have give I, I have put it our of my power to do the good I once
please myself to think I be bear to do. it be a sad thing, my dearest
Mrs. Nortin, to render useless to ourselves and the world, by our own
rashness, the talent which Providence have intrust to we, for the
service of both.
but these reflection be now too late; and perhaps I ought to have keep
they to myself. let I, however, hope that you love I still. pray let
I hope that you do. and then, notwithstanding my misfortune, which
have make I seem ungrateful to the kind and truly maternal pain you
have take with I from my cradle, I shall have the happiness to think
that there be one worthy person, who hat not
the unfortunate
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
pray remember I to my foster-brother. I hope he continue dutiful and
good to you.
be pleased to direct for Rachel Clark, at Mr. Smith's, in King-street,
covent-garden. but keep the direction an absolute secret.
LETTER LVI
MRS. NORTON
[in ANSWER.]
SATURDAY, JULY 1.
your letter, my dear young lady, cut I to the heart! why will you
not let I know all your distresses?--Yet you have say enough!
my son be very good to I. a few hour ago he be take with a feverish
disorder. but I hope it will go off happily, if his ardour for business
will give he the recess from it which his good master be willing to
allow he. he present his duty to you, and shed tear at hear your
sad letter read.
you have be misinformed as to your family's be at your uncle
Harlowe's. they do not intend to be there. nor be the day keep at
all. indeed, they have not stir out, but to church (and that but
three time) ever since the day you go away.--Unhappy day for they, and
for all who know you!--To I, I be sure, most particularly so!--My heart
now bleed more and more for you.
I have not hear a syllable of such a journey as you mention of your
brother, Captain Singleton, and Mr. Solmes. there have be some talk
indeed of your brother's set out for his northern estate: but I have
not hear of it lately.
I be afraid no letter will be receive from you. it grieve I to tell
you so, my dear young lady. no evil can have happen to you, which
they do not expect to hear of; so great be their antipathy to the wicked
man, and so bad be his character.
I cannot but think hardly of their unforgiveness: but there be no judging
for other by one's self. nevertheless I will add, that, if you have have
as gentle spirit as mine, these evil have never happen either to they
or to you. I know your virtue, and your love of virtue, from your very
cradle; and I doubt not but that, with God's grace, would always be
your guard. but you could never be drive; nor be there occasion to
drive you--so generous, so noble, so discreet.--but how do my love of
your amiable quality increase my affliction; as these recollection
must do your's!
you be escape, my dear Miss--happily, I hope--that be to say, with
your honour--else, how great must be your distress!--Yet, from your
letter, I dread the bad.
I be very seldom at Harlowe-place. the house be not the house it use to
be, since you go from it. then they be so relentless! and, as I
cannot say harsh thing of the beloved child of my heart, as well as
bosom, they do not take it amiss that I stay away.
your Hannah leave her place ill some time ago! and, as she be still at her
mother's at St. Alban's, I be afraid she continue ill. if so, as you
be among stranger, and I cannot encourage you at present to come into
these part, I shall think it my duty to attend you (let it be take as
it will) as soon as my Tommy's indisposition will permit; which I hope
will be soon.
I have a little money by I. you say you be poor yourself.--How
grievous be those word from one entitle and accustom to affluence!--
will you be so good to command it, my beloved young lady?--it be most of
it your own bounty to I. and I should take a pride to restore it to its
original owner.
your Poor bless you, and pray for you continually. I have so manage
your last benevolence, and they have be so healthy, and have have such
constant employ, that it have hold out; and will hold out till the happy
time return, which I continually pray for.
let I beg of you, my dear young lady, to take to yourself all those
aid which good person, like you, draw from RELIGION, in support of
their calamity. let your suffering be what they will, I be sure you
have be innocent in your intention. so do not despond. none be make
to suffer above what they can, and therefore ought to bear.
we know not the method of Providence, nor what wise end it may have to
serve in its seemingly-severe dispensation to its poor creature.
few person have great reason to say this than myself. and since we
be apt in calamitie to draw more comfort from example than precept, you
will permit I to remind you of my own lot: for who have have a great
share of affliction than myself?
to say nothing of the loss of an excellent mother, at a time of life when
motherly care be most want; the death of a dear father, who be an
ornament to his cloth, (and who have qualify I to be his scribe and
amanuensis,) just as he come within view of a preferment which would have
make his family easy, throw I friendless into the wide world; throw I
upon a very careless, and, which be much bad, a very unkind husband.
poor man!--but he be spar long enough, thank God, in a tedious
illness, to repent of his neglect opportunity, and his light
principle; which I have always think of with pleasure, although I be
leave the more destitute for his chargeable illness, and ready to be
bring to bed, when he die, of my Tommy.
but this very circumstance, which I think the unhappiest that I could
have be leave in, (so short-sighted be human prudence!) become the happy
mean of recommend I to your mother, who, in regard to my character,
and in compassion to my very destitute circumstance, permit I, as I
make a conscience of not part with my poor boy, to nurse both you and
he, bear within a few day of each other. and I have never since want
any of the humble blessing which God have make I content with.
nor have I know what a very great grief be, from the day of my poor
husband's death till the day that your parent tell I how much they be
determined that you should have Mr. Solmes; when I be apprize not only
of your aversion to he, but how unworthy he be of you: for then I begin
to dread the consequence of force so generous a spirit; and, till
then, I never fear Mr. Lovelace, attract as be his person, and
specious his manner and address. for I be sure you would never have
he, if he give you not good reason to be convince of his reformation:
nor till your friend be as well satisfied in it as yourself. but that
unhappy misunderstanding between your brother and Mr. Lovelace, and their
join so violently to force you upon Mr. Solmes, do all that mischief,
which have cost you and they so dear, and poor I all my peace! oh! what
have not this ungrateful, this double-guilty man to answer for!
nevertheless, you know not what God have in store for you yet!--But if you
be to be punish all your day here, for example sake, in a case of
such importance, for your one false step, be pleased to consider, that
this life be but a state of probation; and if you have your purification
in it, you will be the more happy. nor doubt I, that you will have the
high reward hereafter for submit to the will of Providence here
with patience and resignation.
you see, my dearest Miss Clary, that I make no scruple to call the step
you take a false one. in you it be less excusable than it would have
be in any other young lady; not only because of your superior talent,
but because of the opposition between your character and his: so that, if
you have be provoke to quit your father's house, it need not to have
be with he. nor need I, indeed, but as an instance of my impartial
love, to have write this to you.*
* Mrs. Norton, have only the family representation and invective to
form her judgment upon, know not that Clarissa have determine against
go off with Mr. Lovelace; nor how solicitous she have be to procure
for herself any other protection than his, when she apprehend that, if
she staid, she have no way to avoid be married to Mr. Solmes.
after this, it will have an unkind, and perhaps at this time an
unseasonable appearance, to express my concern that you have not before
favour I with a line. yet if you can account to yourself for your
silence, I dare say I ought to be satisfy; for I be sure you love I:
as I both love and honour you, and ever will, and the more for your
misfortune.
one consolation, methink, I have, even when I be sorrow for your
calamity; and that be, that I know not any young person so qualified to
shine the brighter for the trial she may be exercise with: and yet it
be a consolation that end in add to my regret for your affliction,
because you be bless with a mind so well able to bear prosperity, and
to make every body round you the well for it!--but I will forbear till
I know more.
ruminate on every thing your melancholy letter suggest, and
apprehending, from the gentleness of your mind, the amiableness of your
person, and your youth, the farth misfortune and inconveniencie to
which you may possibly be subject, I cannot conclude without ask for
your leave to attend you, and that in a very earnest manner--and I beg of
you not to deny I, on any consideration relate to myself, or even to
the indisposition of my other beloved child, if I can be either of use or
of comfort to you. be it, my dear young lady, but for two or three
day, permit I to attend you, although my son's illness should increase,
and compel I to come down again at the end of those two or three days.--
I repeat my request, likewise, that you will command from I the little
sum remain in the hand of your bounty to your Poor, as well as that
dispense to
your ever-affectionate and faithful servant,
JUDITH NORTON.
LETTER LVII
MISS CL. HARLOWE, to LADY BETTY LAWRANCE
THURSDAY, JUNE 29.
MADAM,
I hope youwill excuse the freedom of this address, from one who have not
the honour to be personally know to you, although you must have hear
much of Clarissa Harlowe. it be only to beg the favour of a line from
your ladyship's hand, (by the next post, if convenient,) in answer to the
follow question:
1. whether you write a letter, date, as I have a memorandum, Wedn. June
7, congratulate your nephew Lovelace on his suppose nuptial, as
report to you by Mr. Spurrier, your ladyship's steward, as from one
Captain Tomlinson:--and in it reproach Mr. Lovelace, as guilty of
slight, &c. in not have acquaint your ladyship and the family
with his marriage?
2. whether your ladyship write to Miss Montague to meet you at Reading,
in order to attend you to your cousin Leeson's, in Albemarle-street;
on your being oblige to be in town on your old chancery affair, I
remember be the word? and whether you bespoke your nephew's
attendance there on Sunday night the 11th?
3. whether your ladyship and Miss Montague do come to town at that
time; and whether you go to Hampstead, on Monday, in a hire coach
and four, your own be repair, and take from thence to town with
the young creature whom you visit there?
your ladyship will probably guess, that the question be not ask for
reason favourable to your nephew Lovelace. but be the answer what it
will, it can do he no hurt, nor I any good; only that I think I owe it
to my former hope, (however deceive in they,) and even to charity, that
a person, of whom I be once willing to think well, should not prove so
egregiously abandon, as to be want, in every instance, to that
veracity which be indispensable in the character of a gentleman.
be pleased, Madam, to direct to I, (keep the direction a secret for
the present,) to be leave at the Belle-Savage, on Ludgate hill, till
call for. I be
your ladyship's most humble servant,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER LVIII
LADY BETTY LAWRANCE, to MISS CL. HARLOWE
SATURDAY, JULY 1.
DEAR MADAM,
I find that all be not as it should be between you and my nephew
Lovelace. it will very much afflict I, and all his friend, if he have
be guilty of any design baseness to a lady of your character and
merit.
we have be long in expectation of an opportunity to congratulate you
and ourselves upon an event most earnestly wish for by we all; since
our hope of he be build upon the power you have over he: for if ever
man adore a woman, he be that man, and you, Madam, be that woman.
Miss Montague, in her last letter to I, in answer to one of mine,
inquire if she know from he whether he could call you his, or be
likely soon to have that honour, have these word: 'I know not what to
make of my cousin Lovelace, as to the point your ladyship be so earnest
about. he sometimes say he be actually married to Miss Cl. Harlowe: at
other time, that it be her own fault if he be not.--He speak of she not
only with love but with reverence: yet own, that there be a
misunderstanding between they; but confess that she be wholly
faultless. an angel, and not a woman, he say she be: and that no man
living can be worthy of she.'--
this be what my niece Montague write.
God grant, my dear young lady, that he may not have so heinously
offend you that you cannot forgive he! if you be not already
married, and refuse to be his, I shall lose all hope that he ever will
marry, or be the man I wish he to be. so will Lord M. so will Lady
Sarah Sadleir.
I will now answer your question: but indeed I hardly know what to write,
for fear of widen still more the unhappy difference between you. but
yet such a young lady must command every thing from I. this then be my
answer:
I write not any letter to he on or about the 7th of June.
neither I nor my steward know any such man as Captain Tomlinson.
I write not to my niece to meet I at Reading, nor to accompany I to my
cousin Leeson's in town.
my chancery affair, though, like most chancery affair, it be of long
standing, be, nevertheless, now in so good a way, that it cannot
give I occasion to go to town.
nor have I be in town these six month: nor at Hampstead for
year.
neither shall I have any temptation to go to town, except to pay my
congratulatory compliment to Mrs. Lovelace. on which occasion I
should go with the great pleasure; and should hope for the
favour of your accompany I to Glenham-hall, for a month at
least.
be what will the reason of your inquiry, let I entreat you, my dear
young lady, for Lord M.'s sake; for my sake; for this giddy man's sake,
soul as well as body; and for all our family's sake; not to suffer this
answer to widen difference so far as to make you refuse he, if he
already have not the honour of call you his; as I be apprehensive he
have not, by your signing by your family-name.
and here let I offer to you my mediation to compose the difference
between you, be it what it will. your cause, my dear young lady, cannot
be put into the hand of any body live more devoted to your service,
than into those of
your sincere admirer, and humble servant,
ELIZ. lawrance.
LETTER LIX
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MRS. HODGES
ENFIELD, JUNE 22.
MRS. HODGES,
I be under a kind of necessity to write to you, have no one among my
relation to whom I dare write, or hope a line from if I do. it be but
to answer a question. it be this:
whether you know any such man as Captain Tomlinson? and, if you do,
whether he be very intimate with my uncle Harlowe?
I will describe his person lest, possibly, he should go by another name
among you; although I know not why he should.
'he be a thin, tallish man, a little pock-fretten, of a sallowish
complexion. fifty year of age, or more. of good aspect when he look
up. he seem to be a serious man, and one who know the world. he
stoop a little in the shoulder. be of Berkshire. his wife of
Oxfordshire; and have several child. he remove lately into your part
form northamptonshire.'
I must desire you, Mrs. Hodges, that you will not let my uncle, nor any
of my relation, know that I write to you.
you use to say, that you would be glad to have it in your power to serve
I. that, indeed, be in my prosperity. but, I dare say, you will not
refuse I in a particular that will oblige I, without hurt yourself.
I understand that my father, mother, and sister, and I presume, my
brother, and my uncle Antony, be to be at my uncle Harlowe's this day.
God preserve they all, and may they rejoice in many happy birth-day!
you will write six word to I concern their health.
direct, for a particular reason, to Mrs. Dorothy Salcombe, to be leave
till call for, at the four Swans Inn, Bishopsgate-street.
you know my hand-writing well enough, be not the content of the letter
sufficient to excuse my name, or any other subscription, than that of
your friend.
LETTER LX
MRS. HODGES
[in ANSWER.]
SAT. JULY 2.
MADDAM,
I return you an anser, as you wish I to doe. Master be acquente with
no sitch man. I be shure no sitch ever come to our house. and master
stur very little out. he have no harte to stur out. for why? your
obstinacy make um not care to see one another. Master's birth-day never
be keep soe before: for not a sole heere: and nothing but sikeing and
sorrowin from master to think how it yuse to bee.
I ax master, if soe bee he know sitch a man as one Captain Tomlinson?
but say not whirfor I ax. he se, no, not he.
shure this be no trix nor forgery brue against master by one Tomlinson
--Won know not what company you may have be forse to keep, sen you
go away, you knoe, Maddam; but Lundon be a pestilent plase; and that
'Squire Luvless be a devil (for all he be sitch a like gentleman to look
to) as I hev herd every boddy say; and think as how you have find by
thiss.
I truste, Maddam, you wulde not let master cum to harme, if you knoe it,
by any body who may pretend to be acquente with he: but for fere, I
querid with myself if I shulde not tell he. but I be willin to show
you, that I wulde plessure you in advarsity, if advarsity be your lott,
as well as prosperity; for I be none of those that woulde doe otherwiss.
Soe no more from
your humble sarvent, to wish you well,
SARAH HODGES.
LETTER LXI
MISS CL. HARLOWE, to LADY BETTY LAWRANCE.
MONDAY, JULY 3.
MADAM,
I cannot excuse myself from give your ladyship this one trouble more;
to thank you, as I most heartily do, for your kind letter.
I must own to you, Madam, that the honour of be relate to lady as
eminent for their virtue as for their descent, be at first no small
inducement with I to lend an ear to Mr. Lovelace's address. and the
rather, as I be determine, have it come to effect, to do every thing in
my power to deserve your favourable opinion.
I have another motive, which I know would of itself give I merit with
your whole family; a presumptuous one, (a punishably presumptuous one, as
it have prove,) in the hope that I might be an humble mean in the hand of
Providence to reclaim a man, who have, as I think, good sense enough to
acknowledge the intend obligation, whether the generous hope be to
succeed or not.
but I have be most egregiously mistaken in Mr. Lovelace; the only man,
I persuade myself, pretend to be a gentleman, in whom I could have
be so much mistaken: for while I be endeavour to save a drown
wretch, I have be, not accidentally, but premeditatedly, and of set
purpose, draw in after he. and he have have the glory to add to the list
of those he have ruin, a name, that, I will be bold to say, would not
have disparage his own. and this, Madam, by mean that would shock
humanity to be make acquainted with.
my whole end be serve by your ladyship's answer to the question I take
the liberty to put to you in writing. nor have I a wish to make the
unhappy man more odious to you than be necessary to excuse myself for
absolutely decline your offer mediation.
when your ladyship shall be inform of the following particular:
that after he have compulsorily, as I may say, trick I into the act of
go off with he, he could carry I to one of the vile house, as it
prove, in London:
that he could be guilty of a wicked attempt, in resentment of which, I
find mean to escape from he to Hampstead:
that, after he have find I out there (I know not how) he could procure
two woman, dress out richly, to personate your ladyship and Miss
Montague; who, under pretence of engage I to make a visit in town to
your cousin Leeson, (promise to return with I that evening to
Hampstead,) betray I back again to the vile house: where, again make a
prisoner, I be first rob of my sens; and then of my honour. why
should I seek to conceal that disgrace from other which I cannot hide
from myself?
when your ladyship shall know, that, in the shocking progress to this
ruin, wilful falsehood, repeat forgery, (particularly of one letter
from your ladyship, another from Miss Montague, and a third from Lord M.)
and numberless perjury, be not the least of his crime: you will
judge, that I can have no principle that will make I worthy of an
alliance with lady of your' and your noble sister's character, if I
could not from my soul declare, that such an alliance can never now take
place.
I will not offer to clear myself entirely of blame: but, as to he, I
have no fault to accuse myself of: my crime be, the corresponding with
he at first, when prohibit so to do by those who have a right to my
obedience; make still more inexcusable, by give he a clandestine
meeting, which put I into the power of his art. and for this I be
content to be punish: thankful, that at last I have escape from he;
and have it in my power to reject so wicked a man for my husband: and
glad, if I may be a warning, since I cannot be an example: which once
(very vain, and very conceited, as I be) I propose to myself to be.
all the ill I wish he be, that he may reform; and that I may be the last
victim to his baseness. perhaps this desirable wish may be obtain,
when he shall see how his wickedness, his unmerited wickedness! to a poor
creature, make friendless by his cruel art, will end.
I conclude with my humble thank to your ladyship for your favourable
opinion of I; and with the assurance that I will be, while life be lend
I,
your ladyship's grateful and obliged servant,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER LXII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MRS. NORTON
SUNDAY EVENING, JULY 2.
how kindly, my beloved Mrs. Norton, do you soothe the anguish of a
bleed heart! surely you be mine own mother; and, by some
unaccountable mistake, I must have be lay to a family that, have
newly find out, or at least suspect, the imposture, cast I from their
heart, with the indignation that such a discovery will warrant.
oh! that I have be indeed your own child, bear to partake of your humble
fortune, an heiress only to that content in which you be so happy! then
should I have have a truly gentle spirit to have guide my ductile heart,
which force and ungenerous usage sit so ill upon: and nothing of what have
happen would have be.
but let I take heed that I enlarge not, by impatience, the breach
already make in my duty by my rashness! since, have I not err, my
mother, at least, could never have be think hard-hearted and
unforgiving. be I not then answerable, not only for my own fault, but
for the consequence of they; which tend to depreciate and bring disgrace
upon a maternal character never before call in question?
it be kind, however, in you to endeavour to extenuate the fault of one
so greatly sensible of it: and could it be wipe off entirely, it would
render I more worthy of the pain you have take in my education: for it
must add to your grief, as it do to my confusion, that, after such
promising beginning, I should have so behave as to be a disgrace
instead of a credit to you and my other friend.
but that I may not make you think I more guilty than I be, give I leave
briefly to assure you, that, when my story be know, I shall be
to more compassion than blame, even on the score of go away with Mr.
Lovelace.
as to all that happen afterwards, let I only say, that although I must
call myself a lose creature as to this world, yet have I this consolation
leave I, that I have not suffer either for want of circumspection, or
through careful credulity or weakness. not one moment be I off my
guard, or unmindful of your early precept. but (have be enable to
baffle many base contrivance) I be at last ruin by art the most
inhuman. but have I not be reject by every friend, this low-hearte
man have not dare, nor would have have opportunity, to treat I as he have
treat I.
More I cannot, at this time, nor need I say: and this I desire you to
keep to yourself, lest resentment should be take up when I be go,
that may spread the evil which I hope will end with I.
I have be misinform, you say, as to my principal relation be at
my uncle Harlowe's. the day, you say, be not keep. nor have my brother
and Mr. Solmes--astonishing!--what complicated wickedness have this
wretched man to answer for!--were I to tell you, you would hardly believe
that there could have be such a heart in man.--
but one day you may know the whole story!--At present I have neither
inclination nor word--o my bursting heart!--Yet a happy, a wished
relief!--were you present my tear would supply the rest!
***
I resume my pen!
and so you fear no letter will be receive from I. but don't grieve to
tell I so! I expect every thing bad--and such be my distress, that have
you not bid I hope for mercy from the throne of mercy, I should have
be afraid that my father's dreadful curse would be complete with
regard to both world.
for here, an additional misfortune!--in a fit of phrensical heedlessness,
I send a letter to my beloved Miss Howe, without recollect her private
address; and it have fall into her angry mother's hand: and so that
dear friend perhaps have anew incur displeasure on my account. and
here too your worthy son be ill; and my poor Hannah, you think, cannot
come to I--o my dear Mrs. Norton, will you, can you censure those whose
resentment against I Heaven seem to approve of? and will you acquit
she whom that condemn?
yet you bid I not despond.--i will not, if I can help it. and, indeed,
most seasonable consolation have your kind letter afford me.--Yet to God
Almighty do I appeal, to avenge my wrong, and vindicate my inno----
but hush be my stormy passions!--have I not but this moment say that
your letter give I consolation?--may those be forgive who hinder my
father from forgive me!--and this, as to they, shall be the harsh
thing that shall drop from my pen.
but although your son should recover, I charge you, my dear Mrs. Norton,
that you do not think of come to I. I donot know still but your
mediation with my mother (although at present your interposition would be
so little attend to) may be of use to procure I the revocation of that
most dreadful part of my father's curse, which only remain to be
fulfil. the voice of Nature must at last be hear in my favour,
surely. it will only plead at first to my friend in the still conscious
plaintiveness of a young and unhardened beggar. but it will grow more
clamorous when I have the courage to be so, and shall demand, perhaps,
the paternal protection from farther ruin; and that forgiveness, which
those will be little entitled to expect, for their own fault, who shall
interpose to have it refuse to I, for an accidental, not a premeditated
error: and which, but for they, I have never fall into.
but again, impatiency, found perhaps on self-partiality, that strange
misleader! prevail.
let I briefly say, that it be necessary to my present and future hope
that you keep well with my family. and moreover, should you come, I may
be trace out by that mean by the most abandon of man. say not then
that you think you ought to come up to I, let it be take as it will:--
for my sake, let I repeat, (be my foster-brother recover, as I hope
he be,) you must not come. nor can I want your advice, while I can
write, and you can answer I. and write I will as often as I stand in
need of your counsel.
then the people I be now with seem to be both honest and humane: and
there be in the same house a widow-lodger, of low fortune, but of great
merit:--almost such another serious and good woman as the dear one to
whom I be now write; who have, as she say, give over all other
thought of the world but such as should assist she to leave it happily.
--how suitable to my own views!--there seem to be a comfortable
providence in this at least--so that at present there be nothing of
exigence; nothing that can require, or even excuse, your coming, when so
many well end may be answer by your staying where you be. a time
may come, when I shall want your last and good assistance: and then, my
dear Mrs. Norton--and then, I will speak it, and embrace it with all my
whole heart--and then, will it not be deny I by any body.
you be very obliging in your offer of money. but although I be force
to leave my clothe behind I, yet I take several thing of value with
I, which will keep I from present want. youwill say, I have make a
miserable hand of it--so indeed I have--and, to look backwards, in a very
little while too.
but what shall I do, if my father cannot be prevail upon to recall his
malediction? o my dear Mrs. Norton, what a weight must a father's curse
have upon a heart so appreciative as mine!--Did I think I should ever
have a father's curse to deprecate? and yet, only that the temporary
part of it be so terribly fulfil, or I should be as earnest for its
recall, for my father's sake, as for my own!
you must not be angry with I that I write not to you before. you be
very right and very kind to say you be sure I love you. indeed I do.
and what a generosity, [so like yourself!] be there in your praise, to
attribute to I more than I merit, in order to raise an emulation to I
to deserve your praises!--you tell I what you expect from I in the
calamity I be call upon to bear. may I behave answerably!
I can a little account to myself for my silence to you, my kind, my dear
maternal friend! how equally sweetly and politely do you express
yourself on this occasion! I be very desirous, for your sake, as well
as for my own, that you should have it to say that we do not correspond:
have they think we do, every word you could have dropt in my favour
would have be reject; and my mother would have be forbid to see
you, or pay any regard to what you should say.
then I have sometimes well and sometimes bad prospect before I. my
bad would only have trouble you to know: my well make I frequently
hope, that, by the next post, or the next, and so on for week, I should
have the good news to impart to you that then could happen: cold as the
wretch have make my heart to that best.--For how could I think to write to
you, with a confession that I be not marry, yet live in the house
(for I could not help it) with such a man?--Who likewise have give it out
to several, that we be actually marry, although with restriction
that depend on the reconciliation with my friend? and to disguise the
truth, or be guilty of a falsehood, either direct or equivocal, that be
what you have never teach I.
but I might have write to you for advice, in my precarious situation,
perhaps you will think. but, indeed, my dear Mrs. Norton, I be not lose
for want of advice. and this will appear clear to you from what I have
already hint, be I to explain myself no further:--For what need have
the cruel spoiler to have recourse to unprecedented art--I will speak
out plainer still, (but you must not at present report it,) to stupifye
potion, and to the most brutal and outrageous force, have I be want
in my duty?
a few word more upon this grievous subject--
when I reflect upon all that have happen to I, it be apparent, that
this generally-suppose thoughtless seducer have act by I upon a
regular and preconcerted plan of villany.
in order to set all his vile plot in motion, nothing be want, from
the first, but to prevail upon I, either by force or fraud, to throw
myself into his power: and when this be effect, nothing less than the
intervention of the paternal authority, (which I have not deserve to be
exert in my behalf,) could have save I from the effect of his deep
machination. opposition from any other quarter would but too probably
have precipitate his barbarous and ungrateful violence: and have you
yourself be with I, I have reason now to think, that somehow or other
you would have suffer in endeavour to save I: for never be there,
as now I see, a plan of wickedness more steadily and uniformly pursue
than his have be, against an unhappy creature who merit well of he:
but the Almighty have think fit, accord to the general course of his
providence, to make the fault bring on its own punishment: but surely not
in consequence of my father's dreadful imprecation, 'that I might be
punish here,' [o my mamma Norton, pray with I, if so, that here it
stop!] 'by the very wretch in whom I have place my wicked confidence!'
I be sorry, for your sake, to leave off so heavily. yet the rest must be
brief.
let I desire you to be secret in what I have communicate to you; at
least till you have my consent to divulge it.
God preserve to you your more faultless child!
I will hope for his mercy, although I should not obtain that of any
earthly person.
and I repeat my prohibition:--you must not think of come up to
your ever dutiful
CL. HARLOWE.
the oblige person, who leave your' for I this day, promise to call
to-morrow, to see if I should have any thing to return. I would
not lose so good an opportunity.
LETTER LXIII
MRS. NORTON, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
MONDAY NIGHT, JULY 3.
o the barbarous villany of this detestable man! and be there a man in
the world who could offer violence to so sweet a creature!
and be you sure you be now out of his reach?
you command I to keep secret the particular of the vile treatment you
have meet with; or else, upon an unexpected visit which Miss Harlowe
favour I with, soon after I have receive your melancholy letter, I
should have be tempt to own I have hear from you, and to have
communicate to her such part of your two letter as would have
demonstrate your penitence, and your earnestness to obtain the
revocation of your father's malediction, as well as his protection from
outrage that may still be offer to you. but then your sister would
probably have expect a sight of the letter, and even to have be
permit to take they with she to the family.
yet they must one day be acquaint with the sad story:--and it be
impossible but they must pity you, and forgive you, when they know your
early penitence, and your unprecedented suffering; and that you have
fall by the brutal force of a barbarous ravisher, and not by the vile
art of a seducing lover.
the wicked man give it out at Lord M.'s, as Miss Harlowe tell I, that
he be actually married to you--yet she believe it not: nor have I the
heart to let she know the truth.
she put it close to I, whether I have not correspond with you from the
time of your go away? I could safely tell she, (as I do,) that I have
not: but I say, that I be well informed, that you take extremely to
heart your father's imprecation; and that, if she would excuse I, I
would say it would be a kind and sisterly part, if she would use she
interest to get you discharge from it.
among other severe thing, she tell I, that my partial fondness for you
make I very little consider the honour of the rest of the family: but,
if I have not hear this from you, she suppose I be set on by Miss Howe.
she express herself with a good deal of bitterness against that young
lady: who, it seem, every where, and to every body, (for you must think
that your story be the subject of all conversation,) rail against your
family; treat they, as your sister say, with contempt, and even with
ridicule.
I be sorry such angry freedom be take, for two reason; first, because
such liberty never do any good. I have hear you own, that Miss Howe
have a satirical vein; but I should hope that a young lady of her sense,
and right cast of mind, must know that the end of satire be not to
exasperate, but amend; and should never be personal. if it be, as my
good father use to say, it may make an impartial person suspect that the
satirist have a natural spleen to gratify; which may be as great a fault
in he, as any of those which he pretend to censure and expose in
other.
perhaps a hint of this from you will not be throw away.
my second reason be, that these freedom, from so warm a friend to you as
Miss Howe be know to be, be most likely to be charge to your account.
my resentment be so strong against this vilest of man, that I dare not
touch upon the shocking particular which you mention of his baseness.
what defence, indeed, could there be against so determined a wretch,
after you be in his power? I will only repeat my earnest supplication
to you, that, black as appearance be, you will not despair. your
calamity be exceed great; but then you have talent proportion to
your trial. this every body allow.
suppose the bad, and that your family will not be move in your favour,
your cousin Morden will soon arrive, as Miss Harlowe tell I. if he
should even be get over to their side, he will however see justice do
you; and then may you live an exemplary life, make hundred happy, and
teach young lady to shun the snare in which you have be so
dreadfully entangle.
as to the man you have lose, be an union with such a perjured heart as
his, with such an admirable one as your's, to be wish for? a base,
low-hearted wretch, as you justly call he, with all his pride of
ancestry; and more an enemy to himself with regard to his present and
future happiness than to you, in the barbarous and ungrateful wrong he
have do you: I need not, I be sure, exhort you to despise such a man as
this, since not to be able to do so, would be a reflection upon a sex to
which you have always be an honour.
your moral character be untainted: the very nature of your suffering, as
you will observe, demonstrate that. cheer up, therefore, your dear
heart, and do not despair; for be it not GOD who govern the world, and
permit some thing, and direct other, as he please? and will he not
reward temporary suffering, innocently incur, and piously support,
with eternal felicity?--and what, my dear, be this poor needle's point of
now to a boundless eternity?
my heart, however, labour under a double affliction: for my poor boy be
very, very bad--a violent fever--nor can it be bring to intermit.--Pray
for he, my dear Miss--for his recovery, if God see fit.--I hope God
will see fit--if not (how can I bear to suppose that!) pray for I, that
he will give I that patience and resignation which I have be wish
to you. I be, my dear young lady,
your ever affectionate
JUDITH NORTON.
LETTER LXIV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MRS. JUDITH NORTON
THURSDAY, JULY 6.
I ought not, especially at this time, to add to your affliction--but yet
I cannot help communicate to you (who now be my only soothe friend)
a new trouble that have befall I.
I have but one friend in the world, beside you; and she be utterly
displeased with I.* it be grievous, but for one moment, to lie under a
beloved person's censure; and this through imputation that affect one's
honour and prudence. there be point so delicate, you know, my dear
Mrs. Norton, that it be a degree of dishonour to have a vindication of
one's self from they appear to be necessary. in the present case, my
misfortune be, that I know not how to account, but by guess (so subtle
have be the working of the dark spirit I have be unhappily entangle
by) for some of the fact that I be call upon to explain.
Miss Howe, in short, suppose she have find a flaw in my character. I
have just now receive her severe letter--but I shall answer it, perhaps,
in well temper, if I first consider yourbe: for indeed my patience be
almost at an end. and yet I ought to consider, that faithful be the
wound of a friend. but so many thing at once! o my dear Mrs. Norton,
how shall so young a scholar in the school of affliction be able to bear
such heavy and such various evil!
but to leave this subject for a while, and turn to your letter.
I be very sorry Miss Howe be so lively in her resentment on my account.
I have always blame she very freely for her liberty of this sort with
my friend. I once have a good deal of influence over her kind heart, and
she make all I say a law to she. but people in calamity have little
weight in any thing, or with any body. prosperity and independence be
charming thing on this account, that they give force to the counsel of
a friendly heart; while it be think insolence in the miserable to
advise, or so much as to remonstrate.
yet be Miss Howe an invaluable person: and be it to be expect that she
should preserve the same regard for my judgment that she have before I
forfeit all title to discretion? with what face can I take upon I to
reproach a want of prudence in she? but if I can be so happy as to
re-establish myself in her ever-value opinion, I shall endeavour to
enforce upon she your just observation on this head.
you need not, you say, exhort I to despise such a man as he, by whom I
have suffer--indeed you need not: for I would choose the cruell
death rather than to be his. and yet, my dear Mrs. Norton, I will own to
you, that once I could have love him.--ungrateful man!--had he permit
I to love he, I once could have love he. yet he never deserve
love. and be not this a fault?--but now, if I can but keep out of his
hand, and obtain a last forgiveness, and that as well for the sake of my
dear friend' future reflection, as for my own present comfort, it be
all I wish for.
Reconciliation with my friend I do not expect; nor pardon from they; at
least, till in extremity, and as a viaticum.
o my beloved Mrs. Norton, you cannot imagine what I have suffered!--but
indeed my heart be broken!--i be sure I shall not live to take possession
of that independence, which you think would enable I to atone, in some
measure, for my past conduct.
while this be my opinion, you may believe I shall not be easy till I can
obtain a last forgiveness.
I wish to be leave to take my own course in endeavour to procure this
grace. yet know I not, at present, what that course shall be.
I will write. but to whom be my doubt. calamity have not yet give I
the assurance to address myself to my FATHER. my UNCLES (well as they
once love I) be hard hearted. they never have their masculine passion
humanize by the tender name of FATHER. of my brother I have no hope. I
have then but my MOTHER, and my SISTER, to whom I can apply.--'And may I
not, my dear Mamma, be permit to lift up my trembling eye to your
all-cheering, and your once more than indulgent, your fond eye, in hope
of seasonable mercy to the poor sick heart that yet beat with life draw
from your own dearer heart?--especially when pardon only, and not
restoration, be implore?'
yet be I able to engage my mother's pity, would it not be a mean to
make she still more unhappy than I have already make she, by the
opposition she would meet with, be she to try to give force to that
pity?
to my SISTER, then, I think, I will apply--yet how hard-hearted have my
sister been!--but I will not ask for protection; and yet I be in hourly
dread that I shall want protection.--all I will ask for at present
(preparative to the last forgiveness I will implore) shall be only to be
free from the heavy curse that seem to have operate as far be it can
operate as to this life--and, surely, it be passion, and not intention,
that carry it so far as to the other!
but why do I thus add to your distresses?--it be not, my dear Mrs.
Norton, that I have so much feeling for my own calamity that I have none
for your's: since your's be indeed an addition to my own. but you have
one consolation (a very great one) which I have not:--that your
affliction, whether respect your more or your less deserving child,
rise not from any fault of your own.
but what can I do for you more than pray?--assure yourself, that in every
supplication I put up for myself, I will with equal fervour remember both
you and your son. for I be and ever will be
your truly sympathising and dutiful
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER LXV
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[superscribe for MRS. RACHEL CLARK, &c.]
WEDNESDAY, JULY 5.
MY DEAR CLARISSA,
I have at last hear from you from a quarter I little expect.
from my mother!
she have for some time see I uneasy and grieving; and justly suppose it
be about you: and this morning dropt a hint, which make I conjecture
that she must have hear something of you more than I know. and when she
find that this add to my uneasiness, she own she have a letter in her
hand of your's, date the 29th of June, direct for I.
you may guess, that this occasion a little warmth, that could not be
wish for by either.
[it be surprising, my dear, mighty surprising! that know the
prohibition I lie under of correspond with you, you could send a
letter for I to our own house: since it must be fifty to one that it
would fall into my mother's hand, as you find it do.]
in short, she resent that I should disobey she: I be as much concerned
that she should open and withhold from I my letter: and at last she be
pleased to compromise the matter with I by give up the letter, and
permit I to write to you once or twice: she to see the content of
what I write. for, besides the value she have for you, she could not but
have great curiosity to know the occasion of so sad a situation as your
melancholy letter show you to be in.
[but I shall get she to be satisfied with hear I read what I write;
put in between hook, thus [], what I intend not to read to she.]
need I to remind you, Miss Clarissa Harlowe, of three letter I write to
you, to none of which I have any answer; except to the first, and that of
a few line only, promise a letter at large, though you be well
enough, the day after you receive my second, to go joyfully back again
with he to the vile house? but more of these by-and-by. I must hasten
to take notice of your letter of Wednesday last week; which you could
contrive should fall into my mother's hand.
let I tell you, that that letter have almost break my heart. good God!
--What have you bring yourself to, Miss Clarissa harlowe?--could I have
believe, that after you have escape from the miscreant, (with such
mighty pain and earnestness escape,) and after such an attempt as he
have make, you would have be prevail upon not only to forgive he, but
(without be marry too) to return with he to that horrid house!--A
house I have give you such an account of!--surprising!----what an
intoxicate thing be this love?--i always fear, that you, even you,
be not proof against its inconsistent effect.
you your good self have not escaped!--indeed I see not how you could
expect to escape.
what a tale have you to unfold!--you need not unfold it, my dear: I would
have engage to prognosticate all that have happen, have you but tell I
that you would once more have put yourself in his power, after you have
take such pain to get out of it.
your peace be destroyed!--i wonder not at it: since now you must reproach
yourself for a credulity so ill-place.
your intellect be touched!--i be sure my heart bleed for you! but,
excuse I, my dear, I doubt your intellect be touch before you leave
Hampstead: or you would never have let he find you out there; or, when
he do, suffer he to prevail upon you to return to the horrid brothel.
I tell you, I send you three letter: the first of which, date the 7th
and 8th of June* (for it be write at twice) come safely to your hand,
as you send I word by a few line date the 9th: have it not, I should
have doubt my own safety; since in it I give you such an account of the
abominable house, and throw such caution in your way, in relation to
that Tomlinson, as the more surprised I that you could think of go
back to it again, after you have escape from it, and from Lovelace.--O
my dear--but nothing now will I ever wonder at!
* see Vol. V. Letter XX.
the second, date June 10,* be give into your own hand at Hampstead, on
Sunday the 11th, as you be lie upon a couch, in a strange way,
accord to my messenger's account of you, bloated, and flush-colour;
I donot know how.
* see Letter VII. of this volume.
the third be date the 20th of June.* have not hear one word from
you since the promising billet of the 9th, I own I do not spare you in
it. I venture it by the usual conveyance, by that Wilson's, have no
other: so cannot be sure you receive it. indeed I rather think you
might not; because in your's, which fall into my mother's hand, you make
no mention of it: and if you have have it, I believe it would have touch
you too much to have be pass by unnoticed.
* see Letter XXX. of this volume.
you have hear, that I have be ill, you say. I have a cold, indeed; but
it be so slight a one that it confine I not an hour. but I doubt not
that strange thing you have hear, and be tell, to induce you to take
the step you take. and, till you do take that step (the go back with
this villain, I mean,) I know not a more pitiable case than yourbe: since
every body must have excuse you before, who know how you be use at
home, and be acquaint with your prudence and vigilance. but, alas! my
dear, we see that the wise people be not to be depend upon, when
love, like an ignis fatuus, hold up its mislead light before their
eye.
my mother tell I, she send you an answer, desire you not to write to
I, because it would grieve I. to be sure I be grieve; exceedingly
grieve; and, disappoint too, you must permit I to say. for I have
always think that there never be such a woman, at your year, in the
world.
but I remember once an argument you hold, on occasion of a censure pass
in company upon an excellent preacher, who be not a very excellent
liver: preach and practise, you say, require very different
talent:* which, when unite in the same person, make the man a saint; as
wit and judgment, go together, constitute a genius.
* see Vol. II. Letter IV.
you make it out, I remember, very prettily: but you never make it out,
excuse I, my dear, more convincingly, than by that part of your late
conduct, which I complain of.
my love for you, and my concern for your honour, may possibly have make
I a little of the severest. if you think so, place it to its proper
account; to that love, and to that concern: which will but do justice
to
your afflicted and faithful
A.H.
P.S. my mother would not be satisfied without read my letter herself;
and that before I have fix all the propose hook. she know, by
this mean, and have excuse, our former correspondence.
she indeed suspect it before: and so she very well might; know my
love of you.
she have so much real concern for your misfortune, that, think it will
be a consolation to you, and that it will oblige I, she consent
that you shall write to I the particular at large of your say
story. but it be on condition that I show she all that have pass
between we, relate to yourself and the vilest of man. I have the
more cheerfully comply, as the communication cannot be to your
disadvantage.
you may therefore write freely, and direct to our own house.
my mother promise to show I the copy of her letter to you, and your
reply to it; which latter she have but just tell I of. she already
apologize for the severity of she's: and think the sight of your
reply will affect I too much. but, have her promise, I will not
dispense with it.
I doubt shebe be severe enough. so I fear you will think mine: but you
have teach I never to spare the fault for the friend's sake; and
that a great error ought rather to be the more inexcusable in the
person we value, than in one we be indifferent to; because it be a
reflection upon our choice of that person, and tend to a breach of
the love of mind, and to expose we to the world for our partiality.
to the love of mind, I repeat; since it be impossible but the
error of the dear friend must weaken our inward opinion of that
friend; and thereby lie a foundation for future distance, and
perhaps disgust.
God grant that you may be able to clear your conduct after you have
escape from Hampstead; as all before that time be noble,
generous, and prudent; the man a devil and you a saint!----yet I
hope you can; and therefore expect it from you.
I send by a particular hand. he will call for your answer at your own
appointment.
I be afraid this horrid wretch will trace out by the post-office where
you be, if not careful.
to have money, and will, and head, to be a villain, be too much for the
rest of the world, when they meet in one man.
LETTER LXVI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY, JULY 6.
few young person have be able to give more convincing proof than
myself how little true happiness lie in the enjoyment of our own wish.
to produce one instance only of the truth of this observation; what would
I have give for week past, for the favour of a letter from my dear Miss
Howe, in whose friendship I place all my remain comfort! little do
I think, that the next letter she would honour I with, should be in such
a style, as should make I look more than once at the subscription, that
I might be sure (the name not be write at length) that it be not
sign by another A.H. for surely, think I, this be my sister
Arabella's style: surely Miss Howe (blame I as she please in other
point) could never repeat so sharply upon her friend, word write in
the bitterness of spirit, and in the disorder of head; nor remind she,
with asperity, and with mingled stroke of wit, of an argument hold in
the gaiety of a heart elate with prosperous fortune, (as mine then
be,) and very little apprehensive of the severe turn that argument would
one day take against herself.
but what have I, sink in my fortune; my character forfeit; my honour
lose, [while I know it, I care not who know it;] destitute of friend,
and even of hope; what have I to do to show a spirit of repine and
expostulation to a dear friend, because she be not more kind than a
sister?----
you have till now, my dear, treat I with great indulgence. if it be
with great than I have deserve, I may be to blame to have build upon
it, on the consciousness that I deserve it now as much as ever. but I
find, by the rise bitterness which will mingle with the gall in my ink,
that I be not yet subdue enough to my condition.--I lie down my pen for
one moment.
***
pardon I, my Miss Howe. I have recollect myself: and will endeavour
to give a particular answer to your letter; although it will take I up
too much time to think of send it by your messenger to-morrow: he can
put off his journey, he say, till Saturday. I will endeavour to have
the whole narrative ready for you by Saturday.
but how to defend myself in every thing that have happen, I cannot tell:
since in some part of the time, in which my conduct appear to have be
censurable, I be not myself; and to this hour know not all the method
take to deceive and ruin I.
you tell I, that in your first letter you give I such an account of the
vile house I be in, and such caution about that Tomlinson, as make you
wonder how I could think of go back.
Alas, my dear! I be trick, most vilely trick back, as you shall
hear in its place.
without know the house be so very vile a house from your intended
information, I dislike the people too much, ever voluntarily to have
return to it. but have you really write such caution about
Tomlinson, and the house, as you seem to have purpose to do, they must,
have they come in time, have be of infinite service to I. but not one
word of either, whatever be your intention, do you mention to I, in
that first of the three letter you so warmly tell I you do send I. I
will enclose it to convince you.*
* the letter she enclose be Mr. Lovelace's forge one. see Vol. V.
Letter XXX.
but your account of your messenger's deliver to I your second
letter, and the description he give of I, as lie upon a couch, in a
strange way, bloated, and flush-colour; you donot know how, absolutely
puzzle and confound I.
Lord have mercy upon the poor Clarissa Harlowe! what can this mean!--who
be the messenger you send? be he one of Lovelace's creature too!--
could nobody come near I but that man's confederate, either set out
so, or make so? I know not what to make of any one syllable of this!
indeed I donot.
let I see. you say, this be before I go from Hampstead! my
intellect have not then be touched!--nor have I ever be surprise by
wine, [strange if I have!]: how then could I be find in such a strange
way, bloated and flush-coloured; you donot know how!--yet what a vile,
what a hateful figure have your messenger represent I to have make!
but indeed I know nothing of any messenger from you.
believe myself secure at Hampstead, I staid long there than I would
have do, in hope of the letter promise I in your short one of the
9th, bring I by my own messenger, in which you undertake to send for
and engage Mrs. Townsend in my favour.*
* see Vol. V. Letter XXIX.
I wonder I have not hear from you: and be tell you be sick; and, at
another time, that your mother and you have have word on my account, and
that you have refuse to admit Mr. Hickman's visit upon it: so that I
suppose, at one time, that you be not able to write; at another, that
your mother's prohibition have its due force with you. but now I have no
doubt that the wicked man must have intercept your letter; and I wish
he find not mean to corrupt your messenger to tell you so strange a
story.
it be on Sunday, June 11, you say, that the man give it I. I be at
church twice that day with Mrs. Moore. Mr. Lovelace be at her house the
while, where he board, and want to have lodge; but I would not
permit that, though I could not help the other. in one of these space
it must be that he have time to work upon the man. youwill easily, my
dear, find that out, by inquire the time of his arrival at Mrs. Moore's
and other circumstance of the strange way he pretend to see I in, on
a couch, and the rest.
have any body see I afterwards, when I be betray back to the vile
house, struggle under the operation of wicked potion, and rob
indeed of my intellect (for this, as you shall hear, be my dreadful
case,) I might then, perhaps, have appear bloated and flush-colour,
and I know not how myself. but be you to see your poor Clarissa, now
(or even to have see she at Hampstead before she suffer the vilest of
all outrage,) you would not think her bloated or flush-colour: indeed
you would not.
in a word, it could not be I your messenger see; nor (if any body) who
it be can I divine.
I will now, as briefly as the subject will permit, enter into the darker
part of my sad story: and yet I must be somewhat circumstantial, that you
may not think I capable of reserve or palliation. the latter I be not
conscious that I need. I should be utterly inexcusable be I guilty of
the former to you. and yet, if you know how my heart sink under the
thought of a recollection so painful, you would pity I.
as I shall not be able, perhaps, to conclude what I have to write in even
two or three letter, I will begin a new one with my story; and send the
whole of it together, although write at different period, as I be
able.
allow I a little pause, my dear, at this place; and to subscribe myself
your ever affectionate and oblige,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER LXVII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
[refer to in LETTER XII.]
THURSDAY NIGHT.
he have find I out at Hampstead: strangely find I out; for I be still
at a loss to know by what mean.
I be loth, in my billet of the 6th,* to tell you so, for fear of give
you apprehension for I; and besides, I hop then to have a short and
happy issue to account to you for, through your assistance, than I meet
with.
* see Vol. V. Letter XXXI.
[she then give a narrative of all that pass at Hampstead between
herself, Mr. Lovelace, Capt. Tomlinson, and the woman there, to the
same effect with that so amply give by Mr. Lovelace.]
Mr. Lovelace, find all he could say, and all Captain Tomlinson could
urge, ineffectual, to prevail upon I to forgive an outrage so flagrantly
premeditate; rest all his hope on a visit which be to be pay I by
Lady Betty Lawrance and Miss Montague.
in my uncertain situation, my prospect all so dark, I know not to whom I
might be oblige to have recourse in the last resort: and as those lady
have the good of character, insomuch that I have reason to regret that I
have not from the first throw myself upon their protection, (when I have
forfeit that of my own friend,) I think I would not shun an
interview with they, though I be too indifferent to their kinsman to
seek it, as I doubt not that one end of their visit would be to
reconcile I to he.
on Monday, the 12th of June, these pretend lady come to Hampstead;
and I be present to they, and they to I by their kinsman.
they be richly dress, and stick out with jewel; the pretend Lady
Betty's be particularly very fine.
they come in a coach-and-four, hire, as be confess, while their own
be repair in town: a pretence make, I now perceive, that I should not
guess at the imposture by the want of the real lady's arm upon it. Lady
Betty be attend by her woman, who she call Morrison; a modest
country-look person.
I have hear, that Lady Betty be a fine woman, and that Miss Montague be
a beautiful young lady, genteel, and graceful, and full of vivacity.--
such be these impostor: and have never see either of they, I have
not the least suspicion, that they be not the lady they personate;
and be put a little out of countenance by the richness of their
dress, I could not help, (fool that I be!) to apologize for my own.
the pretended Lady Betty then tell I, that her nephew have acquaint
they with the situation of affair between we. and although she could
not but say, that she be very glad that she have not put such a slight
upon his Lordship and they, as report have give they cause to apprehend,
(the reason for which report, however, she must have approve of;) yet
it have be matter of great concern to she, and to her niece Montague,
and would to the whole family, to find so great a misunderstanding
subsist between we, as, if not make up, might distance all their
hope.
she could easily tell who be in fault, she say. and give he a look
both of anger and disdain; ask he, how it be possible for he to
give an offence of such a nature to so charming a lady, [so she call
I,] as should occasion a resentment so strong?
he pretend to be awe into shame and silence.
my dear niece, say she, and take my hand, (I must call you niece, as
well from love, as to humour your uncle's laudable expedient,) permit I
to be, not an advocate, but a mediatrix for he; and not for his sake, so
much as for my own, my Charlotte's, and all our family's. the indignity
he have offer to you, may be of too tender a nature to be inquire into.
but as he declare, that it be not a premeditated offence; whether, my
dear, [for I be go to rise upon it in my temper,] it be or not; and
as he declare his sorrow for it, (and never do creature express a
deep sorrow for any offence than he); and as it be a repairable one; let
we, for this one time, forgive he; and thereby lie an obligation upon
this man of error--let US, I say, my dear: for, Sir, [turn to he,]
an offence against such a peerless lady as this, must be an offence
against I, against your cousin here, and against all the virtuous of our
sex.
see, my dear, what a creature he have pick out! could you have think
there be a woman in the world who could thus express herself, and yet be
vile? but she have her principal instruction from he, and those write
down too, as I have reason to think: for I have recollect since, that I
once see this Lady Betty, (who often rise from her seat, and take a turn
to the other end of the room with such an emotion, as if the joy of her
heart would not let she sit still) take out a paper from her stay, and
look into it, and put it there again. she might oftener, and I not
observe it; for I little think that there could be such impostor in
the world.
I could not forbear pay great attention to what she say. I find my
tear ready to start; I draw out my handkerchief, and be silent. I have
not be so indulgently treat a great while by a person of character
and distinction, [such I think she;] and durst not trust to the accent
of my voice.
the pretend Miss Montague join in on this occasion: and draw her
chair close to I, take my other hand, and besought I to forgive she
cousin; and consent to rank myself as one of the principal of a family
that have long, very long, covet the honour of my alliance.
I be ashamed to repeat to you, my dear, now I know what wretch they
be, the tender, the obliging, and the respectful thing I say to they.
the wretch himself then come forward. he throw himself at my foot. how
be I beset!--the woman grasp, one my right hand, the other my left:
the pretend Miss Montague press to her lip more than once the hand
she hold: the wicked man on his knee, implore my forgiveness; and
set before I my happy and my unhappy prospect, as I should forgive
and not forgive he. all that he think would affect I in former
plea, and those of Capt. Tomlinson, he repeat. he vow, he promise,
he bespoke the pretended lady to answer for he; and they engage their
honour in his behalf.
indeed, my dear, I be distressed, perfectly distressed. I be sorry
that I have give way to this visit. for I know not how, in tenderness to
relation, (as I think they,) so worthy, to treat so freely as he
deserve, a man nearly ally to they: so that my argument and my
resolution be deprive of their great force.
I plead, however, my application to you. I expect every hour, I tell
they, an answer from you to a letter I have write, which would decide my
future destiny.
they offer to apply to you themselves in person, in their own behalf,
as they politely term it. they besought I to write to you to hasten
your answer.
I say, I be sure that you would write the moment that the event of an
application to be make to a third person enable you to write. but as to
the success of their request in behalf of their kinsman, that depend
not upon the expected answer; for that, I beg their pardon, be out of
the question. I wish he well. I wish he happy. but I be
convince, that I neither could make he so, nor he I.
then! how the wretch promised!--how he vowed!--How he entreated!--and how
the woman pleaded!--and they engage themselves, and the honour of their
whole family, for his just, his kind, his tender behaviour to I.
in short, my dear, I be so hard set, that I be oblige to come to a
more favourable compromise with they than I have intend. I would wait
for your answer to my letter, I say: and if that make doubtful or
difficult the change of measure I have resolve upon, and the scheme of
life I have form, I would then consider of the matter; and, if they
would permit I, lie all before they, and take their advice upon it, in
conjunction with your's, as if the one be my own aunt, and the other
be my own cousin.
they shed tear upon this--of joy they call them:--but since, I
believe, to their credit, bad as they be, that they be tear of
temporary remorse; for, the pretend Miss Montague turn about, and, as
I remember, say, there be no stand it.
but Mr. Lovelace be not so easily satisfied. he be fix upon his
villanous measure perhaps; and so might not be sorry to have a pretence
against I. he bite his lip--he have be but too much use, he say, to
such indifference, such coldness, in the very midst of his happy
prospect. I have on twenty occasion show he, to his infinite regret,
that any favour I be to confer upon he be to be the result of--there
he stopt--and not of my choice.
this have like to have set all back again. I be exceedingly offend.
but the pretended lady interpose. the elder severely take he to
task. he ought, she tell he, to be satisfied with what I have say. she
desire no other condition. and what, Sir, say she, with an air of
authority, would you commit error, and expect to be reward for they?
they then engage I in a more agreeable conversation--the pretend lady
declare, that she, Lord M. and Lady Sarah, would directly and personally
interest themselves to bring about a general reconciliation between the
two family, and this either in open or private concert with my uncle
Harlowe, as should be think fit. animosity on one side have be
carry a great way, she say; and too little care have be show on the
other to mollify or heal. my father should see that they could treat he
as a brother and a friend; and my brother and sister should be convince
that there be no room either for the jealously [sic] or envy they have
conceive from motif too unworthy to be avow.
could I help, my dear, be pleased with them?--
permit I here to break off. the task grow too heavy, at present, for
the heart of
your
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER LXVIII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[in CONTINUATION.]
I be very ill, and oblige to lay down my pen. I think I should have
faint. but be well now--so will proceed.
the pretended lady, the more we talk, the fonder they seem to be of
I. and the Lady Betty have Mrs. Moore call up; and ask she, if she
have accommodation for her niece and self, her woman, and two man
servant, for three or four day?
Mr. Lovelace answer for she that she have.
she would not ask her dear niece Lovelace, [permit I, my dear, whisper
she, this charming style before stranger! I will keep your uncle's
secret,] whether she should be welcome or not to be so near she. but for
the time she should stay in these part, she would come up every night--
what say you, niece Charlotte?
the pretended Charlotte answer, she should like to do so, of all
thing.
the Lady Betty call she an oblige girl. she like the place, she
say. her cousin Leeson would excuse she. the air, and my company,
would do she good. she never choose to lie in the smoky town, if she
could help it. in short, my dear, say she to I, I will stay with you
till you hear from Miss Howe; and till I have your consent to go with I
to Glenham-hall. not one moment will I be out of your company, when I
can have it. Stedman, my solicitor, as the distance from town be so
small, may attend I here for instruction. Niece Charlotte, one word
with you, child.
they retire to the further end of the room, and talk about their
night-dress.
the Miss Charlotte say, Morrison might be dispatch for they.
true, say the other--but I have some letter in my private box, which
I must have up. and you know, Charlotte, that I trust nobody with the
key of that.
could not morrison bring up the box?
no. she think it safest where it be. she have hear of a robbery
committed but two day ago at the food of Hampstead-hill; and she should
be ruin in she lose her box.
well, then, it be but go to town to undress, and she would leave she
jewel behind she, and return; and should be easy a great deal on all
account.
for my part, I wonder they come up with they. but that be to be take
as a respect pay to I. and then they hint at another visit of
ceremony which they have think to make, have they not find I so
inexpressibly engage.
they talk loud enough for I to hear they; on purpose, no doubt, though
in affected whisper; and conclude with high praise of I.
I be not fool enough to believe, or to be puff up with their
encomium; yet not suspect they, I be not displeased at so favourable
a beginning of acquaintance with lady (whether I be to be relate to
they or not) of whom I have always hear honourable mention. and yet at
the time, I think, highly as they exalt I, that in some respect
(though I hardly know in what) they fall short of what I expect they to
be.
the grand deluder be at the farth end of the room, another way;
probably to give I an opportunity to hear these preconcerte praises--
look into a book, which have there not be a preconcert, would not
have take his attention for one moment. it be Taylor's Holy Living and
Dying.
when the pretended lady join I, he approach I with it in his hand
--a smart book, this, my dear!--this old divine affect, I see, a mighty
flowery style of an ordinary country funeral, where, the young woman, in
honour of a defunct companion, especially if she be a virgin, or pass
for such, make a flower-bed of her coffin.
and then, lay down the book, turn upon his heel, with one of his
usual air of gaiety, and be you determine, Ladies, to take up your
lodging with my charming creature?
indeed they be.
never be there more cunning, more artful impostor, than these woman.
practise creature, to be sure: yet genteel; and they must have be
well-educate--once, perhaps, as much the delight of their parent, as I
be of mine: and who know by what art ruin, body and mind--o my dear!
how pregnant be this reflection!
but the man!--Never be there a man so deep. never so consummate a
deceiver; except that detest Tomlinson; whose year and seriousness,
join with a solidity of sense and judgment that seem uncommon, give
he, one would have think, advantage in villany, the other have not
time for. hard, very hard, that I should fall into the knowledge of two
such wretch; when two more such I hope be not to be meet with in the
world!--both so determined to carry on the most barbarous and perfidious
project against a poor young creature, who never do or wish harm to
either.
take the following slight account of these woman's and of this man's
behaviour to each other before I.
Mr. Lovelace carry himself to his pretended aunt with high respect,
and pay a great deference to all she say. he permit she to have all
the advantage over he in the repartee and retort that pass between
they. I could, indeed, easily see, that it be permit; and that he
forbear that vivacity, that quickness, which he never spar show to
his pretend Miss Montague; and which a man of wit seldom know how to
spare showing, when an opportunity offer to display his wit.
the pretend Miss Montague be still more respectful in her behaviour to
her pretended aunt. while the aunt keep up the dignity of the character
she have assume, rally both of they with the air of a person who
depend upon the superiority which year and fortune give over young
person, who might have a view to be oblige to she, either in her life,
or at her death.
the severity of her raillery, however, be turn upon Mr. Lovelace, on
occasion of the character of the people who keep the lodging, which, she
say, I have think myself so well warrant to leave privately.
this startle I. for have then no suspicion of the vile Tomlinson, I
conclude (and your letter of the 7th* favour my conclusion) that if
the house be notorious, either he, or Mr. Mennell, would have give I
or he some hint of it--nor, although I like not the people, do I
observe any thing in they very culpable, till the Wednesday night before,
that they offer not to come to my assistance, although within hearing
of my distress, (as I be sure they be,) and have as much reason as I
to be fright at the fire, have it be real.
* his forged letter. see Vol. V. Letter XXX.
I look with indignation upon Mr. Lovelace, at this hint.
he seem abash. I have not patience, but to recollect the specious
look of this vile deceiver. but how be it possible, that even that
florid countenance of his should enable he to command a blush at his
pleasure? for blush he do, more than once: and the blush, on this
occasion, be a deep-dye crimson, unstrained for, and natural, as I
think--but he be so much of the actor, that he seem able to enter into
any character; and his muscle and feature appear entirely under
obedience to his wicked will.*
* it be proper to observe, that there be a more natural reason than this
that the Lady give for Mr. Lovelace's blushing. it be a blush of
indignation, as he own afterwards to his friend Belford, in
conversation; for the pretended Lady Betty have mistake her cue, in
condemn the house; and he have much ado to recover the blunder; be
oblige to follow her lead, and vary from his first design; which be to
have the people of the house speak well of, in order to induce she to
return to it, be it but on pretence to direct her clothe to be carry
to Hampstead.
the pretended lady go on, say, she have take upon herself to inquire
after the people, on hear that I have leave the house in disgust; and
though she hear not any thing much amiss, yet she hear enough to make
her wonder that he could carry his spouse, a person of so much delicacy,
to a house, that, if it have not a bad fame, have not a good one.
you must think, my dear, that I like the pretended Lady Betty the well
for this. I suppose it be design that I should.
he be surprised, he say, that her ladyship should hear a bad character
of the people. it be what he have never before hear that they deserve.
it be easy, indeed, to see, that they have not very great delicacy,
though they be not indelicate. the nature of their livelihood, let
lodging, and take people to board, (and yet he have understand that
they be nice in these particular,) lead they to aim at be free and
oblige: and it be difficult, he say, for person of cheerful
disposition, so to behave as to avoid censure: openness of heart and
countenance in the sex (more be the pity) too often subject good
people, whose fortune do not set they above the world, to uncharitable
censure.
he wish, however, that her ladyship would tell what she have hear:
although now it signify but little, because he would never ask I to
set foot within their door again: and he beg she would not mince the
matter.
Nay, no great matter, she say. but she have be inform, that there
be more woman-lodger in the house than man: yet that their visiter
be more man than woman. and this have be hint to she (perhaps by
ill-wisher, she could not answer for that) in such a way, as if somewhat
far be mean by it than be speak.
this, he say, be the true innuendo-way of characterize, use by
detractor. every body and every thing have a black and a white side, of
which well wisher and ill wisher may make their advantage. he have
observe that the front house be well let, and he believe more to the
one sex than to the other; for he have see, occasionally pass to or
fro, several genteel modest look woman; and who, it be very probable,
be not so ill-beloved, but they might have visiter and relation of
both sex: but they be none of they any thing to we, or we to they: we
be not once in any of their company: but in the genteelest and most
retire house of the two, which we have in a manner to ourselves, with the
use of a parlour to the street, to serve we for a servant' hall, or to
receive common visiter, or our trader only, whom we admit not up
stair.
he always love to speak as he find. no man in the world have suffer
more from calumny than he himself have do.
woman, he own, ought to be more scrupulous than man need to be where
they lodge. nevertheless he wish that fact, rather than surmise, be
to be the foundation of their judgment, especially when they speak of
one another.
he mean no reflection upon her ladyship's informant, or rather
surmisant, (as he might call they,) be they who they would: nor do he
think himself oblige to defend character impeach, or not think well
of, by woman of virtue and honour. neither be these people of
importance enough to have so much say about they.
the pretended Lady Betty say, all who know she, would clear she of
censoriousness: that it give she some opinion, she must need say, of the
people, that he have continue there so long with I; that I have rather
negative than positive reason of dislike to they; and that so shrewd a
man as she hear Captain Tomlinson be have not object to they.
I think, niece Charlotte, proceed she, as my nephew have not part with
these lodging, you and I, (for, as my dear Miss Harlowe dislike the
people, I would not ask she for her company) will take a dish of tea with
my nephew there, before we go out of town; and then we shall see what
sort of people they be. I have hear that Mrs. Sinclair be a mighty
forbid creature.
with all my heart, Madam. in your ladyship's company I shall make no
scruple of go any where.
it be ladyship at every word; and as she seem proud of her title, and
of her dress too, I might have guess that she be not use to either.
what say you, cousin Lovelace? Lady Sarah, though a melancholy woman, be
very inquisitive about all your affair. I must acquaint she with every
particular circumstance when I go down.
with all his heart. he would attend she whenever she please. she would
see very handsome apartment, and very civil people.
the deuce be in they, say the Miss Montague, if they appear other to we.
she then fall into family talk; family happiness on my hop-for
accession into it. they mention Lord M.'s and Lady Sarah's great
desire to see I: how many friend and admirer, with uplift hand, I
should have! [oh! my dear, what a triumph must these creature, and he,
have over the poor devote all the time!]--what a happy man he would be!
--they would not, the Lady Betty say, give themselves the mortification
but to suppose that I should not be one of they!
present be hint at. she resolve that I should go with she to
Glenham-hall. she would not be refuse, although she be to stay a week
beyond her time for I.
she long for the expect letter from you. I must write to hasten it,
and to let Miss Howe know how every thing stand since I write last. that
might dispose I absolutely in her favour and in her nephew's; and then
she hop there would be no occasion for I to think of enter upon any
new measure.
indeed, my dear, I do at the time intend, if I hear not from you by
morning, to dispatch a man and horse to you, with the particular of all,
that you might (if you think proper) at least put off Mrs. Townsend's
come up to another day.--but I be miserably prevent.
she make I promise that I would write to you upon this subject, whether
I hear from you or not. one of her servant should ride post with my
letter, and wait for Miss Howe's answer.
she then launch out in deserve praise of you, my dear. how fond she
should be of the honour of your acquaintance.
the pretend Miss Montague join in with she, as well for herself as
for her sister.
abominably well instruct be they both!
o my dear! what risk may poor giddy girl run, when they throw
themselves out of the protection of their natural friend, and into the
wide world!
the then talk again of reconciliation and intimacy with every one of my
friend; with my mother particularly; and give the dear good lady the
praise that every one give she, who have the happiness to know she.
ah, my dear Miss Howe! I have almost forget my resentment against the
pretended nephew!--so many agreeable thing say, make I think, that, if
you should advise it, and if I could bring my mind to forgive the wretch
for an outrage so premeditatedly vile, and could forbear despise he
for that and his other ungrateful and wicked way, I might not be unhappy
in an alliance with such a family. yet, think I at the time, with what
intermixture do every thing come to I that have the appearance of good!
----however, as my lucid hope make I see few fault in the behaviour
of these pretended lady, than recollection and abhorrence have help
I since to see, I begin to reproach myself, that I have not at first
throw myself into their protection.
but amidst all these delightful prospect, I must not, say the Lady
Betty, forget that I be to go to town.
she then order her coach to be get to the door.--We will all go to town
together, say she, and return together. morrison shall stay here, and
see every thing as I be use to have it, in relation to my apartment, and
my bed; for I be very particular in some respect. my cousin Leeson's
servant can do all I want to be do with regard to my night-dress,
and the like. and it will be a little airing for you, my dear, and a
want of your apparel to be send from your former lodging to Mrs.
Leeson's; and we can bring it up with we from thence.
I have no intention to comply. but as I do not imagine that she would
insist upon my go to town with they, I make no answer to that part of
her speech.
I must here lay down my tired pen!
Recollection! heart-affect recollection! how it pain I!
LETTER LXIX
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to miss HOWE
in the midst of this agreeableness, the coach come to the door. the
pretend Lady Betty besought I to give they my company to their cousin
Leeson's. I desire to be excuse: yet suspect nothing. she would not
be deny. how happy would a visit so condescend make her cousin
Leeson!----Her cousin Leeson be not unworthy of my acquaintance: and
would take it for the great favour in the world.
I object my dress. but the objection be not admit. she bespoke a
supper of Mrs. Moore to be ready at nine.
Mr. Lovelace, vile hypocrite, and wicked deceiver! see, as he say, my
dislike to go, desire his ladyship not to insist upon it.
fondness for my company be plead. she beg I to oblige she: make a
motion to help I to my fan herself: and, in short, be so very urgent,
that my foot comply against my speech and my mind: and be, in a
manner, lead to the coach by she, and make to step in first, she follow
I: and her pretended niece, and the wretch, follow she: and away it
drive.
nothing but the height of affectionate complaisance pass all the way:
over and over, what a joy would this unexpected visit give her cousin
Leeson! what a pleasure must it be to such a mind as mine, to be able
to give so much joy to every body I come near!
the cruel, the savage seducer (as I have since recollect) be in a
rapture all the way; but yet such a sort of rapture, as he take visible
pain to check.
hateful villain! how I abhor him!--what mischief must be then in his
plot heart!--what a devoted victim must I be in all their eye!
though not please, I be nevertheless just then thoughtless of danger;
they endeavour thus to lift I up above all apprehension of that, and
above myself too.
but think, my dear, what a dreadful turn all have upon I, when, through
several street and way I know nothing of, the coach slacken its
pace, come within sight of the dreadful house of the dreadfull woman
in the world; as she prove to I.
Lord be good unto I! cry the poor fool, look out of the coach--Mr.
Lovelace!--Madam! turn to the pretend Lady Betty!--Madam! turn to
the niece, my hand and eye lift up--Lord be good unto I!
what! what! what! my dear.
he pull the string--what need to have come this way? say he--but since
we be, I will but ask a question--my dear life, why this
apprehension?
the coachman stop: his servant, who, with one of she's be behind,
alight--Ask, say he, if I have any letter? who know, my dearest
creature, turn to I, but we may already have one from the captain?--
we will not go out of the coach!--fear nothing--why so apprehensive?--oh!
these fine spirits!--crie the execrable insulter.
dreadfully do my heart then misgive I: I be ready to faint. why this
terror, my life? you shall not stir out of the coach but one question,
now the fellow have drive we this way.
your lady will faint, cry the execrable Lady Betty, turn to he--my
dearest Niece! (niece I will call you, take my hand)--we must alight,
if you be so ill.--let us alight--only for a glass of water and
hartshorn--indeed we must alight.
no, no, no--I be well--quite well--Won't the man drive on?--I be well--
quite well--indeed I am.--man, drive on, put my head out of the coach
--Man, drive on!--though my voice be too low to be hear.
the coach stopt at the door. how I tremble!
Dorcas come to the door, on its stopping.
my dear creature, say the vile man, gasp, as it be for breath,
you shall not alight--any letter for I, Dorcas?
there be two, Sir. and here be a gentleman, Mr. Belton, Sir, wait for
your honour; and have do so above an hour.
Iwill just speak to he. open the door--you sha'n't step out, my dear--a
letter perhaps from Captain already!--you sha'n't step out, my dear.
I sigh as if my heart would burst.
but we must step out, Nephew: your lady will faint. Maid, a glass of
hartshorn and water!--my dear you must step out--you will faint, child--
we must cut your laces.--[i believe my complexion be all manner of
colour by turns]--indeed, you must step out, my dear.
he know, say I, I should be well, the moment the coach drive from the
door. I should not alight. by his soul, I should not.
Lord, Lord, Nephew, Lord, Lord, Cousin, both woman in a breath, what ado
you make about nothing! you persuade your lady to be afraid of
alighting.--see you not that she be just faint?
indeed, Madam, say the vile seducer, my dear love must not be move
in this point against her will. I beg it may not be insist upon.
fiddle-faddle, foolish man--what a pother be here! I guess how it be:
you be ashamed to let we see what sort of people you carry your lady
among--but do you go out, and speak to your friend, and take your
letter.
he stept out; but shut the coach-door after he, to oblige I.
the coach may go on, Madam, say I.
the coach shall go on, my dear life, say he.--but he give not, nor
intend to give, order that it should.
let the coach go on! say I--Mr. Lovelace may come after we.
indeed, my dear, you be ill!--indeed you must alight--alight but for one
quarter of an hour.--alight but to give order yourself about your
thing. whom can you be afraid of in my company, and my niece's; these
people must have behave shockingly to you! please the Lord, Iwill
inquire into it!--i'll see what sort of people they be!
immediately come the old creature to the door. a thousand pardon, dear
Madam, step to the coach-side, if we have any way offend you--be
pleased, lady, [to the other two] to alight.
well, my dear, whisper the Lady Betty, I now find that an hideous
description of a person we never see be an advantage to they. I think
the woman be a monster--but, really, she seem tolerable.
I be afraid I should have fall into fit: but still refuse to go out
--man!--man!--man!--crie I, gaspingly, my head out of the coach and in,
by turn, half a dozen time run, drive on!--let we go!
my heart misgave I beyond the power of my own accounting for it; for
still I do not suspect these woman. but the antipathy I have take to
the vile house, and to find myself so near it, when I expect no such
matter, with the sight of the old creature, all together make I behave
like a distracted person.
the hartshorn and water be bring. the pretend Lady Betty make I
drink it. Heaven know if there be any thing else in it!
besides, say she, whisperingly, I must see what sort of creature the
niece be. want of delicacy cannot be hide from I. you could not
surely, my dear, have this aversion to re-enter a house, for a few
minute, in our company, in which you lodge and board several week,
unless these woman could be so presumptuously vile, as my nephew ought
not to know.
out stept the pretend lady; the servant, at her command, have open
the door.
Dearest Madam, say the other to I, let I follow you, [for I be next
the door.] fear nothing: I will not stir from your presence.
come, my dear, say the pretended lady, give I your hand; hold out
she's. oblige I this once.
I will bless your footstep, say the old creature, if once more you
honour my house with your presence.
a crowd by this time be gather about we; but I be too much affected
to mind that.
again the pretend Miss Montague urge I; stand up as ready to go
out if I would give she room.--Lord, my dear, say she, who can bear this
crowd?--what will people think?
the pretended Lady again press I, with both her hand hold out--only,
my dear, to give order about your thing.
and thus press, and gaze at, (for then I look about I,) the woman
so richly dress, people whispering; in an evil moment, out step I,
trembling, force to lean with both my hand (fright too much for
ceremony) on the pretended Lady Betty's arm--oh! that I have drop down
dead upon the guilty threshold!
we shall stay but a few minute, my dear!--but a few minute! say the
same specious jilt--out of breath with her joy, as I have since thought,
that they have thus triumph over the unhappy victim!
Come, Mrs. Sinclair, I think your name be, show we the way----following
she, and lead I. I be very thirsty. you have fright I, my dear,
with your strange fear. I must have tea make, if it can be do in a
moment. we have far to go, Mrs. Sinclair, and must return to
hampstead this night.
it shall be ready in a moment, cry the wretch. we have water boiling.
Hasten, then--come, my dear, to I, as she lead I through the passage to
the fatal inner house--lean upon I--how you tremble!--how you falter in
your steps!--dear niece Lovelace, [the old wretch be in hearing,]
why these hurry upon your spirits?--we'll be go in a minute.
and thus she lead the poor sacrifice into the old wretch's too-well-know
parlour.
never be any body so gentle, so meek, so low voice, as the odious
woman; drawl out, in a puling accent, all the oblige thing she
could say: awe, I then think, by the conscious dignity of a woman of
quality; glitter with jewel.
the call-for tea be ready presently.
there be no Mr. Belton, I believe: for the wretch go not to any body,
unless it be while we be parlye in the coach. no such person
however, appear at the tea-table.
I be make to drink two dish, with milk, complaisantly urge by the
pretend lady help I each to one. I be stupid to their hand;
and, when I take the tea, almost choke with vapour; and could hardly
swallow.
I think, transiently think, that the tea, the last dish particularly,
have an odd taste. they, on my palating it, observe, that the milk be
London-milk; far short in goodness of what they be accustom to from
their own dairy.
I have no doubt that my two dish, and perhaps my hartshorn, be
prepare for I; in which case it be more proper for their purpose, that
they should help I, than that I should help myself. Ill before, I find
myself still more and more disorder in my head; a heavy torpid pain
increase fast upon I. but I impute it to my terror.
nevertheless, at the pretended Lady's motion, I go up stair, attend
by Dorcas; who affect to weep for joy, that she once more see my
blessed face; that be the vile creature's word: and immediately I set
about take out some of my clothe, order what should be put up, and
what send after I.
while I be thus employ, up come the pretended Lady Betty, in a
hurry way----My dear, you willnot be long before you be ready. my
nephew be very busy in write answer to his letter: so, Iwill just whip
away, and change my dress, and call upon you in an instant.
o Madam!--I be ready! I be now ready!--you must not leave I here. and
down I sunk, affright, into a chair.
this instant, this instant, I will return--before you can be ready--
before you can have pack up your thing--we would not be late--the
robber we have hear of may be out--don't let we be late.
and away she hurry before I could say another word. her pretended
niece go with she, without take notice to I of she go.
I have no suspicion yet that these woman be not indeed the lady
they personate; and I blame myself for my weak fears.--it cannot be,
think I, that such lady will abet treachery against a poor creature
they be so fond of. they must undoubtedly be the person they appear to
be--what folly to doubt it! the air, the dress, the dignity of woman of
quality. how unworthy of they, and of my charity, conclude I, be this
ungenerous shadow of suspicion!
so, recover my stupefied spirit, as well as they could be recover,
(for I be heavy and heavy! and wonder to Dorcas what ail I,
rub my eye, and take some of her snuff, pinch after pinch, to very
little purpose,) I pursue my employment: but when that be over, all
pack up that I design to be pack up; and I have nothing to do but to
think; and find they tarry so long; I think I should have go
distract. I shut myself into the chamber that have be mine; I
kneel, I pray; yet know not what I pray for: then run out again: it
be almost dark night, I say: where, where, where be Mr. Lovelace?
he come to I, take no notice at first of my consternation and
wildness, [what they have give I make I incoherent and wild:] all go
well, say he, my dear!--a line from Capt. Tomlinson!
all indeed do go well for the villanous project of the most cruel and
most villanous of man!
I demand his aunt!--i demand his cousin!--the evening, I say, be
closing!--My head be very, very bad, I remember I say--and it grow
bad and worse.--
Terror, however, as yet keep up my spirit; and I insist upon his go
himself to hasten they.
he call his servant. he rave at the sex for their delay: 'twa well
that business of consequence seldom depend upon such parading,
unpunctual trifler!
his servant come.
he order he to fly to his cousin Leeson's, and to let Lady Betty and
his cousin know how uneasy we both be at their delay: add, of his
own accord, desire they, if they donot come instantly, to send their
coach, and we will go without they. tell they I wonder theywill serve I
so!
I think this be considerately and fairly put. but now, indifferent as
my head be, I have a little time to consider the man and his behaviour.
he terrify I with his look, and with his violent emotion, as he
gaze upon I. evident joy-suppress emotion, as I have since
recollect. his sentence short, and pronounce as if his breath be
touch. never see I his abominable eye look as then they looked--
Triumph in them!--fierce and wild; and more disagreeable than the woman's
at the vile house appear to I when I first see they: and at time,
such a leering, mischief-boding cast!--i would have give the world to
have be an hundred mile from he. yet his behaviour be decent--a
decency, however, that I might have see to be struggle for--for he
snatch my hand two or three time, with a vehemence in his grasp that
hurt I; speak word of tenderness through his shut tooth, as it
seem; and let it go with a beggar-voice humble accent, like the vile
woman's just before; half-inward; yet his word and manner carry the
appearance of strong and almost convulse passion!--o my dear! what
mischief be he not then meditate!
I complain once or twice of thirst. my mouth seem parch. at the
time, I suppose that it be my terror (gasp often as I do for
breath) that parch up the roof of my mouth. I call for water: some
table-beer be bring I: beer, I suppose, be a well vehicle for
their potion. I tell the maid, that she know I seldom taste malt
liquor: yet, suspect nothing of this nature, be extremely thirsty,
I drink it, as what come next: and instantly, as it be, find myself
much bad than before: as if inebriate, I should fancy: I know not how.
his servant be go twice as long as he need: and, just before his
return, come one of the pretended Lady Betty's with a letter for Mr.
Lovelace.
he send it up to I. I read it: and then it be that I think myself a
lose creature; it be to put off she go to Hampstead that night, on
account of violent fit which Miss Montague be pretend to be seize
with; for then immediately come into my head his vile attempt upon I in
this house; the revenge that my flight might too probably inspire he
with on that occasion, and because of the difficulty I make to forgive
he, and to be reconcile to he; his very look wild and dreadful to I;
and the woman of the house such as I have more reason than ever, even from
the pretended Lady Betty's hint, to be afraid of: all these crowding
together in my apprehensive mind, I fall into a kind of phrensy.
I have no remembrance how I be for this time it last: but I know that,
in my first agitation, I pull off my head-dress, and tear my ruffle
in twenty tatter, and run to find he out.
when a little recover, I insist upon the hint he have give I of
their coach. but the messenger, he say, have tell he, that it be send
to fetch a physician, lest his chariot should be put up, or not ready.
I then insist upon go directly to Lady Betty's lodging.
Mrs. Leeson's be now a crowded house, he say: and as my earnestness
could be owe to nothing but groundless apprehension, [and oh! what
vow, what protestation of his honour, do he then make!] he hop I
would not add to their present concern. Charlotte, indeed, be use to
fit, he say, upon any great surprise, whether of joy or grief; and
they would hold she for one week together, if not get off in a few hour.
you be an observer of eye, my dear, say the villain; perhaps in secret
insult: see you not in Miss Montague's, now-and-then at Hampstead,
something wildish? I be afraid for she then. silence and quiet only do
her good: your concern for she, and her love for you, will but augment
the poor girl's disorder, if you should go.
all impatient with grief and apprehension, I still declare myself
resolve not to stay in that house till morning. all I have in the world,
my ring, my watch, my little money, for a coach; or, if one be not to
be get, I would go on foot to Hampstead that night, though I walk it by
myself.
a coach be hereupon send for, or pretend to be send for. any price,
he say, he would give to oblige I, late as it be; and he would attend
I with all his soul. but no coach be to be get.
let I cut short the rest. I grow bad and bad in my head! now
stupid, now rave, now senseless. the vilest of vile woman be bring
to frighten I. never be there so horrible a creature as she
appreare to I at this time.
I remember I plead for mercy. I remember that I say I would be his--
indeed I would be his--to obtain his mercy. but no mercy find I! my
strength, my intellect fail I--and then such scene follow--o my
dear, such dreadful scenes!--fit upon fit, (faintly indeed and
imperfectly remember,) procure I no compassion--but death be
withhold from I. that would have be too great a mercy!
***
thus be I trick and delude back by blacker heart of my own sex than
I think there be in the world; who appear to I to be person of
honour; and, when in his power, thus barbarously be I treat by this
villanous man!
I be so senseless, that I dare not aver, that the horrid creature of
the house be personally aid and abetting: but some visionary
remembrance I have of female figure, flit, as I may say, before my
sight; the wretched woman's particularly. but as these confused idea
might be owe to the terror I have conceive of the bad than masculine
violence she have be permit to assume to I, for express my
abhorrence of her house; and as what I suffer from his barbarity want
not that aggravation; I will say no more on a subject so shocking as this
must ever be to my remembrance.
I never see the personate wretch afterwards. he persist to the
last, (dreadfully invoke Heaven as a witness to the truth of his
assertion) that they be really and truly the lady they pretend to
be; declare, that they could not take leave of I, when they leave town,
because of the state of senselessness and phrensy I be in. for their
intoxicating, or rather stupefy, potion have almost deleterious
effect upon my intellect, as I have hint; insomuch that, for several
day together, I be under a strange delirium; now mop, now doze,
now weep, now rave, now scribble, tear what I scribble as fast
as I write it: most miserable when now-and-then a ray of reason bring
confusedly to my remembrance what I have suffer.
LETTER LXX
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[in CONTINUATION.]
[the lady next give an account,
of her recovery from her delirium and sleepy disorder:
of her attempt to get away in his absence:
of the conversation that follow, at his return, between they:
of the guilty figure he make:
of her resolution not to have he:
of her several effort to escape:
of her treaty with Dorcas to assist she in it:
of Dorcas's drop the promissory note, undoubtedly, as she say, on
purpose to betray she:
of her triumph over all the creature of the house, assemble to terrify
she; and perhaps to commit fresh outrage upon she:
of his set out for M. Hall:
of his repeat letter to induce she to meet he at the altar, on her
uncle's anniversary:
of her determined silence to they all:
of her second escape, effect, as she say, contrary to her own
expectation: the attempt be at first but the intended prelude to
a more promising one, which she have form in her mind:
and of other particular; which be to be find in Mr. Lovelace's
letter precede, and the letter of his friend Belford, be
omit. she then proceed:]
the very hour that I find myself in a place of safety, I take pen to
write to you. when I begin, I design only to write six or eight line,
to inquire after your health: for, have hear nothing from you, I
fear indeed, that you have be, and still be, too ill to write. but
no soon do my pen begin to blot the paper, but my sad heart hurry it
into length. the apprehension I have lain under, that I should not be
able to get away; the fatigue I have in effecting my escape: the
difficulty of procure a lodging for myself; have dislike the people
of two house, and those of a third dislike I; for you must think I
make a fright appearance--these, together with the recollection of what
I have suffer from he, and my farth apprehension of my insecurity,
and my desolate circumstance, have so disorder I, that I remember I
ramble strangely in that letter.
in short, I think it, on re-perusal, a half-distract one: but I then
despair, (be I to begin again,) of write well: so I let it go:
and can have no excuse for direct it as I do, if the cause of the
incoherence in it will not furnish I with a very pitiable one.
the letter I receive from your mother be a dreadful blow to I. but
nevertheless it have the good effect upon I (labour, as I do just
then, under a violent fit of vapourish despondency, and almost yield
to it) which profuse bleeding and blistering have in paralytic or
apoplectical stroke; revive my attention, and restore I to spirit
to combat the evil I be surround by--sluice off, and divert into
a new channel, (if I may be allow another metaphor,) the overcharging
woe which threaten once more to overwhelm my intellect.
but yet I most sincerely lament, (and still lament,) in your mother's
word, that I cannot be unhappy by myself: and be grieve, not only for
the trouble I have give you before; but for the new one I have bring
upon you by my inattention.
[she then give the substance of the letter she write to Mrs. Norton, to
Lady Betty Lawrance, and to Mrs. Hodges; as also of their answer;
whereby she detect all Mr. Lovelace's imposture. she proceed
as follow:]
I cannot, however, forbear to wonder how the vile Tomlinson could come at
the knowledge of several of the thing he tell I of, and which
contribute to give I confidence in he.*
* the attentive reader need not be refer back for what the Lady
nevertheless could not account for, as she know not that Mr. Lovelace have
come at Miss Howe's letter; particularly that in Vol. IV. Letter XXIX.
which he comment upon in Letter XLIV. of the same volume.
I doubt not that the story of Mrs. Fretchville and her house would be
find as vile as any of the rest, be I to inquire; and have I not
enough, and too much, already against the perjured man.
how have I be lead on!--what will be the end of such a false and
perjure creature! Heaven not less profaned and defy by he than
myself deceive and abuse! this, however, against myself I must say,
that if what I have suffer be the natural consequence of my first
error, I never can forgive myself, although you be so partial in my
favour, as to say, that I be not censurable for what pass before my
first escape.
and now, honour Madam, and my dear Miss Howe, who be to sit in
judgment upon my case, permit I to lay down my pen with one request,
which, with the great earnestness, I make to you both: and that be,
that you will neither of you open your lip in relation to the potion
and the violence I have hint at.--not that I be solicitous, that my
disgrace should be hide from the world, or that it should not be
generally know, that the man have prove a villain to I: for this, it
seem, every body but myself expect from his character. but suppose,
as his action by I be really of a capital nature, it be insist
upon that I should appear to prosecute he and his accomplice in a court
of justice, how do you think I could bear that?
but since my character, before the capital enormity, be lose in the eye
of the world; and that from the very hour I leave my father's house; and
since all my own hope of worldly happiness be entirely over; let I
slide quietly into my grave; and let it be not remember, except by one
friendly tear, and no more, dropt from your gentle eye, mine own dear
Anna Howe, on the happy day that shall shut up all my sorrow, that there
be such a creature as
CLARISSA HARLOWE
SATURDAY, JULY 8.
LETTER lxxi
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
SUNDAY, JULY 9.
May Heaven signalize its vengeance, in the face of all the world, upon
the most abandon and profligate of men!--And in its own time, I doubt
not but it will.--And we must look to a world beyond this for the reward
of your suffering!
another shocking detection, my dear!--how have you be deluded!--very
watchful I have think you; very sagacious:--but, alas! not watchful,
not sagacious enough, for the horrid villain you have have to deal with!
----
the letter you send I enclose as mine, of the 7th of June, be a
villanous forgery.*
* see Vol. V. Letter XXX.
the hand, indeed, be astonishingly like mine; and the cover, I see, be
actually my cover: but yet the letter be not so exactly imitate, but
that, (have you have any suspicion about his vileness at the time,) you,
who so well know my hand, might have detect it.
in short, this vile, forge letter, though a long one, contain but a
few extract from mine. mine be a very long one. he have omit every
thing, I see, in it that could have show you what a detestable house the
house be; and give you suspicion of the vile tomlinson.--you will see
this, and how he have turn Miss Lardner's information, and my advice to
you, [execrable villain!] to his own horrid end, by the rough draught of
the genuine letter, which I shall enclose.*
* see Vol. V. Letter XX.
Apprehensive for both our safety from the villany of such a daring and
profligate contriver, I must call upon you, my dear, to resolve upon
take legal vengeance of the infernal wretch. and this not only for our
own sake, but for the sake of innocent who otherwise may yet be
delude and outrage by he.
[she then give the particular of the report make by the young fellow
whom she send to Hampstead with her letter; and who suppose he have
deliver it into her own hand;* and then proceed:]
* see Vol. VI. Letter VI.
I be astonish, that the vile wretch, who could know nothing of the time
my messenger, (whose honesty I can vouch for) would come, could have a
creature ready to personate you! strange, that the man should happen to
arrive just as you be go to church, (as I find be the fact, on
compare what he say with your hint that you be at church twice that
day,) when he might have get to Mrs. Moore's two hour before!--but have
you tell I, my dear, that the villain have find you out, and be about
you!--you should have do that--yet I blame you upon a judgment found
on the event only!
I never have any faith in the story that go current among country girl,
of specter, familiar, and demon; yet I see not any other way to
account for this wretch's successful villany, and for his mean of
work up his specious delusion, but by suppose, (if he be not the
devil himself,) that he have a familiar constantly at his elbow.
sometimes it seem to I that this familiar assume the shape of that
solemn villain Tomlinson: sometimes that of the execrable Sinclair, as he
call she: sometimes it be permit to take that of Lady Betty Lawrance
--but, when it would assume the angelic shape and mien of my beloved
friend, see what a bloated figure it make!
'tis my opinion, my dear, that you will be no long safe where you be,
than while the V. be in the country. word be poor!--or how could I
execrate he! I have hardly any doubt that he have sell himself for a
time. oh! may the time be short!--or may his infernal prompter no more
keep covenant with he than he do with other!
I enclose not only the rough draught of my long letter mention above,
but the head of that which the young fellow think he deliver into
your own hand at Hampstead. and when you have peruse they, I will
leave to you to judge how much reason I have to be surprised that you
write I not an answer to either of those letter; one of which you own
you have receive, (though it prove to be his forge one,) the other
deliver into your own hand, as I be assure; and both of they of so
much concern to your honour; and still now much more surprised I must be,
when I receive a letter from Mrs. Townsend, date June 15, from
Hampstead, import, 'that Mr. Lovelace, who have be with you several
day, have, on the Monday before, bring Lady Betty and his cousin,
richly dress, and in a coach-and-four, to visit you: who, with your own
consent, have carry you to town with they--to your former lodging;
where you still be: that the Hampstead woman believe you to be
marry; and reflect upon I as a fomenter of difference between man
and wife: that he himself be at Hampstead the day before; viz. Wednesday
the 14th; and boast of his happiness with you; invite Mrs. Moore,
Mrs. Bevis, and Miss Rawlins, to go to town, to visit his spouse; which
they promise to do: that he declare that you be entirely reconcile
to your former lodgings:--and that, finally, the woman at Hampstead tell
Mrs. Townsend, that he have very handsomely discharged theirs.'
I own to you, my dear, that I be so much surprised and disgust at
these appearance against a conduct till then unexceptionable, that I be
resolve to make myself as easy as I could, and wait till you should
think fit to write to I. but I could rein-in my impatience but for a
few day; and on the 20th of June I write a sharp letter to you; which I
find you do not receive.
what a fatality, my dear, have appear in your case, from the very
beginning till this hour! have my mother permitted----
but can I blame she; when you have a father and mother living, who have
so much to answer for?--So much!--as no father and mother, consider
the child they have drive, persecute, expose, renounce, ever have to
answer for!
but again I must execrate the abandon villain--yet, as I say before,
all word be poor, and beneath the occasion.
but see we not, in the horrid perjury and treachery of this man, what
rake and libertine will do, when they get a young creature into their
power! it be probable that he might have the intolerable presumption to
hope an easy conquest: but, when your unexampled vigilance and exalted
virtue make potion, and rape, and the utmost violence, necessary to
the attainment of his detestable end, we see that he never boggle at
they. I have no doubt that the same or equal wickedness would be oftener
commit by man of his villanous cast, if the folly and credulity of the
poor inconsiderate who throw themselves into their hand, do not give
they an easy triumph.
with what comfort must those parent reflect upon these thing who have
happily dispose of their daughter in marriage to a virtuous man! and
how happy the young woman who find themselves safe in a worthy
protection!--If such a person as Miss Clarissa Harlowe could not escape,
who can be secure?--since, though every rake be not a LOVELACE, neither
be every woman a CLARISSA: and his attempt be but proportion to your
resistance and vigilance.
my mother have command I to let you know her thought upon the whole of
your sad story. I will do it in another letter; and send it to you with
this, by a special messenger.
but, for the future, if you approve of it, I will send my letter by the
usual hand, (Collins's,) to be leave at the saracen's Head, on Snow-hill:
whither you may send your's, (as we both use to do, to Wilson's,) except
such as we shall think fit to transmit by the post: which I be afraid,
after my next, must be direct to Mr. Hickman, as before: since my
mother be fix a condition to our correspondence, which, I doubt, you
will not comply with, though I wish you would. this condition I shall
acquaint you with by-and-by.
mean time, beg excuse for all the harsh thing in my last, of which
your sweet meekness and superior greatness of soul have now make I most
heartily ashamed, I beseech you, my dearest creature, to believe I to be
your truly sympathising,
and unalterable friend,
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER LXXII
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
MONDAY, JULY 10.
I now, my dear friend, resume my pen, to obey my mother, in give you
her opinion upon your unhappy story.
she still harp upon the old string, and will have it that all your
calamity be owe to your first fatal step; for she believe, (what I
cannot,) that your relation have intend after one general trial more,
to comply with your aversion, if they have find it to be as rivet a
one, as, let I say, it be a folly to suppose it would not be find to
be, after so many ridiculously-repeat experiment.
as to your latter suffering from that vilest of miscreant, she be
unalterably of opinion that if all be as you have relate (which she
doubt not) with regard to the potion, and to the violence you have
sustain, you ought by all mean to set on foot a prosecution against
he, and against his devilish accomplice.
she ask, what murderer, what ravisher, would be bring to justice, if
modesty be to be a general plea, and allowable, against appear in a
court to prosecute?
she say, that the good of society require, that such a beast of prey
should be hunt out of it: and, if you do not prosecute he, she think
you will be answerable for all the mischief he may do in the course of
his future villanous life.
will it be think, Nancy, say she, that Miss Clarissa Harlowe can be in
earnest, when she say, she be not solicitous to have her disgrace
conceal from the world, if she be afraid or ashamed to appear in court,
to do justice to herself and her sex against he? will it not be rather
surmise, that she may be apprehensive that some weakness, or lurking
love, will appear upon the trial of the strange cause? if, infer she,
such complicated villany as this (where perjury, potion, forgery,
subornation, be all combine to effect the ruin of an innocent creature,
and to dishonour a family of eminence, and where the very crime, as may
be suppose, be proof of her innocence) be to go off with impunity,
what case will deserve to be bring into judgment? or what malefactor
ought to be hang?
then she think, and so do I, that the vile creature, his accomplice,
ought, by all mean, to be bring to condign punishment, as they must
and will be upon bring he to trial: and this may be a mean to blow up
and root out a whole nest of viper, and save many innocent creature.
she add, that if Miss Clarissa Harlowe could be so indifferent about
have this public justice do upon such a wretch for her own sake, she
ought to overcome her scruple out of regard to her family, her
acquaintance, and her sex, which be all highly injure and scandalize
by his villany to she.
for her own part, she declare, that be she your mother, she would
forgive you upon no other term: and, upon your compliance with these,
she herself will undertake to reconcile all your family to you.
these, my dear, be my mother's sentiment upon your sad story.
I cannot say but there be reason and justice in they: and it be my
opinion, that it would be very right for the law to oblige an injure
woman to prosecute, and to make seduction on the man's part capital,
where his studied baseness, and no fault in her will, appear.
to this purpose the custom in the Isle of Man be a very good one----
'if a single woman there prosecute a single man for a rape, the
ecclesiastical judge impannel a jury; and, if this jury find he guilty,
he be return guilty to the temporal court: where if he be convict,
the deemster, or judge, deliver to the woman a rope, a sword, and a
ring; and she have it in her choice to have he hang, behead, or to
marry he.'
one of the two former, I think, should always be her option.
I long for the particular of your story. you must have too much time
upon your hand for a mind so active as your's, if tolerable health and
spirit be afford you.
the villany of the bad of man, and the virtue of the most excellent of
woman, I expect will be exemplified in it, be it to be write in the
same connected and particular manner in which you use to write to I.
try for it, my dear friend; and since you cannot give the example
without the warning, give both, for the sake of all those who shall hear
of your unhappy fate; begin from your' of June 5, your prospect
then not disagreeable. I pity you for the task; though I cannot
willingly exempt you from it.
***
my mother will have I add, that she must insist upon your prosecuting
the villain. she repeat, that she make that a condition on which she
permit our future correspondence. let I therefore know your thought
upon it. I ask she, if she would be willing that I should appear to
support you in court, if you complied?--by all mean, she say, if that
would induce you to begin with he, and with the horrid woman. I think I
could probably attend you, I be sure I could, be there but a
probability of bring the monster to his deserved end.
once more your thought of it, suppose it be to meet with the
approbation of your relation.
but whatever be your determination on this head, it shall be my constant
prayer, that God will give you patience to bear your heavy affliction,
as a person ought to do who have not bring they upon herself by a faulty
will: that he will speak peace and comfort to your wounded mind; and give
you many happy year. I be, and ever will be,
your affectionate and faithful
ANNA HOWE.
***
[the two precede letter be send by a special messenger: in the cover
be write the following line:]
MONDAY, JULY 10.
I cannot, my dear friend, suffer the enclose to go unaccompanie by a
few line, to signify to you that they be both less tender in some
place than I would have write, have they not be to pass my mother's
inspection. the principal reason, however, of my writing thus separately
be, to beg of you to permit I to send you money and necessary, which
you must need want; and that you will let I know, if either I, or any
body I can influence, can be of service to you. I be excessively
apprehensive that you be not enough out of the villain's reach where you
be. yet London, I be persuade, be the place, of all other, to be
private in.
I could tear my hair for vexation, that I have it not in my power to
afford you personal protection!--I be
your ever devote
ANNA HOWE.
once more forgive I, my dearest creature, for my barbarous taunting in
mine of the 5th! yet I can hardly forgive myself. I to be so cruel, yet
to know you so well!--whence, whence, have I this vile impatiency of
spirit!--
letter lxxiii
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
TUESDAY, JULY 11.
forgive you, my dear!--most cordially do I forgive you--will you forgive
I for some sharp thing I write in return to your' of the 5th? you
could not have love I as you do, nor have the concern you have always
show for my honour, if you have not be utterly displeased with I, on
the appearance which my conduct wear to you when you write that letter.
I most heartily thank you, my good and only love, for the opportunity you
give I of clear it up; and for be generously ready to acquit I of
intentional blame, the moment you have read my melancholy narrative.
as you be so earnest to have all the particular of my sad story before
you, I will, if life and spirit be lend I, give you an ample account of
all that have befall I, from the time you mention. but this, it be
very probable, you will not see, till after the close of my last scene:
and as I shall write with a view to that, I hope no other voucher will be
want for the veracity of the writer, be who will the reader.
I be far from think myself out of the reach of this man's further
violence. but what can I do? whither can I fly?--perhaps my bad state
of health (which must grow bad, as recollection of the past evil, and
reflection upon they, grow heavy and heavy upon I) may be my
protection. once, indeed, I think of go abroad; and, have I the
prospect of many year before I, I would go.--but, my dear, the blow be
given.--nor have you reason now, circumstance as I be, to be concern
that it be. what a heart must I have, if it be not break--and indeed,
my dear friend, I do so earnestly wish for the last closing scene, and
with so much comfort find myself in a decline way, that I even
sometimes ungratefully regret that naturally-healthy constitution, which
use to double upon I all my enjoyment.
as to the earnestly-recommend prosecution, I may possibly touch upon it
more largely hereafter, if ever I shall have well spirit; for they be
at present extremely sunk and low. but just now, I will only say, that I
would soon suffer every evil (the repetition of the capital one
except) than appear publicly in a court to do myself justice.* and I
be heartily grieve that your mother prescribe such a measure as the
condition of our future correspondence: for the continuance of your
friendship, my dear, and the desire I have to correspond with you to my
life's end, be all my remain hope and consolation. nevertheless,
as that friendship be in the power of the heart, not of the hand only, I
hope I shall not forfeit that.
* Dr. Lewen, in Letter XXIV. of Vol. VIII. press she to this public
prosecution, by argument worthy of his character; which she answer in a
manner worthy of she's. see Letter XXV. of that volume.
o my dear! what would I give to obtain a revocation of my father's
malediction! a reconciliation be not to be hop for. you, who never
love my father, may think my solicitude on this head a weakness: but the
motive for it, sink as my spirit at time be, be not always weak.
***
I approve of the method you prescribe for the conveyance of our letter;
and have already cause the porter of the inn to be engage to bring to
I your's, the moment that Collins arrive with they. and the servant of
the house where I be will be permit to carry mine to Collins for you.
I have write a letter to Miss Rawlins, of Hampstead; the answer to
which, just now receive, have help I to the knowledge of the vile
contrivance, by which the wicked man get your letter of June the 10th. I
will give you the content of both.
in mine to she, I briefly acquaint she 'with what have befall I,
through the vileness of the woman who have pass upon I as the aunt and
cousin of the wicked of man; and own, that I never be married to he.
I desire she to make particular inquiry, and to let I know, who it be
at Mrs. Moore's that, on Sunday afternoon, June 11, while I be at
church, receive a letter from Miss Howe, pretend to be I, and lie
on a couch:--which letter, have it come to my hand, would have save I
from ruin. I excuse myself (on the score of the delirium, which the
horrid usage I have receive throw I into, and from a confinement as
barbarous as illegal) that I have not before apply to Mrs. Moore for an
account of what I be indebted to she: which account I now desire. and,
for fear of be trace by Mr. Lovelace, I direct she to superscribe
her answer, to Mrs. Mary Atkins; to be leave till call for, at the Belle
Savage Inn, on Ludgate-hill.'
in her answer, she tell I, 'that the vile wretch prevail upon Mrs.
Bevis to personate I, [a sudden motion of his, it seem, on the
appearance of your messenger,] and persuade she to lie along a couch:
a handkerchief over her neck and face; pretend to be ill; the
credulous woman draw in by false notion of your ill office to keep up
a variance between a man and his wife--and so take the letter from your
messenger as I.
'Miss Rawlins take pain to excuse Mrs. Bevis's intention. she
express their astonishment, and concern at what I communicate: but be
glad, however, and so they be all, that they know in time the vileness
of the base man; the two widow and herself have, at his earnest
invitation, design I a visit at Mrs. Sinclair's: suppose all to be
happy between he and I; as he assure they be the case. Mr. Lovelace,
she inform I, have handsomely satisfy Mrs. Moore. and Miss Rawlins
conclude with wish to be favour with the particular of so
extraordinary a story, as these particular may be of use, to let she see
what wicked creature (woman as well as man) there be in the world.'
I thank you, my dear, for the draught of your two letter which be
intercept by this horrid man. I see the great advantage they be of
to he, in the prosecution of his villanous design against the poor
wretch whom he have so long make the sport of his abhor invention.
let I repeat, that I be quite sick of life; and of an earth, in which
innocent and benevolent spirit be sure to be consider as alien, and
to be make sufferer by the genuine son and daughter of that earth.
how unhappy, that those letter only which could have acquaint I with
his horrid view, and arm I against they, and against the vileness of
the base woman, should fall into his hands!--unhappi still, in that my
very escape to Hampstead give he the opportunity of receive they.
nevertheless, I cannot but still wonder, how it be possible for that
Tomlinson to know what pass between Mr. Hickman and my uncle Harlowe:*
a circumstance which give the vile impostor most of his credit with I.
* see the note in Letter LXX. of this volume.
how the wicked wretch himself could find I out at Hampstead, must also
remain wholly a mystery to I. he may glory in his contrivance--he, who
have more wickedness than wit, may glory in his contrivances!--But, after
all, I shall, I humbly presume to hope, be happy, when he, poor wretch,
will be--alas!--who can say what!----
Adieu, my dearest friend!--may you be happy!--And then your Clarissa
cannot be wholly miserable!
END of VOL. 6.
Volume VII.
content of volume VII
LETTER i. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
Beseeches she to take comfort, and not despair. be dreadfully
apprehensive of her own safety from Mr. Lovelace. an instruction to
mother.
LETTER II. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
Averse as she be to appear in a court of justice against Lovelace, she
will consent to prosecute he, rather than Miss Howe shall live in
terror. hope she shall not despair: but doubt not, from so many
concurrent circumstance, that the blow be give.
LETTER III. IV. Lovelace to Belford.--
have no subject worth write upon now he have lose his Clarissa. half in
jest, half in earnest, [as usual with he when vex or disappoint,] he
deplore the loss of her.--humourous account of Lord M., of himself, and
of his two cousin Montague. his Clarissa have make he eyeless and
senseless to every other beauty.
LETTER V. VI. VII. viii. from the same.--
Lady Sarah Sadleir and Lady Betty Lawrance arrive, and engage Lord M. and
his two cousin Montague against he, on account of his treatment of the
lady. his trial, as he call it. after many altercation, they obtain
his consent that his two cousin should endeavour to engage Miss Howe to
prevail upon Clarissa to accept of he, on his unfeigned repentance. it
be some pleasure to he, he however rakishly reflect, to observe how
placable the lady of his family would have be, have they meet with a
Lovelace. marriage, say he, with these woman, be an atonement for the
bad we can do to they; a true dramatic recompense. he make several
other whimsical, but characteristic observation, some of which may serve
as caution and warning to the sex.
LETTER IX. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
have have a visit from the two Miss Montague's. their errand. advise she
to marry Lovelace. reason for her advice.
LETTER x. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
chide she with friendly impatience for not answer her letter.
Re-urge she to marry Lovelace, and instantly to put herself under Lady
Betty's protection.
LETTER XI. Miss Howe to Miss Montague.--
in a phrensy of her soul, write to she to demand news of her beloved
friend, spirit away, as she apprehend, by the base art of the
black of man.
LETTER XII. Lovelace to belford.--
the suffering innocent arrest and confine, by the execrable woman, in
a sham action. he curse himself, and all his plot and contrivance.
conjure he to fly to she, and clear he of this low, this dirty
villany; to set she free without condition; and assure she, that he will
never molest she more. horribly execrate the diabolical woman, who
think to make themselves a merit with he by this abominable insult.
LETTER XIII. XIV. Miss Montague to Miss Howe,
with the particular of all that have happen to the lady.--mr. Lovelace
the most miserable of man. reflection on libertine. she, her sister,
Lady Betty, Lady Sarah, Lord M., and Lovelace himself, all sign letter
to Miss Howe, assert his innocence of this horrid insult, and
implore her continued interest in his and their favour with Clarissa.
LETTER XV. Belford to Lovelace.--
Particulars of the vile arrest. insolent visit of the wicked woman to
she. her unexampled meekness and patience. her fortitude. he admire
it, and prefer it to the false courage of man of their class.
LETTER XVI. from the same.--
go to the officer's house. a description of the horrid prison-room,
and of the suffering lady on her knee in one corner of it. her great
and move behaviour. break off, and send away his letter, on purpose
to harass he by suspense.
LETTER XVII. Lovelace to Belford.--
curse he for his tormenting abruption. Clarissa never suffer half
what he suffer. that sex make to bear pain. conjure he to hasten to
he the rest of his soul-harrowing intelligence.
LETTER xviii. Belford to Lovelace.--
his farth proceeding. the lady return to her lodging at Smith's.
Distinction between revenge and resentment in her character. send she,
from the vile woman, all her apparel, as Lovelace have desire.
LETTER XIX. Belford to Lovelace.--
rejoice to find he can feel. will endeavour from time to time to add to
his remorse. insist upon his promise not to molest the lady.
LETTER XX. from the same.--
describe her lodging, and give a character of the people, and of the
good widow Lovick. she be so ill, that they provide she an honest nurse,
and send for Mr. Goddard, a worthy apothecary. substance of a letter to
Miss Howe, dictate by the lady.
LETTER XXI. from the same.--
admit to the lady's presence. what pass on the occasion. really
believe that she still love he. have a reverence, and even a holy love
for she. astonished that Lovelace could hold his purpose against such
an angel of a woman. condemn he for not timely exert himself to
save she.
LETTER XXII. from the same.--
Dr. H. call in. not have a single guinea to give he, she accept of
three from Mrs. Lovick on a diamond ring. her dutiful reason for
admit the doctor's visit. his engaging and gentlemanly behaviour.
she resolve to part with some of her rich apparel. her reason.
LETTER XXIII. Lovelace to belford.--
raf at he. for what. rally he, with his usual gayety, on several
passage in his letter. reason why Clarissa's heart cannot be break
by what she have suffer. passionate girl easily subdue. sedate one
hardly ever pardon. he have some retrograde motion: yet be in earnest to
marry Clarissa. Gravely conclude, that a person intend to marry
should never be a rake. his gay resolution. Renews, however, his
promise not to molest she. a charming encouragement for a man of
intrigue, when a woman be know not to love her husband. advantage
which man have over woman, when disappoint in love. he know she will
permit he to make her amend, after she have plague he heartily.
LETTER XXIV. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
be shock at receive a letter from she write by another hand.
tenderly console she, and inveigh against Lovelace. Re-urge she,
however, to marry he. her mother absolutely of her opinion. praise
Mr. Hickman's sister, who, with her Lord, have pay she a visit.
LETTER XXV. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
her condition greatly mend. in what particular. her mind begin to
strengthen; and she find herself at time superior to her calamity.
in what light she wish she to think of she. desire she to love she
still, but with a weaning love. she be not now what she be when they
be inseparable lover. their view must now be different.
LETTER XXVI. Belford to Lovelace.--
a consume malady, and a consume mistress, as in Belton's case,
dreadful thing to struggle with. far reflection on the life of
keep. the poor man afraid to enter into his own house. Belford
undertake his cause. instinct in brute equivalent to natural affection
in man. story of the ancient Sarmatians, and their slave. reflect on
the life of rake, and free-liver; and how ready they be in sickness
to run away from one another. picture of a rake on a sick bed. will
marry and desert they all.
LETTER XXVII. from the same.--
the lady part with some of her lace. instance of the worthiness of
Dr. H. and Mr. Goddard. he severely reflect upon Lovelace.
LETTER XXVIII. Lovelace to Belford.--
have an interview with Mr. Hickman. on what occasion. he endeavour to
disconcert he, by assurance and ridicule; but find he to behave with
spirit.
LETTER XXIX. from the same.--
rally he on his intentional reformation. ascribe the lady's ill
health entirely to the arrest, (in which, he say, he have no hand,) and
to her relation' cruelty. make light of she sell her clothe and
lace. touch upon Belton's case. distinguishe between companionship
and friendship. how he purpose to rid Belton of his Thomasine and her
cub.
LETTER XXX. Belford to Lovelace.--
the lady have write to her sister, to obtain a revocation of her
father's malediction. defend her parent. he plead with the utmost
earnestness to she for his friend.
LETTER XXXI. from the same.--
can hardly forbear prostration to she. tender himself as her banker.
conversation on this subject. admire her magnanimity. no wonder that a
virtue so solidly base could baffle all his art. other instance of
her greatness of mind. Mr. Smith and his wife invite he, and beg of she
to dine with they, it be their wedding day. her affect behaviour
on the occasion. she briefly, and with her usual noble simplicity,
relate to they the particular of her life and misfortune.
LETTER XXXII. Lovelace to Belford.--
ridicule he on his address to the lady as her banker, and on his
aspiration and prostration. want to come at letter she have write.
put he upon engage Mrs. Lovick to bring this about. weight that
proselyte have with the good people that convert they. reason for it.
he have hope still of the lady's favour; and why. never adore her so
much as now. be about to go to a ball at Colonel Ambrose's. who to be
there. Censures affectation and finery in the dress of man; and
particularly with a view to exalt himself, ridicule Belford on this
subject.
LETTER XXXIII. XXXIV. XXXV. XXXVI. XXXVII.
sharp letter that pass between Miss Howe and Arabella Harlowe.
LETTER XXXVIII. Mrs. Harlowe to Mrs. Howe.--
send with copy of the five foregoing letter.
LETTER XXXIX. Mrs. Howe to Mrs. Harlowe. in answer.
LETTER XL. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
desire an answer to her former letter for she to communicate to Miss
Montague. far enforce her own and her mother's opinion, that she
should marry Lovelace. be oblige by her mother to go to a ball at
Colonel Ambrose's. fervent profession of her friendly love.
LETTER XLI. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
her noble reason for refuse Lovelace. desire she to communicate
extract from this letter to the Ladies of his family.
LETTER XLII. from the same.--
beg, for her sake, that she will forbear treat her relation with
freedom and asperity. Endeavours, in her usual dutiful manner, to defend
their conduct towards she. press she to make Mr. Hickman happy.
LETTER XLIII. Mrs. Norton to clarissa.--
excuse her long silence. her family, who be intend to favour she,
incense against she by mean of Miss Howe's warm letter to her sister.
LETTER XLIV. Clarissa to Mrs. Norton.--
be concerned that Miss Howe should write about she to her friend. give
she a narrative of all that have befall she since her last. her truly
christian frame of mind. make reflection worthy of herself, upon she
present situation, and upon her hope, with regard to a happy futurity.
LETTER XLV.
Copy of Clarissa's humble letter to her sister, implore the revocation
of her father's heavy malediction.
LETTER XLVI. Belford to Lovelace.--
Defends the lady from the perverseness he (Lovelace) impute to she on
parting with some of her apparel. Poor Belton's miserable state both of
body and mind. observation on the friendship of libertine. admire
the noble simplicity, and natural ease and dignity of style, of the
sacred book. expatiate upon the pragmatical folly of man. those who
know least, the great scoffer.
LETTER XLVII. from the same.--
the lady part with one of her good suit of clothe. reflection upon
such purchaser as take advantage of the necessity of their
fellow-creature. self an odious devil. a visible alteration in the
lady for the bad. she give he all Mr. Lovelace's letter. he
(Belford) take this opportunity to plead for he. Mr. Hickman come to
visit she.
LETTER XLVIII. from the same.--
breakfast next morning with the lady and Mr. Hickman. his advantageous
opinion of that gentleman. Censures the conceited pride and
narrow-mindedness of rake and libertine. tender and affect parting
between Mr. Hickman and the lady. observation in praise of intellectual
friendship.
LETTER XLIX. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
have no notion of coldness in friendship. be not a daughter of those whom
she so freely treat. delay give the desire negative to the
solicitation of the lady of Lovelace's family; and why. have be
exceedingly flutter by the appearance of Lovelace at the ball give by
Colonel Ambrose. what pass on that occasion. her mother and all the
lady of their select acquaintance of opinion that she should accept of
he.
LETTER L. Clarissa. in answer.--
chide she for suspend the decisive negative. be she sure she
should live many year, she would not have Mr. Lovelace. Censures of the
world to be but of second regard with any body. Method as to devotion
and exercise she be in when so cruelly arrest.
LETTER LI. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
design to be communicate to Mr. Lovelace's relation.
LETTER LII. LIII. Lovelace to Belford.--
two letter entirely characteristic yet intermingle with lesson and
observation not unworthy of a well character. he have great hope from
Miss Howe's mediation in his favour. picture of two rake turn
hermit, in their penitential.
LETTER LIV. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
she now greatly approve of her rejection of Lovelace. admire the noble
example she have give her sex of a passion conquer. be sorry she write
to Arabella: but cannot imitate she in her self-accusation, and
acquittal of other who be all in fault. her notion of a husband's
prerogative. hope she be employ herself in pen down the
particular of her tragical story. use to be make of it to the advantage
of her sex. her mother earnest about it.
LETTER LV. Miss Howe to Miss Montague.--
with Clarissa's Letter, No. XLI. of this volume. her own sentiment of
the villanous treatment her beloved friend have meet with from their
kinsman. Prays for vengeance upon he, if she do not recover.
LETTER LVI. Mrs. Norton to clarissa.--
Acquaints she with some of their movement at Harlowe-place. almost
wish she would marry the wicked man; and why. useful reflection on
what have befall a young lady so universally beloved. must try to move
her mother in her favour. but by what mean, will not tell she, unless
she succeed.
LETTER LVII. Mrs. Norton to Mrs. Harlowe.
LETTER LVIII. Mrs. Harlowe's affect answer.
LETTER LIX. Clarissa to Mrs. Norton.--
earnestly beg, for reason equally generous and dutiful, that she may be
leave to her own way of work with her relation. have receive she
sister's answer to her letter, no. XLV. of this volume. she try to
find an excuse for the severity of it, though greatly affect by it.
other affecting and dutiful reflection.
LETTER LX. her sister's cruel letter, mention in the preceding.
LETTER LXI. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
be pleased that she now at last approve of she reject Lovelace.
desire she to be comfort as to she. promise that she will not run
away from life. hope she have already get above the shock give she by
the ill treatment she have meet with from Lovelace. have have an escape,
rather than a loss. impossible, be it not for the outrage, that she
could have be happy with he; and why. set in the most affecting, the
most dutiful and generous light, the grief of her father, mother, and
other relation, on her account. have begin the particular of her
tragical story; but would fain avoid proceed with it; and why. Opens
her design to make Mr. Belford her executor, and give her reason for
it. her father have withdraw his malediction, she now have only a last
blessing to supplicate for.
LETTER LXII. Clarissa to her sister.--
beseech she, in the most humble and earnest manner, to procure she a
last blessing.
LETTER LXIII. Mrs. Norton to clarissa.--
Mr. Brand to be send up to inquire after her way of life and health. his
pedantic character. believe they will withhold any favour till they
hear his report. doubt not that matter will soon take a happy turn.
LETTER LXIV. Clarissa. in answer.--
the grace she ask for be only a blessing to die with, not to live with.
their favour, if they design she any, may come too late. doubt her
mother can do nothing for she of herself. a strong confederacy against a
poor girl, their daughter, sister, niece. her brother perhaps get it
renew before he go to Edinburgh. he need not, say she: his work
be do, and more than do.
LETTER LXV. Lovelace to Belford.--
be mortify at receive letter of rejection. Charlotte write to the
lady in his favour, in the name of all the family. every body approve
of what she have write; and he have great hope from it.
LETTER LXVI. Copy of Miss Montague's letter to clarissa.--
beseech she, in the name of all their noble family, to receive
Lovelace to favour.
LETTER LXVII. Belford to Lovelace.--
Proposes to put Belton's sister into possession of Belton's house for
he. the lady visibly alter for the bad. again insist upon his
promise not to molest she.
LETTER LXVIII. Clarissa to Miss Montague.--
in answer to she's, no. LXVI.
LETTER LXIX. Belford to Lovelace.--
have just now receive a letter from the lady, which he enclose,
request extract form the letter write to he by Mr. Lovelace
within a particular period. the reason which determine he to oblige
she.
LETTER LXX. Belford to clarissa.--
with the request extract; and a plea in his friend's favour.
LETTER lxxi. Clarissa to belford.--
thank he for his communication. request that he will be her
executor; and give her reason for her choice of he for that solemn
office.
LETTER LXXII. Belford to clarissa.--
his cheerful acceptance of the trust.
LETTER LXXIII. Belford to Lovelace.--
brief account of the extract deliver to the lady. tell he of she
appoint he her executor. the melancholy pleasure he shall have in
the perusal of her paper. much more lively and affect, say he, must
be the style of those who write in the height of a present distress than
the dry, narrative, unanimated style of a person relate difficulty
surmount, can be.
LETTER LXXIV. arabella to clarissa.--
in answer to her letter, No. LXII., request a last blessing.
LETTER LXXV. Clarissa to she mother.--
write in the fervour of her spirit, yet with the deep humility, and
on her knee, implore her blessing, and her father's, as what will
sprinkle comfort through her last hour.
LETTER LXXVI. Miss Montague to clarissa.--
in reply to she's, no. LXVIII.--All their family love and admire she.
their kinsman have not one friend among they. beseech she to oblige they
with the acceptance of an annuity, and the first payment now send she, at
least till she can be put in possession of her own estate. this letter
sign by Lord M., Lady Sarah, Lady Betty, and her sister and self.
LETTER LXXVII. Lovelace to belford.--
raf against the lady for reject he; yet adore she the more for it.
have one half of the house to himself, and that the good; have forbid
Lord M. and the lady to see he, in return for their forbid he to
see they. incense against Belford for the extract he have promise from
his letter. be pique to death at her proud refusal of he. curse the
vile woman, and their potion. but for these latter, the majesty of her
virtue, he say, would have save she, as it do once before.
LETTER LXXVIII. Lovelace to belford.--
he shall not, he tell he, be her executor. nobody shall be any thing
to she but himself. what a reprobation of a man, who be once so dear to
she! far instance of his rave impatience.
LETTER LXXIX. Lovelace to clarissa.--
a letter full of penitence, promise, praise, and admiration of her
virtue. have no hope of escape from perdition but by her precept and
example. all he beg for the present be a few line to encourage he to
hope for forgiveness, if he can justify his vow by his future conduct.
LETTER lxxx. Clarissa to Lord M. and the lady of the house.--
thankfully decline accept of their offer bounty. plead for their
be reconcile to their kinsman, for reason respect her own peace.
hop that they may be enable to rejoice in the effect of his
reformation many year after she be lay low and forget.
LETTER LXXXI. Belford to Lovelace.--
brief account of his expelling Thomasine, her son, and her gallant.
far reflection on keep. a state not calculate for a sick bed.
give a short journal of what have pass relate to the lady since his
last. Mr. Brand inquire after her character and behaviour of Mrs.
Smith. his starchedness, conceit, and pedantry.
LETTER LXXXII. from the same.--
farther particular relate to the lady. power leave she by her
grandfather's will.
LETTER LXXXIII. Clarissa to lovelace.--
in answer to his letter, No. LXXIX.
LETTER LXXXIV. her uncle Harlowe's cruel answer,
in answer to shebe to her mother, No. LXXV. meditation stitch to it
with black silk.
LETTER LXXXV. Clarissa to her uncle Harlowe. in reply.
the history
of
CLARISSA HARLOWE
letter I
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
WED. NIGHT, JULY 12.
I write, my dearest creature, I cannot but write, to express my concern
on your dejection. let I beseech you, my charming excellence, let I
beseech you, not to give way to it.
Comfort yourself, on the contrary, in the triumph of a virtue unsullied;
a will wholly faultless. who could have withstand the trial you have
surmounted?--your cousin Morden will soon come. he will see justice do
you, I make no doubt, as well with regard to what concern your person as
your estate. and many happy day may you yet see; and much good may you
still do, if you will not heighten unavoidable accident into guilty
despondency.
but why, why, my dear, this pin solicitude continue after a
reconciliation with relation as unworthy as implacable; whose will be
govern by an all-grasp brother, who find his account in keep the
breach open? on this over-solicitude it be now plain to I, that the
vilest of man build all his scheme. he see that you thirst after it
beyond all reason for hope. the view, the hope, I own, extremely
desirable, have your family be Christians: or even have they be Pagans
who have have bowel.
I shall send this short letter [I be oblige to make it a short one] by
young Rogers, as we call he; the fellow I send to you to Hampstead; an
innocent, though pragmatical rustic. admit he, I pray you, into you
presence, that he may report to I how you look, and how you be.
Mr. Hickman should attend you; but I apprehend, that all his motion, and
mine own too, be watch by the execrable wretch: and indeed his be by
an agent of mine; for I own, that I be so apprehensive of his plot and
revenge, now I know that he have intercept my vehement letter against
he, that he be the subject of my dream, as well as of my wake fear.
***
my mother, at my earnest importunity, have just give I leave to write,
and to receive your letter--but fasten this condition upon the
concession, that your's must be under cover to Mr. Hickman, [this be a
view, I suppose, to give he consideration with I]; and upon this
further consideration, that she be to see all we write.--'When girl be
set upon a point,' she tell one who tell I again, 'it be well for a
mother, if possible, to make herself of their party, than to oppose they;
since there will be then hop that she will still hold the rein in her
own hand.'
pray let I know what the people be with whom you lodge?--shall I send
Mrs. Townsend to direct you to lodging either more safe or more
convenient for you?
be pleased to write to I by Rogers; who will wait on you for your
answer, at your own time.
Adieu, my dearest creature. Comfort yourself, as you would in the like
unhappy circumstance comfort
your own
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER II
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY, JULY 13.
I be extremely concerned, my dear Miss Howe, for be primarily the
occasion of the apprehension you have of this wicked man's vindictive
attempt. what a wide-spread error be mine!----
if I find that he have set foot on any machination against you, or against
Mr. Hickman, I do assure you I will consent to prosecute he, although I
be sure I could not survive my first appearance at the bar he should be
arraign at.
I own the justice of your mother's argument on that subject; but must
say, that I think there be circumstance in my particular case, which
will excuse I, although on a slighter occasion than that you be
apprehensive of I should decline to appear against he. I have say,
that I may one day enter more particularly into this argument.
your messenger have now indeed see I. I talk with he on the cheat
put upon he at Hampstead: and be sorry to have reason to say, that have
not the poor young man be very simple, and very self-sufficient, he have
not be so grossly delude. Mrs. Bevis have the same plea to make for
herself. a good-natured, thoughtless woman; not use to converse with so
vile and so specious a deceiver as he, who make his advantage of both
these shallow creature.
I think I cannot be more private than where I be. I hope I be safe. all
the risque I run, be in go out, and return from morning-prayer;
which I have two or three time venture to do; once at Lincoln's-inn
chapel, at eleven; once at St. Dunstan's, Fleet-street, at seven in the
morning,* in a chair both time; and twice, at six in the morning, at the
neighbouring church in Covent-garden. the wicked wretch I have escape
from, will not, I hope, come to church to look for I; especially at so
early prayer; and I have fix upon the private pew in the latter
church to hide myself in; and perhaps I may lay out a little matter in an
ordinary gown, by way of disguise; my face half hide by my mob.--i be very
careless, my dear, of my appearance now. neat and clean take up the
whole of my attention.
* the seven-o'clock prayer at St. Dunstan's have be since
discontinue.
the man's name at whose house I belong, be Smith--a glove maker, as well
as seller. his wife be the shop-keeper. a dealer also in stocking,
ribband, snuff, and perfume. a matron-like woman, plain-hearte, and
prudent. the husband an honest, industrious man. and they live in good
understanding with each other: a proof with I that their heart be
right; for where a married couple live together upon ill term, it be a
sign, I think, that each know something amiss of the other, either with
regard to temper or moral, which if the world know as well as
themselves, it would perhaps as little like they as such people like each
other. happy the marriage, where neither man nor wife have any wilful or
premeditate evil in their general conduct to reproach the other with!--
for even person who have bad heart will have a veneration for those who
have good one.
two neat room, with plain, but clean furniture, on the first floor, be
mine; one they call the dining-room.
there be, up another pair of stair, a very worthy widow-lodger, Mrs.
Lovick by name; who, although of low fortune, be much respect, as Mrs.
Smith assure I, by people of condition of her acquaintance, for her
piety, prudence, and understanding. with she I propose to be well
acquainted.
I thank you, my dear, for your kind, your seasonable advice and
consolation. I hope I shall have more grace give I than to despond, in
the religious sense of the word: especially as I can apply to myself the
comfort you give I, that neither my will, nor my inconsiderateness, have
contribute to my calamity. but, nevertheless, the irreconcilableness of
my relation, whom I love with an unabated reverence; my apprehension of
fresh violence, [this wicked man, I doubt, will not let I rest]; my
be destitute of protection; my youth, my sex, my unacquaintedness with
the world, subject I to insult; my reflection on the scandal I have
give, add to the sense of the indignity I have receive from a man,
of whom I deserve not ill; all together will undoubtedly bring on the
effect that cannot be undesirable to me.--the situation; and, as I
presume to imagine, from principle which I hope will, in due time, and
by due reflection, set I above the sense of all worldly disappointment.
at present, my head be much disorder. I have not indeed enjoy it
with any degree of clearness, since the violence do to that, and to my
heart too, by the wicked art of the abandon creature I be cast
among.
I must have more conflict. at time I find myself not subdue enough to
my condition. I will welcome those conflict as they come, as
probationary ones.--But yet my father's malediction--the temporary part
so strangely and so literally completed!--i cannot, however, think, when
my mind be strong--but what be the story of Isaac, and Jacob, and
Esau, and of Rebekah's cheat the latter of the blessing design for
he, (in favour of Jacob,) give we for in the 27th chapter of Genesis?
my father use, I remember, to enforce the doctrine deducible from it, on
his child, by many argument. at least, therefore, he must believe
there be great weight in the curse he have announce; and shall I not be
solicitous to get it revoke, that he may not hereafter be grieve, for
my sake, that he do not revoke it?
all I will at present add, be my thank to your mother for her
indulgence to we; due compliment to Mr. Hickman; and my request, that
you will believe I to be, to my last hour, and beyond it, if possible,
my beloved friend, and my dearer self (for what be now myself!)
your obliged and affectionate
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER III
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY, JULY 7.
I have three of thy letter at once before I to answer; in each of which
thou complainest of my silence; and in one of they tall I, that thou
canst not live without I scribble to thee every day, or every other day
at least.
why, then, die, Jack, if thou wilt. what heart, think thou, can I
have to write, when I have lose the only subject worth write upon?
help I again to my angel, to my CLARISSA; and thou shalt have a letter
from I, or write at least part of a letter, every hour. all that the
charmer of my heart shall say, that will I put down. every motion, every
air of her beloved person, every look, will I try to describe; and when
she be silent, I will endeavour to tell thee her thought, either what
they be, or what I would have they to be--so that, have she, I shall
never want a subject. have lose she, my whole soul be a blank: the
whole creation round I, the element above, beneath, and every thing I
behold, (for nothing can I enjoy,) be a blank without she.
oh! return, return, thou only charmer of my soul! return to thy adoring
Lovelace! what be the light, what the air, what the town, what the
country, whatbe any thing, without thee? light, air, joy, harmony, in my
notion, be but part of thee; and could they be all express in one
word, that word would be CLARISSA.
o my beloved CLARISSA, return thou then; once more return to bless thy
LOVELACE, who now, by the loss of thee, know the value of the jewel he
have slight; and rise every morning but to curse the sun that shin
upon every body but he!
***
well, but, Jack, 'tis a surprising thing to I, that the dear fugitive
cannot be meet with; cannot be hear of. she be so poor a plotter, (for
plotting be not her talent,) that I be confident, have I be at liberty,
I should have find she out before now; although the different emissary
I have employ about town, round the adjacent village, and in Miss
Howe's vicinage, have hitherto fail of success. but my Lord continue
so weak and low-spirited, that there be no getting from he. I would not
disoblige a man whom I think in danger still: for would his gout, now it
have get he down, but give he, like a fair boxer, the rise-blow, all
would be over with he. and here [pox of his fondness for I! it happen
at a very bad time] he make I sit hour together entertain he with
my roguery: (a pretty amusement for a sick man!) and yet, whenever he
have the gout, he pray night and morning with his chaplain. but what
must his notion of religion be, who after he have nose and mumble over
his response, can give a sigh or groan of satisfaction, as if he think
he have make up with Heaven; and return with a new appetite to my story?
--encourage they, by shake his side with laugh at they, and
call I a sad fellow, in such an accent as show he take no small
delight in his kinsman.
the old peer have be a sinner in his day, and suffer for it now: a
sneak sinner, slide, rather than rush into vice, for fear of his
reputation.--paying for what he never have, and never dare to rise to
the joy of an enterprise at first hand, which could bring he within view
of a tilting, or of the honour of be consider as a principal man in
a court of justice.
to see such an old Trojan as this, just drop into the grave, which I
hop ere this would have be dig, and fill up with he; cry out
with pain, and grunt with weakness; yet in the same moment crack his
leathern face into an horrible laugh, and call a young sinner charming
varlet, encore he, as formerly he use to do to the italian eunuch;
what a preposterous, what an unnatural adherence to old habit!
my two cousin be generally present when I entertain, as the old peer
call it. those story must drag horribly, that have not more hearer
and applauder than relater.
applauder!
Ay, Belford, applauder, repeat I; for although these girl pretend to
blame I sometimes for the fact, they praise my manner, my invention, my
intrepidity.--beside, what other people call blame, that call I praise:
I ever do; and so I very early discharged shame, that cold-water damper
to an enterprising spirit.
these be smart girl; they have life and wit; and yesterday, upon
Charlotte's raving against I upon a related enterprise, I tell she, that
I have have in debate several time, whether she be or be not too near
of kin to I: and that it be once a moot point with I, whether I could
not love she dearly for a month or so: and perhaps it be well for she,
that another pretty little puss start up, and divert I, just as I
be enter upon the course.
they all three hold up their hand and eye at once. but I observe
that, though the girl exclaim against I, they be not so angry at
this plain speak as I have find my beloved upon hint so dark that
I have wonder at her quick apprehension.
I tell Charlotte, that, grave as she pretend to be in her smile
resentment on this declaration, I be sure I should not have be put to
the expense of above two or three stratagem, (for nobody admire a good
invention more than she,) could I but have disentangle her conscience
from the embarrasse of consanguinity.
she pretend to be highly displeased: so do her sister for she. I tell
she, she seem as much in earnest as if she have think I so; and dare
the trial. plain word, I say, in these case, be more shocking to
their sex than gradatim action. and I bid Patty not be displeased at my
distinguish her sister; since I have a great respect for she likewise.
an italian air, in my usual careless way, a half-struggle-for kiss from
I, and a shrug of the shoulder, by way of admiration, from each pretty
cousin, and sad, sad fellow, from the old peer, attend with a
side-shake laugh, make we all friend.
there, jack!--wilt thou, or wilt thou not, take this for a letter?
therebe quantity, I be sure.--how have I fill a sheet (not a short-hand
one indeed) without a subject! my fellow shall take this; for he be
go to town. and if thou canst think tolerably of such execrable
stuff, I will send thee another.
LETTER IV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SIX, SATURDAY MORNING, JULY 8.
have I nothing new, nothing divert, in my whimsical way, thou askest,
in one of thy three letter before I, to entertain thee with?--And thou
tall I, that, when I have least to narrate, to speak, in the scottish
phrase, I be most divert. a pretty compliment, either to thyself, or
to I. to both indeed!--a sign that thou hast as frothy a heart as I a
head. but canst thou suppose that this admirable woman be not all, be
not every thing with I? yet I dread to think of she too; for detection
of all my contrivance, I doubt, must come next.
the old peer be also full of Miss Harlowe: and so be my cousin. he
hop I will not be such a dog [therebe a speciman of his peer-like
dialect] as to think of do dishonourably by a woman of so much merit,
beauty, and fortune; and he say of so good a family. but I tell he,
that this be a string he must not touch: that it be a very tender point:
in short, be my sore place; and that I be afraid he would handle it too
roughly, be I to put myself in the power of so ungentle an operator.
he shake his crazy head. he think all be not as it should be between
we; long to have I present she to he as my wife; and often tell I
what great thing he will do, additional to his former proposal; and
what present he will make on the birth of the first child. but I hope
the whole of his estate will be in my hand before such an event take
place. no harm in hop, Jack! Lord M. say, be it not for hope, the
heart would break.
***
eight o'clock at Midsummer, and these lazy varletesse (in full health)
not come down yet to breakfast!--what a confounded indecency in young
lady, to let a rake know that they love their bed so dearly, and, at
the same time, where to have they! but Iwill punish they--they shall
breakfast with their old uncle, and yawn at one another as if for a
wager; while I drive my phaeton to Colonel Ambroses's, who yesterday give
I an invitation both to breakfast and dine, on account of two Yorkshire
niece, celebrated toast, who have be with he this fortnight past;
and who, he say, want to see I. so, Jack, all woman do not run away
from I, thank Heaven!--I wish I could have leave of my heart, since the
dear fugitive be so ungrateful, to drive she out of it with another
beauty. but who can supplant she? who can be admit to a place in it
after Miss Clarissa Harlowe?
at my return, if I can find a subject, I will scribble on, to oblige
thee.
my phaeton's ready. my cousin send I word they be just come down:
so in spite Iwill be go.
SATURDAY AFTERNOON.
I do stay to dine with the Colonel, and his lady, and niece: but I
could not pass the afternoon with they, for the heart of I. there be
enough in the person and face of the two young lady to set I upon
comparison. particular feature hold my attention for a few moment:
but these serve but to whet my impatience to find the charmer of my
soul; who, for person, for air, for mind, never have any equal. my heart
recoil and sicken upon compare mind and conversation. pert wit, a
too-study desire to please; each in high good humour with herself; an
open-mouth affectation in both, to show white tooth, as if the principal
excellence; and to invite amorous familiarity, by the promise of a sweet
breath; at the same time reflect tacitly upon breath arrogantly
imply to be less pure.
once I could have bear they.
they seem to be disappoint that I be so soon able to leave they.
yet have I not at present so much vanity [my Clarissa have cure I of my
vanity] as to attribute their disappointment so much to particular liking
of I, as to their own self-admiration. they look upon I as a
connoisseur in beauty. they would have be proud of engage my
attention, as such: but so affected, so flimsy-witte, mere skin-deep
beauties!--they have look no far into themselves than what their
glass be flattering-glass too; for I think they passive-face,
and spiritless; with eye, however, upon the hunt for conquest, and
bespeak the attention of other, in order to countenance their own.
----I believe I could, with a little pain, have give they life and
soul, and to every feature of their face sparkle information--but my
Clarissa!--O Belford, my Clarissa have make I eyeless and senseless to
every other beauty!--do thou find she for I, as a subject worthy of my
pen, or this shall be the last from
Thy
LOVELACE.
LETTER V
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY NIGHT, JULY 9.
now, Jack, have I a subject with a vengeance. I be in the very height of
my trial for all my sin to my beloved fugitive. for here to-day, at
about five o'clock, arrive Lady Sarah Sadleir and Lady Betty Lawrance,
each in her chariot-and-six. dowager love equipage; and these cannot
travel ten mile without a sett, and half a dozen horseman.
my time have hang heavy upon my hand; and so I go to church after
dinner. why may not handsome fellow, think I, like to be look at,
as well as handsome wench? I fall in, when service be over, with
Major Warneton; and so come not home till after six; and be surprised,
at enter the court-yard here, to find it litter with equipage and
servant. I be sure the owner of they come for no good to I.
Lady Sarah, I soon find, be raise to this visit by Lady Betty; who have
health enough to allow she to look out to herself, and out of her own
affair, for business. yet congratulation to Lord M. on his amendment,
[spiteful devil on both account!] be the avow errand. but come in
my absence, I be their principal subject; and they have opportunity to
set each other's heart against I.
Simon Parsons hint this to I, as I pass by the steward's office; for
it seem they talk loud; and he be make up some account with old
Pritchard.
however, I hasten to pay my duty to they--other people not perform
theirs, be no excuse for the neglect of our own, you know.
and now I enter upon my trial.
with horrible grave face be I receive. the two antiquity only bow
their tabby head; make long face than ordinary; and all the old
line appear strong in their furrow forehead and fall cheek; how
do you, Cousin? and how do you, Mr. Lovelace? look all round at one
another, as who should say, do you speak first: and, do you: for they
seem resolve to lose no time.
I have nothing for it, but an air as manly, as theirs be womanly. your
servant, Madam, to Lady Betty; and, your servant, Madam, I be glad to see
you abroad, to Lady Sarah.
I take my seat. Lord M. look horribly glum; his finger claspt, and
turn round and round, under and over, his but just disgoute thumb;
his sallow face, and goggle eye, on his two kinswoman, by turn; but
not once deign to look upon I.
then I begin to think of the laudanum, and wet cloth, I tell thee of long
ago; and to call myself in question for a tenderness of heart that will
never do I good.
at last, Mr. Lovelace!----Cousin Lovelace!----Hem!--Hem!--I be sorry,
very sorry, hesitate Lady Sarah, that there be no hope of your ever
take up----
whatbe the matter now, Madam?
the matter now!----Why Lady Betty have two letter from Miss Harlowe,
which have tell we whatbe the matter----are all woman alike with you?
yes; I could have answer; 'bat the difference which pride make.
then they all chorus'd upon I--such a character as Miss Harlowe's!
cry one----a lady of so much generosity and good sense! another--how
charmingly she write! the two maiden monkey, look at her find
handwriting: her perfection my crime. what can you expect will be the
end of these thing! cry Lady Sarah--d----d, d----d doing! vociferate
the peer, shake his loose-fleshe'd wabbling chap, which hang on his
shoulder like an old cow's dewlap.
for my part, I hardly know whether to sing or say what I have to reply to
these all-at-once attack upon me!-Fair and softly, lady--one at a
time, I beseech you. I be not to be hunt down without be hear, I
hope. pray let I see these letter. I beg you will let I see they.
there they are:--thatbe the first--read it out, if you can.
I open a letter from my charmer, date Thursday, June 29, our
wedding-day, that be to be, and write to Lady Betty Lawrance. by the
content, to my great joy, I find the dear creature be alive and well,
and in charming spirit. but the direction where to send an answer to
be so scratch out that I could not read it; which afflict I much.
she put three question in it to Lady Betty.
1st. about a letter of she's, date June 7, congratulate I on my
nuptial, and which I be so good as to save Lady Betty the trouble of
writing----A very civil thing of I, I think!
again--'whether she and one of her niece Montague be to go to town, on
an old chancery suit?'--And, 'whether they actually do go to town
accordingly, and to Hampstead afterwards?' and, 'whether they bring to
town from thence the young creature whom they visit?' be the subject
of the second and third question.
a little inquisitive, dear rogue! and what do she expect to be the
well for these questions?----but curiosity, d----d curiosity, be the
itch of the sex--yet when didst thou know it turn to their benefit?--
for they seldom inquire, but what they fear--and the proverb, as my Lord
have it, say, it come with a fear. that is, I suppose, what they fear
generally happen, because there be generally occasion for the fear.
Curiosity indeed she avow to be her only motive for these
interrogatory: for, though she say her ladyship may suppose the
question be not ask for good to I, yet the answer can do I no harm,
nor her good, only to give she to understand, whether I have tell she a
parcel of d----d lye; thatbe the plain English of her inquiry.
well, Madam, say I, with as much philosophy as I could assume; and may I
ask--Pray, what be your ladyship's answer?
therebe a copy of it, toss it to I, very disrespectfully.
this answer be date July 1. a very kind and complaisant one to the
lady, but very so-so to her poor kinsman--that people can give up their
own flesh and blood with so much ease!--she tell she 'how proud all our
family would be of an alliance with such an excellence.' she do I
justice in say how much I adore she, as an angel of a woman; and beg
of she, for I know not how many sake, besides my soul's sake, 'that she
will be so good as to have I for a husband:' and answer--thou wilt
guess how--to the lady's question.
well, Madam; and pray, may I be favour with the lady's other letter?
I presume it be in reply to your's.
it be, say the peer: but, Sir, let I ask you a few question, before
you read it--give I the letter, Lady Betty.
there it be, my Lord.
then on go the spectacle, and his head move to the line--a charming
pretty hand!--I have often hear that this lady be a genius.
and so, Jack, repeat my Lord's wise comment and question will let
thee into the content of this merciless letter.
'Monday, July 3,' [read my lord.]--let I see!--that be last Monday; no
long ago! 'Monday, July the third--Madam--I cannot excuse myself'--um,
um, um, um, um, um, [hum inarticulately, and skipping,]--'I must own
to you, Madam, that the honour of be related'----
Off go the spectacle--now, tell I, Sir-r, have not this lady lose all
the friend she have in the world for your sake?
she have very implacable friend, my Lord: we all know that.
but have she not lose they all for your sake?--tell I that.
I believe so, my Lord.
well then!--i be glad thou art not so graceless as to deny that.
on go the spectacle again--'I must own to you, Madam, that the honour
of be relate to lady as eminent for their virtue as for their
descent.'--very pretty, truly! saith my Lord, repeat, 'as eminent for
their virtue as for their descent, be, at first, no small inducement
with I to lend an ear to Mr. Lovelace's address.'
there be dignity, bear-dignity, in this lady, cry my Lord.
Lady Sarah. she would have be a grace to our family.
Lady Betty. indeed she would.
Lovel. to a royal family, I will venture to say.
Lord M. then what a devil---
Lovel. please to read on, my Lord. it cannot be her letter, if it do
not make you admire she more and more as you read. Cousin Charlotte,
Cousin Patty, pray attend----Read on, my Lord.
Miss Charlotte. amazing fortitude!
Miss Patty only lift up her dove's eye.
Lord M. [read.] 'and the rather, as I be determine, have it come
to effect, to do every thing in my power to deserve your favourable
opinion.'
then again they chorus'd upon I!
a blessed time of it, poor I!--I have nothing for it but impudence!
Lovel. pray read on, my Lord--I tell you how you would all admire she
----or, shall I read?
Lord M. D----d assurance! [then read.] 'I have another motive,
which I know would of itself give I merit with your whole family: [they
be all ear:] a presumptuous one; a punishably-presumptuous one, as it
have prove: in the hope that I might be an humble mean, in the hand of
Providence, to reclaim a man who have, as I think, good sense enough at
bottom to be reclaim; or at least gratitude enough to acknowledge the
intend obligation, whether the generous hope be to succeed or not.'
--excellent young creature!--
excellent young creature! echo the Ladies, with their handkerchief at
their eye, attend with music.
Lovel. by my soul, Miss Patty, you weep in the wrong place: you shall
never go with I to a tragedy.
Lady Betty. hardened wretch.
his Lordship have pull off his spectacle to wipe they. his eye be
misty; and he think the fault in his spectacle.
I see they be all cock and prim--to be sure that be a very pretty
sentence, say i----that be the excellency of this lady, that in every
line, as she write on, she improve upon herself. pray, my Lord,
proceed--I know her style; the next sentence will still rise upon we.
Lord M. D----d fellow! [again saddle, and read.] 'but I have
be most egregiously mistaken in Mr. Lovelace!' [then they all
clamour again.]--'the only man, I persuade myself'----
Lovel. lady may persuade themselves to any thing: but how can she
answer for what other man would or would not have do in the same
circumstance?
I be force to say any thing to stifle their outcry. pox take ye
altogether, think I; as if I have not vexation enough in lose she!
Lord M. [read.] 'the only man, I persuade myself, pretend to be
a gentleman, in whom I could have be so much mistaken.'
they be all begin again--pray, my Lord, proceed!--Hear, hear--pray,
lady, hear!--Now, my Lord, be pleased to proceed. the Ladies be
silent.
so they be; lose in admiration of I, hand and eye uplifted.
Lord M. I will, to thy confusion; for he have look over the next
sentence.
what wretch, Belford, what spiteful wretch, be poor mortals!--So
rejoice to ste one another! to see each other stung!
Lord M. [read.] 'for while I be endeavour to save a drown
wretch, I have be, not accidentally, but premeditatedly, and of set
purpose, draw in after he.'--what say you to that, Sir-r?
Lady S. | Ay, Sir, what say you to this?
Lady B. |
Lovel. say! why I say it be a very pretty metaphor, if it would but
hold.--But, if you please, my Lord, read on. let I hear what be far
say, and I will speak to it all together.
Lord M. I will. 'and he have have the glory to add to the list of those
he have ruin, a name that, I will be bold to say, would not have
disparage his own.'
they all look at I, as expect I to speak.
Lovel. be pleased to proceed, my Lord: I will speak to this by-and-by--
how come she to know I keep a list?--i will speak to this by-and-by.
Lord M. [read on.] 'and this, Madam, by mean that would shock
humanity to be make acquainted with.'
then again, in a hurry, off go the spectacle.
this be a plaguy stroke upon I. I think myself an oak in impudence;
but, by my troth, this almost fell I.
Lord M. what say you to this, SIR-R!
remember, Jack, to read all their Sirs in this dialogue with a double rr,
Sir-r! denote indignation rather than respect.
they all look at I as if to see if I could blush.
Lovel. eye off, my lord!----eye off, lady! [look bashfully, I
believe.]--what say I to this, my lord!--why, I say, that this lady have a
strong manner of express herself!--thatbe all.--there be many thing
that pass among lover, which a man cannot explain himself upon before
grave people.
Lady Betty. among lover, Sir-r! but, Mr. Lovelace, can you say that
this lady behave either like a weak, or a credulous person?--can you say--
Lovel. I be ready to do the lady all manner of justice.--But, pray now,
lady, if I be to be thus interrogate, let I know the content of the
rest of the letter, that I may be prepare for my defence, as you be all
for my arraignment. for, to be require to answer piecemeal thus,
without know what be to follow, be a cursed ensnare way of
proceeding.
they give I the letter: I read it through to myself:--and by the
repetition of what I say, thou wilt guess at the remain content.
you shall find, lady, you shall find, my Lord, that I will not spare
myself. then hold the letter in my hand, and look upon it, as a
lawyer upon his brief,
Miss Harlowe say, 'that when your ladyship,' [turn to Lady Betty,]
'shall know, that, in the progress to her ruin, wilful falsehood,
repeat forgery, and numberless perjury, be not the least of my
crime, you will judge that she can have no principle that will make she
worthy of an alliance with lady of your's, and your noble sister's
character, if she could not, from her soul, declare, that such an
alliance can never now take place.'
surely, Ladies, this be passion! this be not reason. if our family
would not think themselves dishonour by my marry a person whom I have
so treat; but, on the contrary, would rejoice that I do she this
justice: and if she have come out pure gold from the assay; and have
nothing to reproach herself with; why should it be an impeachment of her
principle, to consent that such an alliance take place?
she cannot think herself the bad, justly she cannot, for what be do
against her will.
their countenance menace a general uproar--but I proceed.
your Lordship read to we, that she have an hope, a presumptuous one: nay,
a punishably-presumptuous one, she call it; 'that she might be a mean,
in the hand of Providence, to reclaim I; and that this, she know, if
effect, would give she a merit with you all.' but from what would she
reclaim me?--She have hear, youwill say, (but she have only hear, at the
time she entertain that hope,) that, to express myself in the woman's
dialect, I be a very wicked fellow!--well, and what then?--Why, truly,
the very moment she be convince, by her own experience, that the charge
against I be more than hearsay; and that, of consequence, I be a fit
subject for her generous endeavour to work upon; she would need give I
up. accordingly, she fly out, and declare, that the ceremony which
would repair all shall never take place!--can this be from any other
motive than female resentment?
this bring they all upon I, as I intend it should: it be as a tub
to a whale; and after I have let they play with it a while, I claim
their attention, and, know that they always love to hear I prate,
go on.
the lady, it be plain, think, that the reclaiming of a man from bad
habit be a much easy task than, in the nature of thing, it can be.
she write, as your Lordship have read, 'that, in endeavour to save a
drown wretch, she have be, not accidentally, but premeditatedly, and
of set purpose, draw in after he.' but how be this, ladies?--you see
by her own word, that I be still far from be out of danger myself.
have she find I, in a quagmire suppose, and I have get out of it by her
mean, and leave she to perish in it; that would have be a crime indeed.
--But be not the fact quite otherwise? have she not, if her allegory
prove what she would have it prove, get out herself, and leave I
flounder still deep and deep in?--what she should have do, have
she be in earnest to save I, be, to join her hand with mine, that so
we might by our united strength help one another out.--i hold out my hand
to she, and besought she to give I her's:--But, no truly! she be
determined to get out herself as fast as she could, let I sink or swim:
refuse her assistance (against her own principle) because she see I
want it.--you see, lady, you see, my Lord, how pretty tinkle word
run away with ear incline to be musical.
they be all ready to exclaim again: but I go on, proleptically, as a
rhetorician would say, before their voice would break out into word.
but my fair accuser say, that, 'I have add to the list of those I have
ruin, a name that would not have disparage my own.' it be true, I
have be gay and enterprising. it be in my constitution to be so. I
know not how I come by such a constitution: but I be never accustom to
check or controul; that you all know. when a man find himself hurry
by passion into a slight offence, which, however slight, will not be
forgive, he may be make desperate: as a thief, who only intend a
robbery, be often by resistance, and for self-preservation, draw in to
commit murder.
I be a strange, a horrid wretch, with every one. but he must be a silly
fellow who have not something to say for himself, when every cause have its
black and its white side.--westminster-hall, Jack, afford every day as
confident defence as mine.
but what right, proceed I, have this lady to complain of I, when she as
good as say--here, Lovelace, you have act the part of a villain by I!
--you would repair your fault: but I willnot let you, that I may have the
satisfaction of expose you; and the pride of refuse you.
but, be that the case? be that the case? would I pretend to say, I
would now marry the lady, if she would have I?
Lovel. you find she renounce Lady Betty's mediation----
Lord M. [interrupt I.] word be wind; but deed be mind: what
signify your cursed quibbling, bob?--say plainly, if she will have
you, will you have she? answer I, yes or no; and lead we not a
wild-goose chace after your meaning.
Lovel. she know I would. but here, my Lord, if she thus go on to
expose herself and I, she will make it a dishonour to we both to marry.
Charl. but how must she have be treated--
Lovel. [interrupt she.] why now, Cousin Charlotte, chuck she
under the chin, would you have I tell you all that have pass between
the lady and I? would you care, have you a bold and enterprizing lover,
that proclamation should be make of every little piece of amorous
roguery, that he offer to you?
Charlotte redden. they all begin to exclaim. but I proceed.
the lady say, 'she have be dishonour' (devil take I, if I spare
myself!) 'by mean that would shock humanity to be make acquainted with
they.' she be a very innocent lady, and may not be a judge of the mean
she hint at. over-niceness may be under-niceness: have you not such a
proverb, my Lord?--tantamount to, one extreme produce another!----Such
a lady as this may possibly think her case more extraordinary than it be.
this I will take upon I to say, that if she have meet with the only man in
the world who would have treat she, as she say I have treat she, I
have meet in she with the only woman in the world who would have make such
a rout about a case that be uncommon only from the circumstance that
attend it.
this bring they all upon I; hand, eye, voice, all lift at once.
but my Lord M. who have in his head (the last seat of retreat lewdness)
as much wickedness as I have in my heart, be force (upon the air I
speak this with, and Charlotte's and all the rest redden) to make a
mouth that be big enough to swallow up the other half of his face;
cry out, to avoid laugh, oh! Oh!--as if under the power of a gouty
twinge.
hadst thou see how the two tabby and the young grimalkin look at
one another, at my Lord, and at I, by turn, thou would have be ready
to split thy ugly face just in the middle. Thy mouth hath already do
half the work. and, after all, I find not seldom in this conversation,
that my humourous undaunted air force a smile into my service from the
prim mouth of the young lady. they perhaps, have they meet with such
another intrepid fellow as myself, who have first gain upon their
affection, would not have make such a rout as my beloved have do, about
such an affair as that we be assemble upon. young lady, as I have
observe on an hundred occasion, fear not half so much for themselves
as their mother do for they. but here the girl be force to put on
grave air, and to seem angry, because the antique make the matter of
such high importance. yet so lightly sit anger and fellow-feeling at
their heart, that they be force to purse in their mouth, to
suppress the smile I now-and-then lay out for: while the elder
have have rose (that be to say, daughter) of their own, and know
how fond man be of a trifle, would have be very loth to have have
they nipt in the bud, without say to the mother of they, by your
leave, Mrs. Rose-bush.
the next article of my indictment be for forgery; and for personate
of Lady Betty and my cousin Charlotte.
two shocking charge, thou'lt say: and so they were!--the peer be
outrageous upon the forgery charge. the Ladies vow never to forgive
the personate part.
not a peace-maker among they. so we all turn woman, and scold.
my Lord tell I, that he believe in his conscience there be not a
viler fellow upon God's earth than me.--what signify mince the
matter? say he--and that it be not the first time I have forge his
hand.
to this I answer, that I suppose, when the statute of Scandalum
Magnatum be frame, there be a good many in the peerage who know
they deserve hard name; and that that law therefore be rather make
to privilege their quality, than to whiten their character.
he call upon I to explain myself, with a Sir-r, so pronounced, as to
show that one of the most ignominious word in our language be in his
head.
People, I say, that be fence in by their quality, and by their
year, should not take freedom that a man of spirit could not put up
with, unless he be able heartily to despise the insulter.
this set he in a violent passion. he would send for Pritchard
instantly. let Pritchard be call. he would alter his will; and all
he could leave from I, he would.
do, do, my Lord, say I: I always value my own pleasure above your
estate. but Iwill let Pritchard know, that if he draw, he shall sign
and seal.
why, what would I do to pritchard?--shake his crazy head at I.
only, what he, or any man else, write with his pen, to despoil I of
what I think my right, he shall seal with his ear; thatbe all, my
Lord.
then the two Ladies interpose.
Lady Sarah tell I, that I carry thing a great way; and that neither
Lord M. nor any of they, deserve the treatment I give they.
I say, I could not bear to be use ill by my Lord, for two reason;
first, because I respect his lordship above any man live; and next,
because it look as if I be induce by selfish consideration to
take that from he, which nobody else would offer to I.
and what, return he, shall be my inducement to take what I do at your
hands?--Hay, Sir?
indeed, Cousin Lovelace, say Lady Betty, with great gravity, we do not
any of we, as Lady Sarah say, deserve at your hand the treatment you
give we: and let I tell you, that I donot think my character and your
cousin Charlotte's ought to be prostitute, in order to ruin an innocent
lady. she must have know early the good opinion we all have of she, and
how much we wish she to be your wife. this good opinion of our have
be an inducement to she (you see she say so) to listen to your
address. and this, with her friend' folly, have help to throw she into
your power. how you have requite she be too apparent. it become the
character we all bear, to disclaim your action by she. and let I tell
you, that to have she abuse by wicked people raise up to personate we,
or any of we, make a double call upon we to disclaim they.
Lovel. why this be talk somewhat like. I would have you all
disclaim my action. I own I have do very vilely by this lady. one
step lead to another. I be curst with an enterprizing spirit. I hate
to be foiled--
foil! interrupt Lady Sarah. what a shame to talk at this
rate!--Did the lady set up a contention with you? all nobly sincere,
and plain-hearted, have I hear Miss Clarissa Harlowe be: above art,
above disguise; neither the coquette, nor the prude!--poor lady! she
deserve a well fare from the man for whom she take the step which
she so freely blame!
this above half affect me.--had this dispute be so handle by every
one, I have be ashamed to look up. I begin to be bashful.
Charlotte ask if I do not still seem inclinable to do the lady
justice, if she would accept of I? it would be, she dare to say, the
great felicity the family could know (she would answer for one) that
this fine lady be of it.
they all declare to the same effect; and Lady Sarah put the matter
home to I.
but my Lord Marplot would have it that I could not be serious for six
minute together.
I tell his Lordship that he be mistaken; light as he think I make of
his subject, I never know any that go so near my heart.
Miss Patty say she be glad to hear that: and her soft eye glisten
with pleasure.
Lord M. call her sweet soul, and be ready to cry.
not from humanity neither, Jack. this peer have no bowel; as thou
mayest observe by this treatment of I. but when people's mind be
weaken by a sense of their own infirmity, and when they be draw
on to their latter end, they will be move on the slight occasion,
whether those offer from within or without they. and this, frequently,
the unpenetrating world, call humanity; when all the time, in
compassionate the misery of human nature, they be but pity
themselves; and be they in strong health and spirit, would care as
little for any body else as thou or I do.
here break they off my trial for this sitting. Lady Sarah be much
fatigued. it be agree to pursue the subject in the morning. they
all, however, retire together, and go into private conference.
LETTER VI
MR. LOVELACE
[in CONTINUATION.]
the Ladies, instead of take up the subject where we have lay it down,
must need touch upon passage in my fair accuser's letter, which I be in
hope they would have let rest, as we be in a tolerable way. but,
truly, they must hear all they could hear of our story, and what I have to
say to those passage, that they might be well enable to mediate
between we, if I be really and indeed inclined to do she the hop-for
justice.
these passage be, 1st, 'that, after I have compulsorily trick she
into the act of go off with I, I carry she to one of the bad
house in London.'
2nd, 'that I have make a wicked attempt upon she; in resentment of which
she flee to Hampstead privately.'
3dly, come the forgery, and personate charge again; and we be upon
the point of renew out quarrel, before we could get to the next
charge: which be still bad.
for that (4thly) be 'that have betray she back to the vile house, I
first rob she of her sens, and then her honour; detain she
afterwards a prisoner there.'
be I to tell thee the gloss I put upon these heavy charge, what
would it be, but repeat many of the extenuating argument I have use in
my letter to thee?--suffice it, therefore, to say, that I insist much,
by way of palliation, on the lady's extreme niceness: on her diffidence
in my honour: on Miss Howe's contrive spirit; plot on their part
beget plot on mine: on the high passion of the sex. I assert,
that my whole view, in gently restrain she, be to oblige she to
forgive I, and to marry I; and this for the honour of both family.
I boast of my own good quality; some of which none that know I deny;
and to which few libertine can lay claim.
they then fall into warm admiration and praise of the lady; all of they
preparatory, as I know, to the grand question: and thus it be introduce
by Lady Sarah.
we have say as much as I think we can say upon these letter of the poor
lady. to dwell upon the mischief that may ensue from the abuse of a
person of her rank, if all the reparation be not make that now can be
make, would perhaps be to little purpose. but you seem, Sir, still to
have a just opinion of she, as well as affection for she. her virtue be
not in the least questionable. she could not resent as she do, have she
any thing to reproach herself with. she be, by every body's account, a
fine woman; have a good estate in her own right; be of no contemptible
family; though I think, with regard to she, they have act as
imprudently as unworthily. for the excellency of her mind, for good
economy, the common speech of she, as the worthy Dr. Lewen once tell I,
be that her prudence would enrich a poor man, and her piety reclaim a
licentious one. I, who have not be abroad twice this twelvemonth, come
hither purposely, so do Lady Betty, to see if justice may not be do
she; and also whether we, and my Lord M. (your near relation, Sir,)
have, or have not, any influence over you. and, for my own part, as your
determination shall be in this article, such shall be mine, with regard
to the disposition of all that be within my power.
Lady Betty. and mine.
and mine, say my Lord: and valiantly he swear to it.
Lovel. far be it from I to think slightly of favour you may any of
you be glad I would deserve! but as far be it from I to enter into
condition against my own liking, with sordid views!--a to future
mischief, let they come. I have not do with the Harlowes yet. they
be the aggressor; and I should be glad they would let I hear from
they, in the way they should hear from I in the like case. perhaps I
should not be sorry to be find, rather than be oblige to seek, on this
occasion.
Miss Charlotte. [redden.] speak like a man of violence, rather than
a man of reason! I hope youwill allow that, Cousin.
Lady Sarah. well, but since what be do, and cannot be undo, let we
think of the next good, have you any objection against marry Miss
Harlowe, if she will have you?
Lovel. there can possibly be but one: that she be to every body, no
doubt, as well as to Lady Betty, pursue that maxim peculiar to herself,
(and let I tell you so it ought to be:) that what she cannot conceal
from herself, she will publish to the world.
Miss Patty. the lady, to be sure, write this in the bitterness of her
grief, and in despair.----
Lovel. and so when her grief be allay; when her despairing fit be
over--and this from you, Cousin Patty!--Sweet girl! and would you, my
dear, in the like case [whisper she] have yield to entreaty--would
you have mean no more by the like exclamation?
I have a rap with her fan, and blush; and from Lord M. a reflection, that
I turn'd into jest every thing they say.
I ask, if they think the Harlowes deserve any consideration from I?
and whether that family would not exult over I, be I to marry their
daughter, as if I dare not to do otherwise?
Lady Sarah. once I be angry with that family, as we all be. but now
I pity they; and think, that you have but too well justify the bad
treatment they give you.
Lord M. their family be of stand. all gentleman of it, and rich,
and reputable. let I tell you, that many of our coronet would be glad
they could derive their descent from no bad a stem than theirs.
Lovel. the Harlowes be a narrow-souled and implacable family. I hate
they: and, though I revere the lady, scorn all relation to they.
Lady Betty. I wish no bad could be say of he, who be such a scorner
of common failing in other.
Lord M. how would my sister Lovelace have reproach herself for all
her indulgent folly to this favourite boy of she's, have she live till
now, and be present on this occasion!
Lady Sarah. well, but, beg your Lordship's pardon, let we see if
any thing can be do for this poor lady.
Miss Ch. if Mr. Lovelace have nothing to object against the lady's
character, (and I presume to think he be not ashamed to do her justice,
though it may make against himself,) I cannot but see her honour and
generosity will compel from he all that we expect. if there be any
levity, any weakness, to be charge upon the lady, I should not open
my lip in her favour; though in private I would pity she, and deplore
her hard hap. and yet, even then, there might not want argument, from
honour to gratitude, in so particular a case, to engage you, Sir, to make
good the vow it be plain you have break.
Lady Betty. my niece Charlotte have call upon you so justly, and have
put the question to you so properly, that I cannot but wish you would
speak to it directly, and without evasion.
all in a breath then bespoke my seriousness, and my justice: and in this
manner I deliver myself, assume an air sincerely solemn.
'I be very sensible that the performance of the task you have put I upon
will leave I without excuse: but I will not have recourse either to
evasion or palliation.
'as my cousin Charlotte have severely observe, I be not ashamed to do
justice to Miss Harlowe's merit.
'I own to you all, and, what be more, with high regret, (if not with
shame, cousin Charlotte,) that I have a great deal to answer for in my
usage of this lady. the sex have not a nobler mind, nor a lovely person
of it. and, for virtue, I could not have believe (excuse I, Ladies)
that there ever be a woman who give, or could have give, such
illustrious, such uniform proof of it: for, in her whole conduct, she
have show herself to be equally above temptation and art; and, I have
almost say, human frailty.
'the step she so freely blame herself for taking, be truly what she
call compulsatory: for though she be provoke to think of go off
with I, she intend it not, nor be provide to do so: neither would
she ever have have the thought of it, have her relation leave she free,
upon she offer composition to renounce the man she do not hate, in
order to avoid the man she do.
'it pique my pride, I own, that I could so little depend upon the force
of those impression which I have the vanity to hope I have make in a heart
so delicate; and, in my bad device against she, I encourage myself
that I abuse no confidence; for none have she in my honour.
'the evil she have suffer, it would have be more than a miracle have
she avoid. her watchfulness render more plot abortive than those
which contribute to her fall; and they be many and various. and all
her great trial and hardship be owe to her noble resistance and
just resentment.
'I know, proceed I, how much I condemn myself in the justice I be do
to this excellent creature. but yet I will do her justice, and cannot
help it if I would. and I hope this show that I be not so totally
abandon as I have be think to be.
'indeed, with I, she have do more honour to her sex in her fall, if it
be to be call a fall, (in truth it ought not,) than ever any other
could do in her standing.
'when, at length, I have give she watchful virtue cause of suspicion, I
be then indeed oblige to make use of power and art to prevent she
escape from I. she then form contrivance to elude mine; but all
shebe be such as strict truth and punctilious honour would justify.
she could not stoop to deceit and falsehood, no, not to save herself.
More than once justly do she tell I, fire by conscious worthiness,
that her soul be my soul's superior!--forgive I, Ladies, for say,
that till I know she, I question a soul in a sex, create, as I be
willing to suppose, only for temporary purposes.--it be not to be
imagine into what absurdity man of free principle run in order to
justify to themselves their free practice; and to make a religion to
their mind: and yet, in this respect, I have not be so faulty as some
other.
'no wonder that such a noble creature as this look upon every studied
artifice as a degree of baseness not to be forgive: no wonder that she
could so easily become averse to the man (though once she behold he with
an eye not wholly indifferent) whom she think capable of premeditated
guilt. nor, give I leave, on the other hand, to say, be it to be
wonder at, that the man who find it so difficult to be forgive for
the slighter offence, and who have not the grace to recede or repent,
(make desperate,) should be hurry on to the commission of the great.
'in short, lady, in a word, my Lord, Miss Clarissa Harlowe be an angel;
if ever there be or could be one in human nature: and be, and ever be,
as pure as an angel in her will: and this justice I must do she, although
the question, I see by every glistening eye, be ready to be ask, what
then, Lovelace, art thou?'--
Lord M. A devil!--a d----d devil! I must answer. and may the curse of
God follow you in all you undertake, if you do not make she the good
amend now in your power to make she!
Lovel. from you, my Lord, I could expect no other: but from the lady
I hope for less violence from the ingenuousness of my confession.
the Ladies, eld and young, have their handkerchief to their eye, at
the just testimony which I bear to the merit of this exalt creature;
and which I would make no scruple to bear at the bar of a court of
justice, be I to be call to it.
Lady Betty. well, Sir, this be a noble character. if you think as you
speak, surely you cannot refuse to do the lady all the justice now in
your power to do she.
they all join in this demand.
I plead, that I be sure she would not have I: that, when she have
take a resolution, she be not to be move. unpersuadableness be an
Harlowe sin: that, and her name, I tell they, be all she have of theirs.
all be of opinion, that she might, in her present desolate
circumstance, be bring to forgive I. Lady Sarah say, that Lady
Betty and she would endeavour to find out the noble sufferer, as they
justly call she; and would take she into their protection, and be
guarantee of the justice that I would do she; as well after marriage as
before.
it be some pleasure to I, to observe the placability of these lady of
my own family, have they, any or either of they, meet with a LOVELACE. but
'twould be hard upon we honest fellow, Jack, if all woman be
clarissas.
here I be oblige to break off.
LETTER VII
MR. LOVELACE
[in CONTINUATION.]
it be much well, Jack, to tell your own story, when it must be know,
than to have an adversary tell it for you. conscious of this, I give
they a particular account how urgent I have be with she to fix upon the
Thursday after I leave she (it be her uncle Harlowe's anniversary
birth-day, and name to oblige she) for the private celebration; have
some day before actually procure a license, which still remain with
she.
that, not be able to prevail upon she to promise any thing, while
under a suppose restraint! I offer to leave she at full liberty, if
she would give I the least hope for that day. but neither do this
offer avail I.
that this inflexibleness make I desperate, I resolve to add to my
former fault, by give direction that she should not either go or
correspond out of the house, till I return from M. Hall; well know,
that if she be at full liberty, I must for ever lose she.
that this constraint have so much incense she, that although I write no
less than four different letter, I could not procure a single word in
answer; though I press she but for four word to signify the day and
the church.
I refer to my two cousin to vouch for I the extraordinary method I
take to send messenger to town, though they know not the occasion; which
now I tell they be this.
I acquaint they, that I even have write to you, Jack, and to another
gentleman of whom I think she have a good opinion, to attend she, in
order to press for her compliance; hold myself in readiness the last
day, at Salt-hill, to meet the messenger they should send, and proceed to
London, if his message be favourable. but that, before they could
attend she, she have find mean to fly away once more: and be now, say
I, perch perhaps somewhere under Lady Betty's window at Glenham-hall;
and there, like the sweet Philomela, a thorn in her breast, warble forth
her melancholy complaint against her barbarous Tereus.
Lady Betty declare that she be not with she; nor do she know where she
be. she should be, she add, the most welcome guest to she that she
ever receive.
in truth, I have a suspicion that she be already in their knowledge, and
take into their protection; for Lady Sarah I imagine incapable of be
rouse to this spirit by a letter only from Miss Harlowe, and that not
direct to herself; she be a very indolent and melancholy woman. but
her sister, I find have work she up to it: for Lady Betty be as
officious and manage a woman as Mrs. Howe; but of a much more generous
and noble disposition--she be my aunt, Jack.
I suppose, I say, that her ladyship might have a private direction
where to send to she. I speak as I wish: I would have give the world
to have hear that she be inclined to cultivate the interest of any of
my family.
Lady Betty answer that she have no direction but what be in the letter;
which she have scratch out, and which, it be probable, be only a
temporary one, in order to avoid I: otherwise she would hardly have
direct an answer to be leave at an inn. and she be of opinion, that to
apply to Miss Howe would be the only certain way to succeed in any
application for forgiveness, would I enable that young lady to interest
herself in procure it.
Miss Charlotte. permit I to make a proposal.----since we be all of
one mind, in relation to the justice due to Miss Harlowe, if Mr. Lovelace
will oblige himself to marry she, I will make Miss Howe a visit, little
as I be acquaint with she; and endeavour to engage her interest to
forward the desire reconciliation. and if this can be do, I make no
question but all may be happily accommodate; for every body know the
love there be between Miss Harlowe and Miss Howe.
marriage, with these woman, thou seest, Jack, be an atonement for all we
can do to they. a true dramatic recompense!
this motion be highly approve of; and I give my honour, as desire, in
the full manner they could wish.
Lady Sarah. well then, Cousin Charlotte, begin your treaty with Miss
Howe, out of hand.
Lady Betty. pray do. and let Miss Harlowe be tell, that I be ready to
receive she as the most welcome of guest: and I will not have she out of
my sight till the knot be tie.
Lady Sarah. tell she from I, that she shall be my daughter, instead of
my poor Betsey!----And shed a tear in remembrance of her lose daughter.
Lord M. what say you, Sir, to this?
Lovel. CONTENT, my Lord, I speak in the language of your house.
Lord M. we be not to be fool, Nephew. no quibbling. we will have
no slur put upon we.
Lovel. you shall not. and yet, I do not intend to marry, if she
exceed the appoint Thursday. but, I think (accord to her own
notion) that I have injure she beyond reparation, although I be to
make she the good of husband; as I be resolve to be, if she will
condescend, as I will call it, to have I. and be this, Cousin
Charlotte, my part of your commission to say.
this please they all.
Lord M. give I thy hand, Bob!--Thou talk like a man of honour at
last. I hope we may depend upon what thou sayest!
the Ladies eye put the same question to I.
Lovel. you may, my Lord--you may, lady--absolutely you may.
then be the personal character of the lady, as well as her more
extraordinary talent and endowment again expatiate upon: and Miss
Patty, who have once see she, launch out more than all the rest in her
praise. these be follow by such inquiry as be never forget to
be make in marriage-treaty, and which generally be the principal
motif with the sage of a family, though the least to be mention by
the party themselves, and yet even by they, perhaps, the first thought
of: that be to say, inquisition into the lady's fortune; into the
particular of the grandfather's estate; and what her father, and her
single-souled uncle, will probably do for she, if a reconciliation be
effect; as, by their mean, they make no doubt but it will be between
both family, if it be not my fault. the two venerable [no long
tabby with I now] hint at rich present on their own part; and my
Lord declare that he would make such overture in my behalf, as should
render my marriage with Miss Harlowe the good day's work I ever make;
and what, he doubt not, would be as agreeable to that family as to
myself.
thus, at present, by a single hair, hang over my head the matrimonial
sword. and thus end my trial. and thus be we all friend, and Cousin
and Cousin, and Nephew and Nephew, at every word.
do ever comedy end more happily than this long trial?
LETTER VIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
WEDN. JULY 12.
so, Jack, they think they have gain a mighty point. but, be I to
change my mind, be I to repent, I fancy I be safe.--And yet this very
moment it rise to my mind, that 'tis hard trust too; for surely there
must be some ember, where there be fire so lately, that may be stir
up to give a blaze to combustible strew lightly upon they. love, like
some self-propagate plant, or root, (which have take strong hold in
the earth) when once get deep into the heart, be hardly ever totally
extirpate, except by matrimony indeed, which be the grave of love,
because it allow of the end of love. then these lady, all advocate
for herself, with herself, Miss Howe at their head, perhaps,----not in
favour to I--I donot expect that from Miss Howe--but perhaps in favour
to herself: for Miss Howe have reason to apprehend vengeance from I, I
ween. her Hickman will be safe too, as she may think, if I marry she
beloved friend: for he have be a busy fellow, and I have long wish to
have a slap at him!--The lady's case desperate with her friend too; and
likely to be so, while single, and her character expose to censure.
a husband be a charming cloke, a fig-leave apron for a wife: and for a
lady to be protect in liberty, in diversion, which her heart pant
after--and all her fault, even the most criminal, be she to be
detect, to be throw upon the husband, and the ridicule too; a charming
privilege for a wife!
but I shall have one comfort, if I marry, which please I not a little.
if a man's wife have a dear friend of her sex, a hundred liberty may be
take with that friend, which could not be take, if the single lady
(know what a title to freedom marriage have give he with her friend)
be not less scrupulous with he than she ought to be as to herself.
then there be broad freedom (shall I call they?) that may be take by
the husband with his wife, that may not be quite shocking, which, if the
wife bear before her friend, will serve for a lesson to that friend;
and if that friend bear to be present at they without check or
bashfulness, will show a sagacious fellow that she can bear as much
herself, at proper time and place.
Chastity, Jack, like piety, be an uniform thing. if in look, if in
speech, a girl give way to undue levity, depend upon it the devil have
get one of his cloven foot in her heart already--so, Hickman, take care
of thyself, I advise thee, whether I marry or not.
thus, Jack, have I at once reconcile myself to all my relation--and if
the lady refuse I, throw the fault upon she. this, I know, would be
in my power to do at any time: and I be the more arrogant to they, in
order to heighten the merit of my compliance.
but, after all, it would be very whimsical, would it not, if all my plot
and contrivance should end in wedlock? what a punishment should this
come out to be, upon myself too, that all this while I have be
plunder my own treasury?
and then, can there be so much harm do, if it can be so easily repair
by a few magical word; as I Robert take thee, Clarissa; and I Clarissa
take thee, Robert, with the rest of the for-well and for-bad
legerdemain, which will hocus pocus all the wrong, the cry wrong,
that I have do to Miss Harlowe, into act of kindness and benevolence
to Mrs. Lovelace?
but, Jack, two thing I must insist upon with thee, if this be to be the
case.--having put secret of so high a nature between I and my spouse
into thy power, I must, for my own honour, and for the honour of my wife
and illustrious progeny, first oblige thee to give up the letter I have
so profusely scribble to thee; and in the next place, do by thee, as I
have head whisper in France be do by the true father of a certain
monarque; that be to say, cut thy throat, to prevent thy telling of
tale.
I have find mean to heighten the kind opinion my friend here have
begin to have of I, by communicate to they the content of the four
last letter which I write to press my elect spouse to solemnize. my
Lord repeat one of his phrase in my favour, that he hop it will come
out, that the devil be not quite so black as he be paint.
now pr'ythee, dear Jack, since so many good consequence be to flow from
these our nuptial, (one of which to thyself; since the soon thou
di, the less thou wilt have to answer for); and that I now-and-then be
apt to believe there may be something in the old fellow's notion, who
once tell we, that he who kill a man, have all that man's sin to answer
for, as well as his own, because he give he not the time to repent of
they that Heaven design to allow he, [a fine thing for thee, if thou
consent to be knock of the head; but a cursed one for the
manslayer!] and since there may be room to fear that Miss Howe will not
give we her help; I pr'ythee now exert thyself to find out my Clarissa
Harlowe, that I may make a LOVELACE of she. set all the city bellman,
and the country crier, for ten mile round the metropolis, at work, with
their 'Oye's! and if any man, woman, or child can give tale or tiding.'
--advertise she in all the news-paper; and let she know, 'that if she
will repair to Lady Betty Lawrance, or to Miss Charlotte Montague, she
may hear of something greatly to her advantage.'
***
my two cousin Montague be actually to set out to-morrow to Mrs. Howe's,
to engage her vixen daughter's interest with her friend. they will
flaunt it away in a chariot-and-six, for the great state and
significance.
confound mortification to be reduce this low!--my pride hardly know
how to brook it.
Lord M. have engage the two venerable to stay here to attend the issue:
and I, stand very high at present in their good grace, be to gallant
they to Oxford, to Blenheim, and to several other place.
LETTER ix
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY NIGHT, JULY 13.
Collins set not out to-morrow. some domestic occasion hinder he.
Rogers be but now return from you, and cannot be well spar. Mr.
Hickman be go upon an affair of my mother's, and have take both his
servant with he, to do credit to his employer: so I be force to
venture this by post, direct by your assumed name.
I be to acquaint you, that I have be favour with a visit from Miss
Montague and her sister, in Lord M.'s chariot-and-six. my Lord's
gentleman ride here yesterday, with a request that I would receive a
visit from the two young lady, on a very particular occasion; the
great favour if it might be the next day.
as I have so little personal knowledge of either, I doubt not but it
must be in relation to the interest of my dear friend; and so consulting
with my mother, I send they an invitation to favour I (because of the
distance) with their company at dinner; which they kindly accept.
I hope, my dear, since thing have be so very bad, that their errand to
I will be as agreeable to you, as any thing that can now happen. they
come in the name of Lord M. and Lady Sarah and Lady Betty his two
sister, to desire my interest to engage you to put yourself into the
protection of Lady Betty; who will not part with you till she see all
the justice do you that now can be do.
Lady Sarah have not stir out for a twelve-month before; never since she
lose her agreeable daughter whom you and I see at Mrs. Benson's: but be
induce to take this journey by Lady Betty, purely to procure you
reparation, if possible. and their joint strength, unite with Lord
M.'s, have so far succeed, that the wretch have bind himself to they,
and to these young lady, in the solemn manner, to wed you in their
presence, if they can prevail upon you to give he your hand.
this consolation you may take to yourself, that all this honourable
family have a due (that be, the high) sense of your merit, and greatly
admire you. the horrid creature have not spar himself in do justice
to your virtue; and the young lady give we such an account of his
confession, and self-condemnation, that my mother be quite charm with
you; and we all four shed tear of joy, that there be one of our sex [I,
that that one be my dear friend,] who have do so much honour to it,
as to deserve the exalt praise give you by a wretch so
self-conceited; though pity for the excellent creature mix with our
joy.
he promise by they to make the good of husband; and my Lord, and Lady
Sarah, and Lady Betty, be all three to be guarantee that he will be so.
noble settlement, noble present, they talk of: they say, they leave
Lord M. and his two sister talk of nothing else but of those present
and settlement, how most to do you honour, the great in proportion for
the indignity you have suffer; and of change of name by act of
parliament, preparative to the interest they will all join to make to get
the title to go where the bulk of the estate must go, at my Lord's
death, which they apprehend to be near than they wish. nor doubt they
of a thorough reformation in his moral, from your example and influence
over he.
I make a great many objection for you--all, I believe, that you could
have make yourself, have you be present. but I have no doubt to advise
you, my dear, (and so do my mother,) instantly to put yourself into
Lady Betty's protection, with a resolution to take the wretch for your
husband. all his future grandeur [he want not pride] depend upon his
sincerity to you; and the young lady vouch for the depth of his concern
for the wrong he have do you.
all his apprehension be, in your readiness to communicate to every one,
as he fear, the evil you have suffer; which he think will expose you
both. but have you not reveal they to Lady Betty, you have not have so
warm a friend; since it be owe to two letter you write to she, that
all this good, as I hope it will prove, be bring about. but I advise
you to be more sparing in expose what be past, whether you have
thought of accept he or not: for what, my dear, can that avail now,
but to give a handle to vile wretch to triumph over your friend; since
every one will not know how much to your honour your very suffering have
be?
your melancholy letter bring by Rogers,* with his account of your
indifferent health, confirm to he by the woman of the house, as well
as by your look and by your faintness while you talk with he, would
have give I inexpressible affliction, have I not bee cheer by this
agreeable visit from the young lady. I hope you will be equally so on
my impart the subject of it to you.
* see Letter II. of this volume.
indeed, my dear, you must not hesitate. you must oblige they. the
alliance be splendid and honourable. very few will know any thing of his
brutal baseness to you. all must end, in a little while, in a general
reconciliation; and you will be able to resume your course of do the
good to every deserving object, which procure you blessing wherever you
set your foot.
I be concerned to find, that your father's inhuman curse affect you so
much as it do. yet you be a noble creature to put it, as you put it--
I hope you be indeed more solicitous to get it revoke for their sake
than for your own. it be for they to be penitent, who hurry you into
evil you could not well avoid. you be apt to judge by the unhappy
event, rather than upon the true merit of your case. upon my honour, I
think you faultless almost in every step you have take. what have not
that vilely-insolent and ambitious, yet stupid, brother of your' to
answer for?--that spiteful thing your sister too!
but come, since what be past cannot be help, let we look forward. you
have now happy prospect open to you: a family, already noble,
prepare to receive you with open arm and joyful heart; and who, by
their love to you, will teach another family (who know not what an
excellence they have confederate to persecute) how to value you. your
prudence, your piety, will crown all. you will reclaim a wretch that,
for an hundred sake more than for his own, one would wish to be
reclaim.
like a traveller, who have be put out of his way, by the overflowing of
some rapid stream, you have only have the fore-right path you be in
overwhelmed. a few mile about, a day or two only lost, as I may say,
and you be in a way to recover it; and, by quicken your speed, will
get up the lost time. the hurry upon your spirit, mean time, will be
all your inconvenience; for it be not your fault you be stop in
your progress.
think of this, my dear; and improve upon the allegory, as you know how.
if you can, without impede your progress, be the mean of assuage the
inundation, of bound the water within their natural channel, and
thereby of recover the overwhelmed path for the sake of future
passenger who travel the same way, what a merit will your's be!
I shall impatiently expect your next letter. the young lady propose
that you should put yourself, if in town, or near it, into the Reading
stage-coach, which inn somewhere in Fleet-street: and, if you give
notice of the day, you will be meet on the road, and that pretty early in
your journey, by some of both sex; one of whom you willnot be sorry to
see.
Mr. Hickman shall attend you at Slough; and Lady Betty herself, and one
of the Miss Montagues, with proper equipage, will be at read to
receive you; and carry you directly to the seat of the former: for I have
expressly stipulate, that the wretch himself shall not come into your
presence till your nuptial be to be solemnize, unless you give leave.
Adieu, my dear friend. be happy: and hundred will then be happy of
consequence. inexpressibly so, I be sure, will then be
your ever affectionate
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER x
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
SUNDAY NIGHT, JULY 16.
my DEAREST FRIEND,
why should you permit a mind, so much devoted to your service, to labour
under such an impatience as you must know it would labour under, for want
of an answer to a letter of such consequence to you, and therefore to I,
as be mine of Thursday night?--roger tell I, on Thursday, you be so
ill; your letter send by he be so melancholy!--Yet you must be ill
indeed, if you could not write something to such a letter; be it but a
line, to say you would write as soon as you could. sure you have
receive it. the master of your near post-office will pawn his
reputation that it go safe: I give he particular charge of it.
God send I good news of your health, of your ability to write; and then
I will chide you--indeed I will--as I never yet do chide you.
I suppose your excuse will be, that the subject require consideration--
Lord! my dear, so it might; but you have so right a mind, and the matter
in question be so obvious, that you could not want half an hour to
determine.--then you intend, probably, to wait Collins's call for your
letter as on to-morrow!--suppose something be to happen, as it do on
Friday, that he should not be able to go to town to-morrow?--How, child,
could you serve I so!--I know not how to leave off scold you!
dear, honest Collins, make haste: he will: he will. he set out, and
travel all night: for I have tell he, that the dear friend I have in
the world have it in her own choice to be happy, and to make I so; and
that the letter he will bring from she will assure it to I.
I have order he to go directly (without stop at the
Saracen's-head-inn) to you at your lodging. matter be now in so good
a way, that he safely may.
your expected letter be ready write I hope: if it can be not, he will
call for it at your hour.
you cannot be so happy as you deserve to be: but I doubt not that you will
be as happy as you can; that be, that you will choose to put yourself
instantly into Lady Betty's protection. if you would not have the wretch
for your own sake; have he you must, for mine, for your family's, for
your honour's, sake!--dear, honest Collins, make haste! make haste! and
relieve the impatient heart of my beloved's
ever faithful, ever affectionate,
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XI
MISS HOWE, to MISS CHARLOTTE MONTAGUE
TUESDAY MORN. JULY 18.
MADAM,
I take the liberty to write to you, by this special messenger. in the
phrensy of my soul I write to you, to demand of you, and of any of your
family who can tell news of my beloved friend, who, I doubt, have be
spirit away by the base art of one of the black--o help I to a
name black enough to call he by! her piety be proof against
self-attempt. it must, it must be he, the only wretch, who could injure
such an innocent; and now--who know what he have do with she!
if I have patience, I will give you the occasion of this distract
vehemence.
I write to she the very moment you and your sister leave I. but be
unable to procure a special messenger, as I intend, be force to send
by the post. I urge she, [you know I promise that I would: I urge
she,] with earnestness, to comply with the desire of all your family.
have no answer, I write again on Sunday night; and send it by a
particular hand, who travel all night; chide she for keep a heart
so impatient as mine in such cruel suspense, upon a matter of so much
importance to she, and therefore to I. and very angry I be with she in
my mind.
but, judge my astonishment, my distraction, when last night, the
messenger, return post-haste, bring I word, that she have not be
hear of since Friday morning! and that a letter lie for she at her
lodging, which come by the post; and must be mine!
she go out about six that morning; only intend, as they believe, to
go to morning-prayer at Covent-Garden church, just by her lodging, as
she have do diver time before--go on foot!--left word she should be
back in an hour!--very poorly in health!
Lord, have mercy upon I! what shall I do!--I be a distracted creature
all last night!
o Madam! you know not how I love her!--my own soul be not dearer to I,
than my Clarissa Harlowe!--Nay! she be my soul--for I now have none--only
a miserable one, however--for she be the joy, the stay, the prop of my
life. never woman love woman as we love one another. it be impossible
to tell you half her excellency. it be my glory and my pride, that I
be capable of so fervent a love of so pure and matchless a creature.--
but now--who know, whether the dear injure have not all her woe, her
undeserved woe, complete in death; or be not reserve for a bad fate!
--This I leave to your inquiry--for--your--[shall I call the man----
your?] relation I understand be still with you.
surely, my good lady, you be well authorize in the proposal you
make in presence of my mother!--surely he dare not abuse your confidence,
and the confidence of your noble relation! I make no apology for give
you this trouble, nor for desire you to favour with a line, by this
messenger,
your almost distract
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
M. HALL, SAT. NIGHT, JUNE 15.
all undone, undo, by Jupiter!--Zounds, Jack, what shall I do now! a
curse upon all my plot and contrivances!--But I have it----in the very
heart and soul of I I have it!
Thou toldest I, that my punishment be but begin--Canst thou, O
fatal prognosticator, can thou tell I, where they will end?
Thy assistance I bespeak. the moment thou receivest this, I bespeak thy
assistance. this messenger rid for life and death--and I hope hewill
find you at your town-lodging; if he meet not with you at Edgware;
where, be Sunday, he will call first.
this curse, cursed woman, on Friday dispatch man and horse with the
joyful news (as she think it would be to I) in an exulting letter from
Sally Martin, that she have find out my angel as on Wednesday last; and
on Friday morning, after she have be at prayer at Covent-Garden church
--praying for my reformation perhaps--get she arrest by two sheriff's
officer, as she be return to her lodging, who (villain!) put she
into a chair they have in readiness, and carry she to one of the cursed
fellow's house.
she have arrest she for 150L. pretendedly due for board and lodge: a
sum (besides the low villany of the proceeding) which the dear soul could
not possibly raise: all her clothe and effect, except what she have on
and with she when she go away, be at the old devil's.
and here, for an aggravation, have the dear creature lain already two
day; for I must be gallante my two aunt and my two cousin, and
give Lord M. an airing after his lie-in--pox upon the whole family
of we! and return not till within this hour: and now return to my
distraction, on receive the cursed tiding, and the exulting letter.
Hasten, hasten, dear Jack; for the love of God, hasten to the injured
charmer! my heart bleed for her!--she deserve not this!--i dare not
stir. it will be think do by my contrivance--and if I be absent from
this place, that will confirm the suspicion.
damnation seize quick this accurse woman!--yet she think she have make
no small merit with I. unhappy, thrice unhappy circumstances!--At a
time too, when well prospect be open for the sweet creature!
Hasten to her!--clear I of this cursed job. most sincerely, by all
thatbe sacred, I swear you may!----Yet have I be such a villanous
plotter, that the charming sufferer will hardly believe it: although the
proceeding be so dirtily low.
set she free the moment you see she: without conditioning, free!--On your
knee, for I, beg her pardon: and assure she, that, wherever she go, I
will not molest she: no, nor come near she without she leave: and be sure
allow not any of the d----d crew to go near she--only let she permit you
to receive her command from time to time.--you have always be her
friend and advocate. what would I now give, have I permit you to have
be a successful one!
let she have all her clothe and effect send she instantly, as a small
proof of my sincerity. and force upon the dear creature, who must be
moneyless, what sum you can get she to take. let I know how she have
be treat. if roughly, woe be to the guilty!
take thy watch in thy hand, after thou hast free she, and d--n the whole
brood, dragon and serpent, by the hour, till thou'rt tired; and tell
they, I bid thee do so for their cursed officiousness.
they have nothing to do when they have find she, but to wait my order how
to proceed.
the great devil fly away with they all, one by one, through the roof of
their own cursed house, and dash they to piece against the top of
chimney as he fly; and let the less devil collect the scatter
scrap, and bag they up, in order to put they together again in their
allotted place, in the element of fire, with cement of molten lead.
a line! a line! a kingdom for a line! with tolerable news, the first
moment thou canst write!--this fellow wait to bring it.
LETTER XIII
MISS CHARLOTTE MONTAGUE, to MISS HOWE
M. HALL, TUESDAY AFTERNOON.
dear MISS HOWE,
your letter have infinitely disturb we all.
this wretched man have be half distract ever since Saturday night.
we know not what ail he, till your letter be bring.
Vile wretch, as he be, he be however innocent of this new evil.
indeed he be, he must be; as I shall more at large acquaint you.
but will not now detain your messenger.
only to satisfy your just impatience, by tell you, that the dear young
lady be safe, and we hope well.
a horrid mistake of his general order have subject she to the terror
and disgrace of an arrest.
poor dear Miss harlowe!--her suffering have endear she to we, almost
as much as her excellency can have endear she to you.
but she must now be quite at liberty.
he have be a distracted man, ever since the news be bring he; and we
know not what ail he.
but that I say before.
my Lord M. my lady Sarah Sadleir, and my Lady Betty Lawrance, will all
write to you this very afternoon.
and so will the wretch himself.
and send it by a servant of their own, not to detain your's.
I know not what I write.
but you shall have all the particular, just, and true, and fair, from
Dear Madam,
your most faithful and obedient servant,
CH. MONTAGUE.
LETTER XIV
MISS MONTAGUE, to MISS HOWE
M. HALL, JULY 18.
DEAR MADAM,
in pursuance of my promise, I will minutely inform you of every thing we
know relate to this shocking transaction.
when we return from you on Thursday night, and make our report of the
kind reception both we and our message meet with, in that you have be so
good as to promise to use your interest with your dear friend, it put we
all into such good humour with one another, and with my cousin Lovelace,
that we resolve upon a little tour of two day, the Friday and Saturday,
in order to give an airing to my Lord, and Lady Sarah, both have be
long confine, one by illness, the other by melancholy. my Lord, Lady
Sarah, Lady Betty, and myself, be in the coach; and all our talk be of
dear Miss Harlowe, and of our future happiness with she: Mr. Lovelace and
my sister (who be his favourite, as he be she's) be in his phaeton:
and, whenever we join company, that be still the subject.
as to he, never man praise woman as he do she: never man give great
hope, and make well resolution. he be none of those that be
govern by interest. he be too proud for that. but most sincerely
delighted be he in talk of she; and of his hope of her return
favour. he say, however, more than once, that he fear she would not
forgive he; for, from his heart, he must say, he deserve not her
forgiveness: and often and often, that there be not such a woman in the
world.
this I mention to show you, Madam, that he could not at this time be
privy to such a barbarous and disgraceful treatment of she.
we return not till Saturday night, all in as good humour with one
another as we go out. we never have such pleasure in his company
before. if he would be good, and as he ought to be, no man would be
well belove by relation than he. but never be there a great
alteration in man when he come home, and receive a letter from a
messenger, who, it seem, have be flatter himself in hope of a
reward, and have be wait for his return from the night before. in
such a fury!--the man fare but badly. he instantly shut himself up to
write, and order man and horse to be ready to set out before day-light
the next morning, to carry the letter to a friend in London.
he would not see we all that night; neither breakfast nor dine with we
next day. he ought, he say, never to see the light; and bid my sister,
whom he call an innocent, (and who be very desirous to know the
occasion of all this,) shun he, say, he be a wretch, and make so by
his own invention, and the consequence of they.
none of we could get out of he what so disturb he. we should too
soon hear, he say, to the utter dissipation of all his hope, and of all
our.
we could easily suppose that all be not right with regard to the worthy
young lady and he.
he go out each day; and say he want to run away from himself.
late on Monday night he receive a letter from Mr. Belford, his most
favour friend, by his own messenger; who come back in a foam, man and
horse. whatever be the content, he be not easy, but like a madman
rather: but still would not let we know the occasion. but to my sister
he say, nobody, my dear Patsey, who can think but of half the plague
that pursue an intriguing spirit, would ever quit the fore-right path.
he be out when your messenger come: but soon come in; and bad enough be
his reception from we all. and he say, that his own torment be
great than our, than Miss Harlowe's, or your's, Madam, all put
together. he would see your letter. he always carry every thing
before he: and say, when he have read it, that he thank God, he be
not such a villain, as you, with too great an appearance of reason,
think he.
thus, then, he own the matter to be.
he have leave general instruction to the people of the lodging the dear
lady go from, to find out where she be go to, if possible, that he
might have an opportunity to importune she to be his, before their
difference be public. the wicked people (officious at least, if not
wicked) discover where she be on Wednesday; and, for fear she should
remove before they could have his order, they put she under a gentle
restraint, as they call it; and dispatch away a messenger to acquaint
he with it; and to take his order.
this messenger arrive Friday afternoon; and staid here till we return
on Saturday night:--and, when he read the letter he bring--I have tell
you, Madam, what a fury he be in.
the letter he retire to write, and which he dispatch away so early on
Sunday morning, be to conjure his friend, Mr. Belford, on receipt of it,
to fly to the lady, and set she free; and to order all her thing to be
send to she; and to clear he of so black and villanous a fact, as he
justly call it.
and by this time he doubt not that all be happily over; and the belove
of his soul (as he call she at ever word) in an easy and happy way
than she be before the horrid fact. and now he own that the reason why
Mr. Belford's letter set he into strong raving be, because of his
keep he wilfully (and on purpose to torment he) in suspense; and
reflect very heavily upon he, (for Mr. Belford, he say, be ever the
lady's friend and advocate); and only mention, that he have wait upon
she; refer to his next for further particular; which Mr. Belford
could have tell he at the time.
he declare, and we can vouch for he, that he have be, ever since last
Saturday night, the most miserable of man.
he forbear go up himself, that it might not be imagine he be guilty
of so black a contrivance; and that he go up to complete any base view
in consequence of it.
believe we all, dear Miss Howe, under the deep concern at this unhappy
accident; which will, we fear, exasperate the charming sufferer; not too
much for the occasion, but too much for our hope.
o what wretch be these free-live man, who love to tread in intricate
path; and, when once they err, know not how far out of the way their
headstrong course may lead they!
my sister join she thank with mine to your good mother and self, for
the favour you heap upon we last Thursday. we beseech your continued
interest as to the subject of our visit. it shall be all our study to
oblige and recompense the dear lady to the utmost of our power, and for
what she have suffer from the unhappy man.
we be, dear Madam,
your obliged and faithful servant,
CHARLOTTE | MONTAGUE.
MARTHA |
***
dear MISS HOWE,
we join in the above request of Miss Charlotte and Miss Patty Montague,
for your favour and interest; be convince that the accident be an
accident, and no plot or contrivance of a wretch too full of they. we
be, Madam,
your most obedient humble servant,
M.
SARAH SADLEIR.
ELIZ. lawrance.
***
dear MISS HOWE,
after what be write above, by name and character of unquestionable
honour, I might have be excuse sign a name almost as hateful to
myself, as I know it be to you. but the above will have it so. since,
therefore, I must write, it shall be the truth; which be, that if I may
be once more admit to pay my duty to the most deserving and most
injure of her sex, I will be content to do it with a halter about my
neck; and, attend by a parson on my right hand, and the hangman on my
left, be doom, at she will, either to the church or the gallow.
your most humble servant,
ROBERT LOVELACE.
TUESDAY, JULY 18.
LETTER XV
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SUNDAY NIGHT, JULY 16.
what a cursed piece of work hast thou make of it, with the most excellent
of woman! thou mayest be in earnest, or in jest, as thou wilt; but the
poor lady will not be long either thy sport, or the sport of fortune!
I will give thee an account of a scene that want but her affect pen
to represent it justly; and it would wring all the black blood out of thy
callous heart.
thou only, who art the author of her calamity, shouldst have attend
she in her prison. I be unequal to such a task: nor know I any other man
but would.
this last act, however unintended by thee, yet a consequence of thy
general order, and too likely to be think agreeable to thee, by those
who know thy other villanie by she, have finish thy barbarous work.
and I advise thee to trumpet forth every where, how much in earnest thou
art to marry she, whether true or not.
Thou mayest safely do it. she will not live to put thee to the trial;
and it will a little palliate for thy enormous usage of she, and be a
mean to make mankind, who know not what I know of the matter, herd a
little long with thee, and forbear to hunt thee to thy fellow-savage
in the lybian wild and desart.
your messenger find I at Edgware expect to dinner with I several
friend, whom I have invite three day before. I send apology to they,
as in a case of life and death; and speed to town to the
woman's: for how know I but shocking attempt might be make upon she by
the cursed wretch: perhaps by your connivance, in order to mortify she
into your measure?
Little know the public what villanie be commit by vile wretch, in
these abominable house upon innocent creature draw into their snare.
find the lady not there, I post away to the officer's, although
Sally tell I that she have but just come from thence; and that she have
refuse to see she, or (as she send down word) any body else; be
resolve to have the remainder of that Sunday to herself, as it might,
perhaps, be the last she should ever see.
I have the same thing tell I, when I get thither.
I send up to let she know, that I come with a commission to set she at
liberty. I be afraid of send up the name of a man know to be your
friend. she absolutely refuse to see any man, however, for that day, or
to answer far to any thing say from I.
have therefore inform myself of all that the officer, and his wife,
and servant, could acquaint I with, as well in relation to the horrid
arrest, as to her behaviour, and the woman's to she; and her ill state of
health; I go back to Sinclair's, as I will still call she, and hear
the three woman's story. from all which I be enable to give you the
follow shocking particular: which may serve till I can see the
unhappy lady herself to-morrow, if then I gain admittance to she. you
will find that I have be very minute in my inquiry.
your villain it be that set the poor lady, and have the impudence to
appear, and abet the sheriff's officer in the cursed transaction. he
think, no doubt, that he be do the most acceptable service to his
bless master. they have get a chair; the head ready up, as soon as
service be over. and as she come out of the church, at the door
front Bedford-street, the officer, step up to she, whisper that
they have an action against she.
she be terrify, tremble, and turn pale.
action, say she! what be that!----i have commit no bad action!----
Lord bless I! man, what mean you?
that you be our prisoner, Madam.
Prisoner, Sirs!--What--how--why--what have I do?
you must go with we. be pleased, Madam, to step into this chair.
with you!--With man! must go with men!--I be not use to go with strange
men!----indeed you must excuse I!
we cannot excuse you. we be sheriff's officer, we have a writ against
you. you must go with we, and you shall know at whose suit.
Suit! say the charming innocent; I donot know what you mean. pray, man,
donot lay hand upon I; (they offer to put she into the chair.) I be
not use to be thus treat--I have do nothing to deserve it.
she then spy thy villain--o thou wretch, say she, where be thy vile
master?--am I again to be his prisoner? help, good people!
a crowd have begin to gather.
my master be in the country, Madam, many mile off. if you please to go
with these man, they will treat you civilly.
the people be most of they strike with compassion. a fine young
creature!--a thousand pity cry some. while some few throw out vile
and shocking reflection! but a gentleman interpose, and demand to
see the fellow's authority.
they show it. be your name Clarissa Harlowe, Madam? say he.
yes, yes, indeed, ready to sink, my name be Clarissa Harlowe:--but it be
now Wretchedness!----Lord be merciful to I, what be to come next?
you must go with these man, Madam, say the gentleman: they have
authority for what they do.
he pity she, and retire.
indeed you must, say one chairman.
indeed you must, say the other.
can nobody, join in another gentleman, be apply to, who will see that
so fine a creature be not ill use?
Thy villain answer, order be give particularly for that. she have
rich relation. she need but ask and have. she would only be carry to
the officer's house till matter could be make up. the people she have
lodge with loved her:--but she have leave her lodging privately.
oh! have she those trick already? cry one or two.
she hear not this--but say--well, if I must go, I must--I cannot resist
--but I will not be carry to the woman's! I will rather die at your
foot, than be carry to the woman's.
you willnot be carry there, Madam, cry thy fellow.
only to my house, Madam, say one of the officer.
where be that?
in High-Holborn, Madam.
I know not where High-Holborn be: but any where, except to the woman's.
----but be I to go with man only?
look about she, and see the three passage, to wit, that lead to
Henrietta-street, that to King-street, and the fore-right one, to
Bedford-street, crowd, she start--any where--any where, say she, but
to the woman's! and step into the chair, throw herself on the seat,
in the utmost distress and confusion--carry I, carry I out of sight--
cover I--cover I up--for ever--be her word.
thy villain draw the curtain: she have not power: and they go away with
she through a vast crowd of people.
here I must rest. I can write no more at present.
only, Lovelace, remember, all this be to a Clarissa.
***
the unhappy lady faint away when she be take out of the chair at the
officer's house.
several people follow the chair to the very house, which be in a
wretched court. Sally be there; and satisfy some of the inquirer,
that the young gentlewoman would be exceedingly well use: and they soon
disperse.
Dorcas be also there; but come not in her sight. Sally, as a favour,
offer to carry she to her former lodging: but she declare they should
carry she thither a corpse, if they do.
very gentle usage the woman boast of: so would a vulture, could it speak,
with the entrail of its prey upon its rapacious talon. of this youwill
judge from what I have to recite.
she ask, what be mean by this usage of she? People tell I, say
she, that I must go with the man: that they have authority to take I: so
I submit. but now, what be to be the end of this disgraceful
violence?
the end, say the vile Sally Martin, be, for honest people to come at
their own.
bless I! have I take away any thing that belong to those who have
obtain the power over me?--i have leave very valuable thing behind I;
but have take away that be not my own.
and who do you think, Miss Harlowe; for I understand, say the curse
creature, you be not marry; who do you think be to pay for your board
and your lodging! such handsome lodging! for so long a time as you be
at Mrs. Sinclair's?
Lord have mercy upon me!--miss Martin, (I think you be Miss Martin!)--
and be this the cause of such a disgraceful insult upon I in the open
street?
and cause enough, Miss Harlowe! (fond of gratify her jealous revenge,
by call she miss,)--one hundred and fifty guineas, or pound, be no
small sum to lose--and by a young creature who would have bilk she
lodging.
you amaze I, Miss Martin!--What language do you talk in?--Bilk my
lodgings?--what be that?
she stand astonished and silent for a few moment.
but recover herself, and turn from she to the window, she wring she
hand [the curse Sally show I how!] and lift they up--now,
Lovelace: now indeed do I think I ought to forgive thee!--But who shall
forgive Clarissa Harlowe!----O my sister!--o my brother!--tender mercy
be your cruelty to this!
after a pause, her handkerchief dry up her fall tear, she turn
to Sally: now, have I note to do but acquiesce--only let I say, that
if this aunt of your's, this Mrs. Sinclair, or this man, this Mr.
Lovelace, come near I; or if I be carry to the horrid house; (for
that, I suppose, be the design of this new outrage;) God be merciful to
the poor Clarissa Harlowe!----Look to the consequence!----look, I charge
you, to the consequence!
the vile wretch tell she, it be not design to carry she any where
against her will: but, if it be, they should take care not to be
fright again by a penknife.
she cast up her eye to Heaven, and be silent--and go to the farth
corner of the room, and, sit down, throw her handkerchief over her
face.
Sally ask she several question; but not answer she, she tell she,
she would wait upon she by-and-by, when she have find her speech.
she order the people to press she to eat and drink. she must be
fast--nothing but her prayer and tear, poor thing!--were the
merciless devil's word, as she own to me.--Dost think I do not curse
she?
she go away; and, after her own dinner, return.
the unhappy lady, by this devil's account of she, then seem either
mortify into meekness, or to have make a resolution not to be provoke
by the insult of this cursed creature.
Sally inquire, in her presence, whether she have eat or drank any thing;
and be tell by the woman, that she could not prevail upon she to taste
a morsel, or drink a drop, she say, this be wrong, Miss Harlowe! very
wrong!--your religion, I think, should teach you, that starve yourself
be self-murder.
she answer not.
the wretch own she be resolve to make she speak.
she ask if Mabell should attend she, till it be see what her friend
would do for she in discharge of the debt? Mabell, say she, have not yet
earn the clothe you be so good as to give she.
be I not worthy an answer, Miss Harlowe?
I would answer you (say the sweet sufferer, without any emotion) if I
know how.
I have order pen, ink, and paper, to be bring you, Miss Harlowe.
there they be. I know you love write. you may write to whom you
please. your friend, Miss Howe, will expect to hear from you.
I have no friend, say she, I deserve none.
Rowland, for thatbe the officer's name, tell she, she have friend enow to
pay the debt, if she would write.
she would trouble nobody; she have no friend; be all they could get from
she, while Sally staid: but yet speak with a patience of spirit, as if
she enjoy her grief.
the insolent creature go away, order they, in the lady's hearing, to
be very civil to she, and to let she want for nothing. now have she, she
own, the triumph of her heart over this haughty beauty, who keep they
all at such a distance in their own house!
what think thou, Lovelace, of this!--this wretch's triumph be over a
Clarissa!
about six in the evening, Rowland's wife press she to drink tea. she
say, she have rather have a glass of water; for her tongue be ready to
cleave to the roof of her mouth.
the woman bring she a glass, and some bread and butter. she try to
taste the latter; but could not swallow it: but eagerly drink the water;
lift up her eye in thankfulness for that!!!
the divine Clarissa, lovelace,--reduce to rejoice for a cup of cold
water!--By whom reduce?
about nine o'clock she ask if any body be to be her bedfellow.
their maid, if she please; or, as she be so weak and ill, the girl
should sit up with she, if she choose she should.
she choose to be alone both night and day, she say. but might she not be
trust with the key of the room where she be to lie down; for she
should not put off her clothe!
that, they tell she, could not be.
she be afraid not, she said.--but indeed she would not get away, if she
could.
they tell I, that they have but one bed, besides that they lay in
themselves, (which they would fain have have she accept of,) and besides
that their maid lie in, in a garret, which they call a hole of a
garret: and that that one bed be the prisoner's bed; which they make
several apology to I about. I suppose it be shocking enough.
but the lady would not lie in theirs. be she not a prisoner? she say
--let she have the prisoner's room.
yet they own that she start, when she be conduct thither. but
recover herself, very well, say she--why should not all be of a
piece?--why should not my wretchedness be complete?
she find fault, that all the fastening be on the outside, and none
within; and say, she could not trust herself in a room where other
could come in at their pleasure, and she not go out. she have not be
use to it!!!
dear, dear soul!--my tear flow as I write!----Indeed, Lovelace, she have
not be use to such treatment.
they assure she, that it be as much their duty to protect she from
other person' insult, as from escape herself.
then they be people of more honour, she say, than she have be of late
use to.
she ask if they know Mr. Lovelace?
no, be their answer.
have you hear of he?
no.
well, then, you may be good sort of folk in your way.
pause here for a moment, Lovelace!--and reflect--I must.
***
again they ask she if they should send any word to her lodging?
these be my lodging now; be they not?--wa all her answer.
she sit up in a chair all night, the back against the door; have, it
seem, thrust a piece of a poker through the staple where a bolt have
be on the inside.
***
next morning Sally and Polly both go to visit she.
she have beg of Sally, the day before, that she might not see Mrs.
Sinclair, nor Dorcas, nor the break-toothe servant, call William.
Polly would have ingratiate herself with she; and pretend to be
concerned for her misfortune. but she take no more notice of she than
of the other.
they ask if she have any commands?--if she have, she only need to mention
what they be, and she should be obey.
none at all, she say.
how do she like the people of the house? be they civil to she?
pretty well, consider she have no money to give they.
would she accept of any money? they could put it to her account.
she would contract no debt.
have she any money about she?
she meekly put her hand in her pocket, and pull out half a guinea, and
a little silver. yes, I have a little.----but here should be fee pay,
I believe. should there not? I have hear of entrance-money to compound
for not be stript. but these people be very civil people, I fancy;
for they have not offer to take away my clothe.
they have order to be civil to you.
it be very kind.
but we two will bail you, Miss, if you will go back with we to Mrs.
Sinclair's.
not for the world!
she's be very handsome apartment.
the fitter for those who own they!
these be very sad one.
the fitter for I!
you may be happy yet, Miss, if you will.
I hope I shall.
if you refuse to eat or drink, we will give bail, and take you with we.
then I will try to eat and drink. any thing but go with you.
will you not send to your new lodging; the people will be fright.
so they will, if I send. so they will, if they know where I be.
but have you no thing to send for from thence?
there be what will pay for their lodging and trouble: I shall not lessen
their security.
but perhaps letter or message may be leave for you there.
I have very few friend; and to those I have I will spare the
mortification of know what have befall I.
we be surprised at your indifference, Miss Harlowe! will you not write
to any of your friend?
no.
why, you donot think of tarrying here always?
I shall not live always.
do you think you be to stay here as long as you live?
thatbe as it shall please God, and those who have bring I hither.
should you like to be at liberty?
I be miserable!--What be liberty to the miserable, but to be more
miserable.
how miserable, miss?--you may make yourself as happy as you please.
I hope you be both happy.
we be.
may you be more and more happy!
but we wish you to be so too.
I shall never be of your opinion, I believe, as to what happiness be.
what do you take our opinion of happiness to be?
to live at Mrs. Sinclair's.
perhaps, say Sally, we be once as squeamish and narrow-minded as you.
how come it over with you?
because we see the ridiculousness of prudery.
do you come hither to persuade I to hate prudery, as you call it, as
much as you do?
we come to offer our service to you.
it be out of your power to serve I.
perhaps not.
it be not in my inclination to trouble you.
you may be bad offer.
perhaps I may.
you be mighty short, Miss.
as I wish your visit to be, lady.
they own to I, that they crack their fan, and laugh.
Adieu, perverse beauty!
your servant, Ladies.
Adieu, haughty air!
you see I humbled--
as you deserve, Miss Harlowe. Pride will have a fall.
well fall, with what you call pride, than stand with meanness.
who do?
I have once a well opinion of you, Miss Horton!--Indeed you should not
insult the miserable.
neither should the miserable, say Sally, insult people for their
civility.
I should be sorry if I do.
Mrs. Sinclair shall attend you by-and-by, to know if you have any
command for she.
I have no wish for any liberty, but that of refuse to see she, and one
more person.
what we come for, be to know if you have any proposal to make for your
enlargement.
then, it seem, the officer put in. you have very good friend, Madam,
I understand. be it not well that you make it up? charge will run
high. a hundred and fifty guineas be easier pay than two hundred. let
these lady bail you, and go along with they; or write to your friend
to make it up.
Sally say, there be a gentleman who see you take, and be so much move
for you, Miss Harlowe, that he would gladly advance the money for you,
and leave you to pay it when you can.
see, Lovelace, what curse devil these be! this be the way, we know,
that many an innocent heart be throw upon keeping, and then upon the
town. but for these wretch thus to go to work with such an angel as
this!--how glad would have be the devilish Sally, to have have the least
handle to report to thee a listening ear, or patient spirit, upon this
hint!
Sir, say she, with high indignation, to the officer, do not you say,
last night, that it be as much your business to protect I from the
insult of other, as from escaping?--cannot I be permit to see whom
I please? and to refuse admittance to those I like not?
your creditor, Madam, will expect to see you.
not if I declare I will not treat with they.
then, Madam, you will be send to prison.
Prison, friend!--what dost thou call thy house?
not a prison, Madam.
why these iron-bar window, then? why these double lock and bolt
all on the outside, none on the in?
and down she dropt into her chair, and they could not get another word
from she. she throw her handkerchief over her face, as one before, which
be soon wet with tear; and grievously, they own, she sob.
gentle treatment, Lovelace!--Perhaps thou, as well as these wretch,
will think it so!
Sally then order a dinner, and say, they would soon be back a gain,
and see that she eat and drank, as a good christian should, comport
herself to her condition, and make the good of it.
what have not this charming creature suffer, what have she not go
through, in these last three month, that I know of!--Who would think
such a delicately-frame person could have sustain what she have
sustain! we sometimes talk of bravery, of courage, of fortitude!--here
they be in perfection!--such bravo as thou and I should never have
be able to support ourselves under half the persecution, the
disappointment, and contumely, that she have meet with; but, like
coward, should have slide out of the world, basely, by some back-door;
that be to say, by a sword, by a pistol, by a halter, or knife;--but here
be a fine-principle woman, who, by dint of this noble consideration, as
I imagine, [what else can support she?] that she have not deserve the
evil she contend with; and that this world be design but as a
transitory state of the probation; and that she be travel to another
and well; put up with all the hardship of the journey; and be not to
be divert from her course by the attack of thief and robber, or any
other terror and difficulty; be assure of an ample reward at the
end of it.
if thou think this reflection uncharacteristic from a companion and
friend of thine, imagin thou, that I profit nothing by my long
attendance on my uncle in his die state; and from the pious reflection
of the good clergyman, who, day by day, at the poor man's own request,
visit and pray by him?--And could I have another such instance, as
this, to bring all these reflection home to I?
then who can write of good person, and of good subject, and be capable
of admire they, and not be make serious for the time? and hence may we
gather what a benefit to the moral of man the keeping of good company
must be; while those who keep only bad, must necessarily more and more
harden, and be harden.
***
'tis twelve of the clock, Sunday night--I can think of nothing but this
excellent creature. her distress fill my head and my heart. I be
drowsy for a quarter of an hour; but the fit be go off. and I will
continue the melancholy subject from the information of these wretch.
Enough, I dare say, will arise in the visit I shall make, if admit
to-morrow, to send by thy servant, as to the way I be likely to find she
in.
after the woman have leave she, she complain of her head and her heart;
and seem terrified with apprehension of be carry once more to
Sinclair's.
refuse any thing for breakfast, Mrs. Rowland come up to she, and tell
she, (as these wretch own they have order she, for fear she should
starve herself,) that she must and should have tea, and bread and butter:
and that, as she have friend who could support she, if she write to they,
it be a wrong thing, both for herself and they, to starve herself thus.
if it be for your own sake, say she, that be another thing: let coffee,
or tea, or chocolate, or what you will, be get: and put down a chicken to
my account every day, if you please, and eat it yourself. I will taste
it, if I can. I would do nothing to hinder you. I have friend will pay
you liberally, when they know I be go.
they wonder, they tell she, at her strange composure in such
distress.
they be nothing, she say, to what she have suffer already from the
vilest of all man. the disgrace of seize she in the street; multitude
of people about she; shocking imputation wound her ear; have indeed
be very affect to she. but that be over.--every thing soon would!
--and she should be still more composed, be it not for the
apprehension of see one man, and one woman; and be trick or
force back to the vile house in the world.
then be it not well to give way to the two gentlewoman's offer to
bail her?--They could tell she, it be a very kind proffer; and what be
not to be meet every day.
she believe so.
the lady might, possibly, dispense with she go back to the house to
which she have such an antipathy. then the compassionate gentleman, who
be inclined to make it up with her creditor on her own bond--it was
very strange to they she hearken not to so generous a proposal.
do the two lady tell you who the gentleman was?--Or, do they say any
more on the subject?
yes, they do! and hint to I, say the woman, that you have nothing to
do but to receive a visit from the gentleman, and the money, they
believe, would be lay down on your own bond or note.
she be startle.
I charge you, say she, as you will answer it one day to my friend, I
charge you donot. if you do, you know not what may be the consequence.
they apprehend no bad consequence, they say, in do their duty: and
if she know not her own good, her friend would thank they for take any
innocent step to serve she, though against her will.
donot push I upon extremity, man!--don't make I desperate, woman!--i
have no small difficulty, notwithstanding the seem composure you just
now take notice of, to bear, as I ought to bear, the evil I suffer. but
if you bring a man or man to I, be the pretence what it will----
she stopt there, and look so earnestly, and so wildly, they say, that
they do not know but she would do some harm to herself, if they
disobey she; and that would be a sad thing in their house, and might be
their ruin. they therefore promise, that no man should be bring to
she but by her own consent.
Mrs. Rowland prevail on she to drink a dish of tea, and taste some
bread and butter, about eleven on Saturday morning: which she probably
do to have an excuse not to dine with the woman when they return.
but she would not quit her prison-room, as she call it, to go into
their parlour.
'unbarred window, and a lightsomer apartment,' she say, 'have too
cheerful an appearance for her mind.'
a shower fall, as she speak, 'what,' say she, look up, 'do the
element weep for I?'
at another time, 'the light of the sun be irksome to she. the sun
seem to shine in to mock her woe.'
'methought,' add she, 'the sun dart in, and gilding these iron bar,
play upon I like the two woman, who come to insult my haggard look, by
the word beauty; and my dejected heart, by the word haughty air!'
Sally come again at dinner-time, to see how she fare, as she tell she;
and that she do not starve herself: and, as she want to have some talk
with she, if she give she leave, she would dine with she.
I cannot eat.
you must try, Miss Harlowe.
and, dinner be ready just then, she offer her hand, and desire she
to walk down.
no; she would not stir out of her prison-room.
these sullen air willnot do, Miss Harlowe: indeed they willnot.
she be silent.
you will have hard usage than any you have ever yet know, I can tell
you, if you come not into some humour to make matter up.
she be still silent.
come, Miss, walk down to dinner. let I entreat you, do. Miss Horton be
below: she be once your favourite.
she wait for an answer: but receive none.
we come to make some proposal to you, for your good; though you
affront we so lately. and we would not let Mrs. Sinclair come in
person, because we think to oblige you.
this be indeed oblige.
come, give I your hand. Miss Harlowe: you be oblige to I, I can tell
you that: and let we go down to Miss Horton.
excuse I: I will not stir out of this room.
would you have I and Miss Horton dine in this filthy bed-room?
it be not a bed-room to I. I have not be in bed; nor will, while I be
here.
and yet you care not, as I see, to leave the house.--And so, you willnot go
down, Miss Harlowe?
I willnot, except I be force to it.
well, well, let it alone. I sha'n't ask Miss Horton to dine in this
room, I assure you. I will send up a plate.
and away the little saucy toad flutter down.
when they have din, up they come together.
well, Miss, you would not eat any thing, it seems?--very pretty sullen
air these!--No wonder the honest gentleman have such a hand with you.
she only hold up her hand and eye; the tear trickle down her cheek.
Insolent devils!--how much more cruel and insulting be bad woman even
than bad man!
Methinks, Miss, say Sally, you be a little soily, to what we have see
you. pity such a nice lady should not have change of apparel! why
willnot you send to your lodging for linen, at least?
I be not nice now.
Miss look well and clean in any thing, say polly. but, dear Madam, why
willnot you send to your lodging? be it but in kindness to the people?
they must have a concern about you. and your Miss Howe will wonder
whatbe become of you; for, no doubt, you correspond.
she turn from they, and, to herself, say, too much! Too much!--she
toss her handkerchief, wet before with her tear, from she, and hold
her apron to her eye.
donot weep, Miss! say the vile polly.
yet do, cry the viler Sally, it will be a relief. nothing, as Mr.
Lovelace once tell I, dry soon than tear. for once I too weep
mightily.
I could not bear the recital of this with patience. yet I curse they
not so much as I should have do, have I not have a mind to get from they
all the particular of their gentle treatment: and this for two reason;
the one, that I might stab thee to the heart with the repetition; and the
other, that I might know upon what term I be likely to see the unhappy
lady to-morrow.
well, but, Miss Harlowe, cry Sally, do you think these forlorn air
pretty? you be a good christian, child. Mrs. Rowland tell I, she have
get you a Bible-book.--o there it lies!--I make no doubt but you have
double down the useful place, as honest Matt. Prior say.
then rise, and take it up.--ay, so you have.--The Book of Job! one
open naturally here, I see--my mamma make I a fine Bible-scholar.--You
see, Miss Horton, I know something of the book.
they propose once more to bail she, and to go home with they. a motion
which she receive with the same indignation as before.
Sally tell she, that she have write in a very favourable manner, in her
behalf, to you; and that she every hour expect an answer; and make no
doubt, that you would come up with a messenger, and generously pay the
whole debt, and ask her pardon for neglect it.
this disturb she so much, that they fear she would have fall into
fit. she could not bear your name, she say. she hop she should
never see you more: and, be you to intrude yourself, dreadful
consequence might follow.
surely, they say, she would be glad to be release from her confinement.
indeed she should, now they have begin to alarm she with his name, who be
the author of all her woe: and who, she now see plainly, give way to
this new outrage, in order to bring she to his own infamous term.
why then, they ask, would she not write to her friend, to pay Mrs.
Sinclair's demand?
because she hop she should not trouble any body; and because she know
that the payment of the money if she should be able to pay it, be not
what be aim at.
Sally own that she tell she, that, truly, she have think herself as
well descended, and as well educate, as herself, though not entitle to
such considerable fortune. and have the impudence to insist upon it to
I to be truth.
she have the insolence to add, to the lady, that she have as much reason as
she to expect Mr. Lovelace would marry she; he have contract to do so
before he know Miss Clarissa Harlowe: and that she have it under his hand
and seal too--or else he have not obtain his end: therefore it be not
likely she should be so officious as to do his work against herself, if
she think Mr. Lovelace have design upon she, like what she presume to
hint at: that, for her part, her only view be, to procure liberty to a
young gentlewoman, who make those thing grievous to she which would not
be make such a rout about by any body else--and to procure the payment of
a just debt to her friend Mrs. Sinclair.
she besought they to leave she. she want not these instance, she
say, to convince she of the company she be in; and tell they, that, to
get rid of such visiter, and of the still bad she be apprehensive of,
she would write to one friend to raise the money for she; though it would
be death for she to do so; because that friend could not do it without
her mother, in whose eye it would give a selfish appearance to a
friendship that be above all sordid alloy.
they advise she to write out of hand.
but how much must I write for? what be the sum? should I not have have a
bill deliver I? God know, I take not your lodging. but he that
could treat I as he have do, could do this!
donot speak against Mr. Lovelace, Miss Harlowe. he be a man I greatly
esteem. [curse toad!] and, 'bat that he will take his advantage,
where he can, of US silly credulous woman, he be a man of honour.
she lift up her hand and eye, instead of speak: and well she
might! for any word she could have use could not have express the
anguish she must feel on be comprehend in the US.
she must write for one hundred and fifty guineas, at least: two hundred,
if she be short of more money, might well be write for.
Mrs. Sinclair, she say, have all her clothe. let they be sell, fairly
sell, and the money go as far as it would go. she have also a few other
valuable; but no money, (none at all,) but the poor half guinea, and the
little silver they have see. she would give bond to pay all that her
apparel, and the other mater she have, would fall short of. she have
great effect belong to she of right. her bond would, and must be
pay, be it for a thousand pound. but her clothe she should never
want. she believe, if not too much undervalued, those, and her few
valuable, would answer every thing. she wish for no surplus but to
discharge the last expense; and forty shilling would do as well for
those as forty pound. 'let my ruin, say she, lift up her eye, be
large! let it be COMPLETE, in this life!--For a composition, let it be
complete.'--and there she stop.
the wretch could not help wish to I for the opportunity of make
such a purchase for their own wear. how I curse they! and, in my heart,
thee!--but too probable, think I, that this vile Sally Martin may hope,
[though thou art incapable of it,] that her Lovelace, as she have the
assurance, behind thy back, to call thee, may present she with some of
the poor lady's spoil!
will not Mrs. Sinclair, proceed she, think my clothe a security, till
they can be sell? they be very good clothe. a suit or two but just
put on, as it be; never wear. they cost much more than it demand of
I. my father love to see I fine.--all shall go. but let I have the
particular of her demand. I suppose I must pay for my destroyer [that
be her well-adapt word!] and his servant, as well as for myself. I
be content to do so--I be above wish that any body, who could thus
act, should be so much as expostulate with, as to the justice and equity
of this payment. if I have but enough to pay the demand, I shall be
satisfied; and will leave the baseness of such an action as this, as ana
aggravation of a guilt which I think could not be aggravate.
I own, Lovelace, I have malice in this particularity, in order to ste
thee on the heart. and, let I ask thee, what now thou can'st think of
thy barbarity, thy unprecedented barbarity, in have reduce a person of
her rank, fortune, talent, and virtue, so low?
the wretched woman, it must be own, act but in their profession: a
profession thou hast be the principal mean of reduce these two to
act in. and they know what thy design have be, and how far
prosecute. it be, in their opinion, use she gently, that they have
forborne to bring she to the woman so justly odious to she: and that they
have not threaten she with the introducing to her strange man: nor yet
bring into her company their spirit-breaker, and humbling-drone,
(fellow not allow to carry sting,) to trace and force she back to
their detest house; and, when there, into all their measure.
till I come, they think thou wouldst not be displeased at any thing she
suffer, that could help to mortify she into a state of shame and
disgrace; and bring she to comply with thy view, when thou shouldst come
to release she from these wretch, as from a great evil than
cohabit with thee.
when thou consider these thing, thou wilt make no difficulty of
believe, that this their own account of their behaviour to this
admirable woman have be far short of their insult: and the less, when I
tell thee, that, all together, their usage have such effect upon she, that
they leave she in violent hysteric; order an apothecary to be send
for, if she should continue in they, and be bad; and particularly (as
they have do from the first) that they keep out of her way any edged or
point instrument; especially a pen-knife; which, pretend to mend a
pen, they say, she might ask for.
at twelve, Saturday night, Rowland send to tell they, that she be so
ill, that he know not what might be the issue; and wish she out of his
house.
and this make they as heartily wish to hear from you. for their
messenger, to their great surprise, be not then return from M. Hall.
and they be sure he must have reach that place by Friday night.
early on Sunday morning, both devil go to see how she do. they have
such an account of her weakness, lowness, and anguish, that they forebore
(out of compassion, they say, find their visit so disagreeable to
she) to see she. but their apprehension of what might be the issue be,
no doubt, their principal consideration: nothing else could have soften
such flinty bosom.
they send for the apothecary Rowland have have to she, and give he, and
Rowland, and his wife and maid, strict order, many time repeat, for
the utmost care to be take of she--no doubt, with an Old-Bailey
forecast. and they send up to let she know what order they have give:
but that, understand she have take something to compose herself, they
would not disturb she.
she have scruple, it seem, to admit the apothecary's visit over night,
because he be a man. nor could she be prevail upon to see he, till
they plead their own safety to she.
they go again, from church, [Lord, Bob., these creature go to church!]
but she send they down word that she must have all the remainder of the
day to herself.
when I first come, and tell they of thy execration for what they have
do, and join my own to they, they be astonish. the mother say,
she have think she have know Mr. Lovelace well; and expect thank,
and not curse.
while I be with they, come back halt and cursing, most horribly,
their messenger; by reason of the ill-usage he have receive from you,
instead of the reward he have be teach to expect for the suppose good
news that he carry down.--a pretty fellow, art thou not, to abuse
people for the consequence of thy own fault?
Dorcas, whose acquaintance this fellow be, and who recommend he for
the journey, have condition with he, it seem, for a share in the
expect bounty from you. have she be to have have her share make good,
I wish thou hadst break every bone in his skin.
under what shocking disadvantage, and with this addition to they, that I
be thy friend and intimate, be I to make a visit to this unhappy lady
to-morrow morning! in thy name, too!--enough to be refuse, that I be of
a sex, to which, for thy sake, she have so justifiable an aversion: nor,
have such a tyrant of a father, and such an implacable brother, have she
the reason to make an exception in favour of any of it on their account.
it be three o'clock. I will close here; and take a little rest: what I
have write will be a proper preparative for what shall offer by-and-by.
Thy servant be not to return without a letter, he tell I; and that thou
expectest he back in the morning. Thou hast fellow enough where thou
art at thy command. if I find any difficulty in see the lady, thy
messenger shall post away with this.--Let he look to broken bone, and
other consequence, if what he carry answer not thy expectation. but,
if I be admit, thou shalt have this and the result of my audience both
together. in the former case, thou mayest send another servant to wait
the next advice from
J. BELFORD.
LETTER XVI
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
MONDAY, JULY 17.
about six this morning, I go to Rowland's. Mrs. Sinclair be to follow
I, in order to dismiss the action; but not to come in sight.
Rowland, upon inquiry, tell I, that the lady be extremely ill; and that
she have desire, that no one but his wife or maid should come near she.
I say, I must see she. I have tell he my business over-night, and I
must see she.
his wife go up: but return presently, say, she could not get she
to speak to she; yet that her eyelid move; though she either would not,
or could not, open they, to look up at she.
oon, woman, say I, the lady may be in a fit: the lady may be die--let
I go up. show I the way.
a horrid hole of a house, in an alley they call a court; stair
wretchedly narrow, even to the first-floor room: and into a den they lead
I, with broken wall, which have be paper, as I see by a multitude of
tack, and some tear bit hold on by the rusty head.
the floor indeed be clean, but the ceiling be smoke with variety of
figure, and initial of name, that have be the woeful employment of
wretch who have no other way to amuse themselves.
a bed at one corner, with coarse curtain tack up at the foot to the
ceiling; because the curtain-ring be break off; but a coverlid upon
it with a cleanish look, though plaguily in tatter, and the corner tie
up in tassel, that the rent in it might go no far.
the window dark and double-barred, the top board up to save mending;
and only a little four-pan eyelet-hole of a casement to let in air;
more, however, come in at broken pane than could come in at that.
four old Turkey-work chair, bursten-bottom, the stuffing star
out.
an old, tottering, worm-eat table, that have more nail bestow in
mend it to make it stand, than the table cost fifty year ago, when
new.
on the mantle-piece be an iron shove-up candlestick, with a light
candle in it, twinkle, twinkle, twinkle, four of they, I suppose, for a
penny.
near that, on the same shelf, be an old look-glass, crack through
the middle, break out into a thousand point; the crack give it,
perhaps, in a rage, by some poor creature, to whom it give the
representation of his heart's woe in his face.
the chimney have two half-tile in it on one side, and one whole one on
the other; which show it have be in well plight; but now the very
mortar have follow the rest of the tile in every other place, and leave
the brick bare.
an old half-bar stove grate be in the chimney; and in that a large
stone-bottle without a neck, fill with baleful yew, as an evergreen,
wither southern-wood, dead sweet-briar, and sprig of rue in flower.
to finish the shocking description, in a dark nook stand an old
break-bottom cane couch, without a squab, or coverlid, sink at one
corner, and unmortise by the failing of one of its worm-eater leg,
which lie in two piece under the wretched piece of furniture it could
no long support.
and this, thou horrid Lovelace, be the bed-chamber of the divine
Clarissa!!!
I have leisure to cast my eye on these thing: for, go up softly, the
poor lady turn not about at our entrance; nor, till I speak, move she
head.
she be kneel in a corner of the room, near the dismal window, against
the table, on an old bolster (as it seem to be) of the cane couch,
half-cover with her handkerchief; her back to the door; which be only
shut to, [no need of fastening;] her arm cross upon the table, the
fore-finger of her right-hand in her Bible. she have perhaps be read
in it, and could read no long. Paper, pen, ink, lie by her book on
the table. her dress be white damask, exceed neat; but her stay
seem not tight-laced. I be tell afterwards, that her lace have be
cut, when she faint away at her entrance into this cursed place; and
she have not be solicitous enough about her dress to send for other.
her head-dress be a little discompose; her charming hair, in natural
ringlet, as you have heretofore describe it, but a little tangle, as
if not lately comb, irregularly shade one side of the lovely neck
in the world; as her disorder rumple handkerchief do the other. she
face [o how altered from what I have see it! yet lovely in spite of all
her grief and suffering!] be recline, when we enter, upon she
cross arm; but so, as not more than one side of it could be hide.
when I survey the room around, and the kneeling lady, sink with majesty
too in her white flow robe, (for she have not on a hoop,) spread
the dark, though not dirty, floor, and illuminate that horrid corner;
her linen beyond imagination white, consider that she have not be
undressed every since she have be here; I think my concern would have
choke I. something rise in my throat, I know not what, which make I,
for a moment, guggle, as it be, for speech: which, at last, force its
way, con--con--confound you both, say I, to the man and woman, be this
an apartment for such a lady? and could the cursed devil of her own sex,
who visit this suffering angel, see she, and leave she, in so d----d a
nook?
Sir, we would have have the lady to accept of our own bed-chamber: but she
refuse it. we be poor people--and we expect nobody will stay with we
long than they can help it.
you be people choose purposely, I doubt not, by the d----d woman who have
employ you: and if your usage of this lady have be but half as bad as
your house, you have well never to have see the light.
up then raise the charming sufferer her lovely face; but with such a
significance of woe overspread it, that I could not, for the soul of
I, help be visibly affect.
she wave her hand two or three time towards the door, as if command
I to withdraw; and displease at my intrusion; but do not speak.
permit I, Madam--I will not approach one step far without your leave
--permit I, for one moment, the favour of your ear!
no--no--go, go, MAN! with an emphasis--and would have say more; but, as
if struggle in vain for word, she seem to give up speech for lost,
and drop her head down once more, with a deep sigh, upon her left arm;
her right, as if she have not the use of it (numb, I suppose)
self-move, drop on her side.
o that thou hadst be there! and in my place!--But by what I then feel,
in myself, I be convince, that a capacity of be move by the
distress of our fellow creature, be far from be disgraceful to a
manly heart. with what pleasure, at that moment, could I have give up
my own life, could I but first have avenge this charming creature, and
cut the throat of her destroyer, as she emphatically call thee, though
the friend that I good love: and yet, at the same time, my heart and my
eye give way to a softness of which (though not so harden a wretch as
thou) they be never before so susceptible.
I dare not approach you, dear lady, without your leave: but on my
knee I beseech you to permit I to release you from this d----d house,
and out of the power of the cursed woman, who be the occasion of your
be here!
she lift up her sweet face once more, and behold I on my knee. never
know I before what it be to pray so heartily.
be you not--be you not Mr. Belford, Sir? I think your name be Belford?
it be, Madam, and I ever be a worshipper of your virtue, and an
advocate for you; and I come to release you from the hand you be in.
and in whose to place me?--O leave I, leave I! let I never rise from
this spot! let I never, never more believe in man!
this moment, dear lady, this very moment, if you please, you may
depart whithersoever you think fit. you be absolutely free, and your
own mistress.
I have now as lieve die here in this place, as any where. I will owe no
obligation to any friend of he in whose company you have see I. so,
pray, Sir, withdraw.
then turn to the officer, Mr. Rowland I think your name be? I be
well reconcile to your house than I be at first. if you can but
engage that I shall have nobody come near I but your wife, (no man!)
and neither of those woman who have sport with my calamity, I will
die with you, and in this very corner. and you shall be well satisfied
for the trouble you have have with I--I have value enough for that--for,
see, I have a diamond ring; take it out of her bosom; and I have
friend will redeem it at a high price, when I be go.
but for you, Sir, look at I, I beg you to withdraw. if you mean well
by I, God, I hope, will reward you for your good meaning; but to the
friend of my destroyer will I not owe an obligation.
you will owe no obligation to I, nor to any body. you have be
detain for a debt you do not owe. the action be dismiss; and you
will only be so good as to give I your hand into the coach, which stand
as near to this house as it could draw up. and I will either leave you
at the coach-door, or attend you whithersoever you please, till I see you
safe where you would wish to be.
will you then, Sir, compel I to be beholden to you?
you will inexpressibly oblige I, Madam, to command I to do you either
service or pleasure.
why then, Sir, [look at me]--but why do you mock I in that humble
posture! rise, Sir! I cannot speak to you else.
I rise.
only, Sir, take this ring. I have a sister, who will be glad to have it,
at the price it shall be value at, for the former owner's sake!--out of
the money she give, let this man be pay! handsomely pay: and I have a
few valuable more at my lodging, (Dorcas, or the MAN William, can tell
where that be;) let they, and my clothe at the wicked woman's, where you
have see I, be sell for the payment of my lodging first, and next of
your friend's debt, that I have be arrest for, as far as they will
go; only reserve enough to put I into the ground, any where, or any
how, no matter----tell your friend, I wish it may be enough to satisfy
the whole demand; but if it be not, he must make it up himself; or, if he
think fit to draw for it on Miss Howe, she will repay it, and with
interest, if he insist upon it.----and this, Sir, if you promise to
perform, you will do I, as you offer, both pleasure and service: and say
you will, and take the ring and withdraw. if I want to say any thing
more to you (you seem to be an humane man) I will let you know----and so,
Sir, God bless you!
I approach she, and be go to speak----
donot speak, Sir: herebe the ring.
I stand off.
and willnot you take it? willnot you do this last office for me?--I have no
other person to ask it of; else, believe I, I would not request it of
you. but take it, or not, lay it upon the table----you must withdraw,
Sir: I be very ill. I would fain get a little rest, if I could. I find
I be go to be bad again.
and offer to rise, she sink down through excess of weakness and grief,
in a fainting fit.
why, Lovelace, be thou not present thyself?----why dost thou commit such
villanie, as even thou art afraid to appear in; and yet putt a weak
heart and head upon encounter with they?
the maid come in just then, the woman and she lift she up on a
decrepit couch; and I withdraw with this Rowland; who weep like a child,
and say, he never in his life be so moved.
yet so harden a wretch art thou, that I question whether thou wilt shed
a tear at my relation.
they recover she by hartshorn and water. I go down mean while; for
the detestable woman have be below some time. o how I do curse she! I
never before be so fluent in curse.
she try to wheedle I; but I renounce she; and, after she have
dismiss the action, send she away crying, or pretend to cry, because
of my behaviour to she.
you will observe, that I do not mention one word to the lady about you.
I be afraid to do it. for 'twa plain, that she could not bear your
name: your friend, and the company you have see I in, be the word
near to name you she could speak: and yet I want to clear your
intention of this brutal, this sordid-look villany.
I send up again, by Rowland's wife, when I hear that the lady be
recover, beseech she to quit that devilish place; and the woman
assure she that she be at liberty to do so, for that the action be
dismiss.
but she care not to answer she: and be so weak and low, that it be
almost as much out of her power as inclination, the woman tell I, to
speak.
I would have hasten away for my friend Doctor H., but the house be such
a den, and the room she be in such a hole, that I be ashamed to be see
in it by a man of his reputation, especially with a woman of such an
appearance, and in such uncommon distress; and I find there be no
prevail upon she to quit it for the people's bed-room, which be neat
and lightsome.
the strong room she be in, the wretch tell I, should have be in
well order, but that it be but the very morning that she be bring
in that an unhappy man have quit it; for a more eligible prison, no
doubt; since there could hardly be a bad.
be tell that she desire not to be disturb, and seem inclined to
doze, I take this opportunity to go to her lodging in Covent-garden: to
which Dorcas (who first discover she there, as Will. be the setter
from church) have before give I a direction.
the man's name be Smith, a dealer in glove, snuff, and such petty
merchandize: his wife the shopkeeper: he a maker of the glove they sell.
honest people, it seem.
I think to have get the woman with I to the lady; but she be not
within.
I talk with the man, and tell he what have befall the lady; owe, as
I say, to a mistake of order; and give she the character she deserve;
and desire he to send his wife, the moment she come in, to the lady;
direct he whither; not doubt that her attendance would be very
welcome to she; which he promise.
he tell I that a letter be leave for she there on Saturday; and, about
half an hour before I come, another, superscribe by the same hand; the
first, by the post; the other, by a countryman; who have be inform
of her absence, and of all the circumstance they could tell he of it,
post away, full of concern, say, that the lady he be send from
would be ready to break her heart at the tiding.
I think it right to take the two letter back with I; and, dismiss
my coach, take a chair, as a more proper vehicle for the lady, if I (the
friend of her destroyer) could prevail upon she to leave Rowland's.
and here, be oblige to give way to an indispensable avocation, I will
make thee taste a little, in thy turn, of the plague of suspense; and
break off, without give thee the least hint of the issue of my further
proceeding. I know, that those least bear disappointment, who love most
to give it. in twenty instance, hast thou afford I proof of the
truth of this observation. and I matter not thy raving.
another letter, however, shall be ready, send for it a soon as thou wilt.
but, be it not, have I not write enough to convince thee, that I be
Thy ready and obliging friend,
J. BELFORD.
LETTER XVII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY, JULY 17, eleven AT NIGHT.
curse upon thy hard heart, thou vile caitiff! how hast thou torture I,
by thy design abruption! 'tis impossible that Miss Harlowe should have
ever suffer as thou hast make I suffer, and as I now suffer!
that sex be make to bear pain. it be a curse that the first of it
entail upon all her daughter, when she bring the curse upon we all.
and they love those good, whether man or child, who give they most--but
to stretch upon thy d----d tenter-hook such a spirit as mine--no rack,
no torture, can equal my torture!
and must I still wait the return of another messenger?
confound thee for a malicious devil! I wish thou wert a post-horse, and
I upon the back of thee! how would I whip and spur, and harrow up thy
clumsy side, till I make thee a ready-roasted, ready-flay, mess of
dog's meat; all the hound in the country howl after thee, as I drive
thee, to wait my dismounting, in order to devour thee piece-meal; life
still throb in each churn mouthful!
give this fellow the sequel of thy torment scribble.
dispatch he away with it. Thou hast promise it shall be ready. every
cushion or chair I shall sit upon, the bed I shall lie down upon (if I go
to bed) till he return, will be stuff with bolt-upright awl, bodkin,
cork-pin, and packing needle: already I can fancy that, to pink my
body like my mind, I need only to be put into a hogshead stuck full of
steel-point spike, and roll down a hill three time as high as the
Monument.
but I lose time; yet know not how to employ it till this fellow return
with the sequel of thy soul-harrowing intelligence!
LETTER XVIII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
MONDAY NIGHT, JULY 17.
on my return to Rowland's, I find that the apothecary be just go up.
Mrs. Rowland be above with he, I make the less scruple to go up too,
as it be probable, that to ask for leave would be to ask to be deny;
hop also, that the letter have with I would be a good excuse.
she be sit on the side of the broken couch, extremely weak and low;
and, I observe, care not to speak to the man: and no wonder; for I
never see a more shocking fellow, of a profession tolerably genteel, nor
hear a more illiterate one prate--physician in ordinary to this house,
and other like it, I suppose! he put I in mind of Otway's apothecary
in his Caius Marius; as borrow from the immortal Shakspeare:
Meagre and very rueful be his look:
sharp misery have wear he to the bone.
------------ famine in his cheek:
need and oppression star in his eye:
Contempt and beggary hang on his back:
the world no friend of his, nor the world's law.
as I be in black, he take I, at my entrance, I believe, to be a doctor;
and slunk behind I with his hat upon his two thumb, and look as if he
expect the oracle to open, and give he order.
the lady look displeased, as well at I as at Rowland, who follow I,
and at the apothecary. it be not, she say, the least of her present
misfortune, that she could not be leave to her own sex; and to her option
to see whom she please.
I besought she excuse; and wink for the apothecary to withdraw, [which
he do,] tell she, that I have be at her new lodging, to order every
thing to be get ready for reception, presume she would choose to go
thither: that I have a chair at the door: that Mr. Smith and his wife [I
name their name, that she should not have room for the least fear of
Sinclair's] have be full of apprehension for her safety: that I have
bring two letter, which be leave there fore she; the one by the post,
the other that very morning.
this take her attention. she hold out her charming hand for they; take
they, and, press they to her lip--from the only friend I have in the
world! say she; kiss they again; and look at the seal, as if to
see whether they have be open. I cannot read they, say she, my eye
be too dim; and put they into her bosom.
I besought she to think of quit that wretched hole.
Whither could she go, she ask, to be safe and uninterrupted for the
short remainder of her life; and to avoid be again visit by the
creature who have insult she before?
I give she the solemn assurance that she should not be invade in her
new lodging by any body; and say that I would particularly engage my
honour, that the person who have most offend she should not come near
she, without her own consent.
your honour, Sir! be you not that man's friend!
I be not a friend, Madam, to his vile action to the most excellent of
woman.
do you flatter I, Sir? then you be a MAN.--But oh, Sir, your friend,
hold her face forward with great earnestness, your barbarous friend,
what have he not to answer for!
there she stopt: her heart full; and put her hand over her eye and
forehead, the tear trick through her finger: resent thy barbarity,
it seem, as Caesar do the stab from his distinguished Brutus!
though she be so very much disorder, I think I would not lose this
opportunity to assert your innocence of this villanous arrest.
there be no defend the unhappy man in any of his vile action by you,
Madam; but of this last outrage, by all thatbe good and sacred, he be
innocent.
o wretch; what a sex be your's!--have you all one dialect? good and
sacred!--If, Sir, you can find an oath, or a vow, or an adjuration, that
my ear have not be twenty time a day wound with, then speak it, and
I may again believe a MAN.
I be excessively touch at these word, know thy baseness, and the
reason she have for they.
but say you, Sir, for I would not, methink, have the wretch capable of
this sordid baseness!--Say you, that he be innocent of this last
wickedness? can you truly say that he be?
by the great God of heaven!----
Nay, Sir, if you swear, I must doubt you!--if you yourself think your
word insufficient, what reliance can I have on your oath!--o that this my
experience have not cost I so dear! but be I to love a thousand year,
I would always suspect the veracity of a swearer. excuse I, Sir; but be
it likely, that he who make so free with his GOD, will scruple any thing
that may serve his turn with his fellow creature?
this be a most affect reprimand!
Madam, say I, I have a regard, a regard a gentleman ought to have, to my
word; and whenever I forfeit it to you----
Nay, Sir, donot be angry with I. it be grievous to I to question a
gentleman's veracity. but your friend call himself a gentleman--you
know not what I have suffer by a gentleman!----and then again she weep.
I would give you, Madam, demonstration, if your grief and your weakness
would permit it, that he have no hand in this barbarous baseness: and that
he resent it as it ought to be resent.
well, well, Sir, [with quickness,] he will have his account to make up
somewhere else; not to I. I should not be sorry to find he able to
acquit his intention on this occasion. let he know, Sir, only one
thing, that when you hear I in the bitterness of my spirit, most
vehemently exclaim against the undeserved usage I have meet with from he,
that even then, in that passionate moment, I be able to say [and never
do I see such an earnest and affect exultation of hand and eye,]
'give he, good God! repentance and amendment; that I may be the last
poor creature, who shall be ruin by him!--and, in thine own good time,
receive to thy mercy the poor wretch who have none on me!--'
by my soul, I could not speak.--She have not her Bible before she for
nothing.
I be force to turn my head away, and to take out my handkerchief.
what an angel be this!--Even the gaoler, and his wife and maid, weep.
again I wish thou hadst be there, that thou mightest have sink down at
her foot, and begin that moment to reap the effect of her generous wish
for thee; undeserving, as thou art, of any thing but perdition.
I represent to she that she would be less free where she be from
visit she like not, than at her own lodging. I tell she, that it
would probably bring she, in particular, one visiter, who, otherwise I
would engage, [but I durst not swear again, after the severe reprimand
she have just give I,] should not come near she, without her consent.
and I express my surprize, that she should be unwilling to quit such a
place as this; when it be more than probable that some of her friend,
when it be know how bad she be, would visit she.
she say the place, when she be first bring into it, be indeed very
shocking to she: but that she have find herself so weak and ill, and her
grief have so sink she, that she do not expect to have live till now:
that therefore all place have be alike to she; for to die in a prison,
be to die; and equally eligible as to die in a palace, [palace, she
say, could have no attraction for a die person:] but that, since she
fear she be not so soon to be release, as she have hop; since she
be suffer to be so little mistress of herself here; and since she
might, by removal, be in the way of her dear friend's letter; she would
hope that she might depend upon the assurance I give she of be at
liberty to return to her last lodging, (otherwise she would provide
herself with new one, out of my knowledge, as well as your';) and that
I be too much of a gentleman, to be concern in carry she back to
the house she have so much reason to abhor, and to which she have be once
before most vilely betray to her ruin.
I assure she, in the strong term [but swear not,] that you be
resolve not to molest she: and, as a proof of the sincerity of my
profession, besought she to give I direction, (in pursuance of my
friend's express desire,) about send all her apparel, and whatever
belong to she, to her new lodging.
she seem pleased; and give I instantly out of her pocket her key;
ask I, if Mrs. Smith, whom I have name, might not attend I; and she
would give her further direction? to which I cheerfully assent; and
then she tell I that she would accept of the chair I have offer she.
I withdraw; and take the opportunity to be civil to Rowland and his maid;
for she find no fault with their behaviour, for what they be; and the
fellow seem to be miserably poor. I send also for the apothecary, who
be as poor as the officer, (and still poor, I dare say, as to the skill
require in his business,) and satisfy he beyond his hope.
the lady, after I have withdraw, attempt to read the letter I have
bring she. but she could read but a little way in one of they, and have
great emotion upon it.
she tell the woman she would take a speedy opportunity to acknowledge her
civility and her husband's, and to satisfy the apothecary, who might
send she his bill to her lodging.
she give the maid something; probably the only half-guinea she have: and
then with difficulty, her limb tremble under she, and support by
Mrs. Rowland, get down stair.
I offer my arm: she be pleased to lean upon it. I doubt, Sir, say
she, as she move, I have behave rudely to you: but, if you know all,
you would forgive I.
I know enough, Madam, to convince I, that there be not such purity and
honour in any woman upon earth; nor any one that have be so barbarously
treat.
she look at I very earnestly. what she think, I cannot say; but, in
general, I never see so much soul in a woman's eye as in she's.
I order my servant, (whose mourning make he less observable as such,
and who have not be in the lady's eye,) to keep the chair in view; and
to bring I word, how she do, when set down. the fellow have the thought
to step into the shop, just before the chair enter it, under pretence
of buy snuff; and so enable himself to give I an account, that she
be receive with great joy by the good woman of the house; who tell she,
she be but just come in; and be prepare to attend she in high
Holborn.--O Mrs. Smith, say she, as soon as she see she, do you not
think I be run away?--you donot know what I have suffer since I see
you. I have be in a prison!----arrested for debt I owe not!--But,
thank God, I be here!--will your maid--I have forget her name already----
Catharine, madam----
will you let Catharine assist I to bed?--I have not have my clothe off
since Thursday night.
what she far say the fellow hear not, she lean upon the maid,
and go up stair.
but dost thou not observe, what a strange, what an uncommon openness of
heart reign in this lady? she have be in a prison, she say, before a
stranger in the shop, and before the maid-servant: and so, probably, she
would have say, have there be twenty people in the shop.
the disgrace she cannot hide from herself, as she say in her letter to
Lady Betty, she be not solicitous to conceal from the world!
but this make it evident to I, that she be resolve to keep no term
with thee. and yet to be able to put up such a prayer for thee, as she
do in her prison; [I will often mention the prison-room, to tease thee!]
do this not show, that revenge have very little sway in her mind; though
she can retain so much proper resentment?
and this be another excellence in this admirable woman's character: for
whom, before she, have we meet with in the whole sex, or in ours either,
that know how, in practice, to distinguish between REVENGE and
RESENTMENT, for base and ungrateful treatment?
'tis a cursed thing, after all, that such a woman as this should be
treat as she have be treat. hadst thou be a king, and do as
thou hast do by such a meritorious innocent, I believe, in my heart, it
would have be adjudge to be a national sin, and the sword, the
pestilence, or famine, must have atone for it!--But as thou art a
private man, thou wilt certainly meet with thy punishment, (besides what
thou mayest expect from the justice of the country, and the vengeance of
her friend,) as she will her reward, HEREAFTER.
it must be so, if there be really such a thing as future remuneration; as
now I be more and more convinced there must:--else, what a hard fate be
she's, whose punishment, to all appearance, have so much exceed she
fault? and, as to thine, how can temporary burning, wert thou by some
accident to be consume in thy bed, expiate for thy abominable vileness
to she, in breach of all obligation moral and divine?
I be resolve to lose no time in have every thing which belong to
the lady at the cursed woman's send she. accordingly, I take coach to
Smith's, and procure the lady, (to whom I send up my compliment, and
inquiry how she bear her removal,) ill as she send down word she be,
to give proper direction to Mrs. Smith: whom I take with I to
Sinclair's: and who see every thing look out, and put into the trunk
and box they be first bring in, and carry away in two coach.
have I not be there, Sally and Polly would each of they have take to
herself something of the poor lady's spoil. this they declare: and I
have some difficulty to get from Sally a fine Brussels-lace head, which
she have the confidence to say she would wear for Miss Harlowe's sake.
nor should either I or Mrs. Smith have know she have get it, have she not
be in search of the ruffle belong to it.
my resentment on this occasion, and the conversation which Mrs. Smith and
I have, (in which I not only expatiate on the merit of the lady, but
express my concern for her suffering; though I leave her room to
suppose she married, yet without aver it,) give I high credit with
the good woman: so that we be perfectly well acquainted already: by
which mean I shall be enable to give you account from time to time of
all that pass; and which I will be very industrious to do, provide I
may depend upon the solemn promise I have give the lady, in your name,
as well as in my own, that she shall be free from all personal
molestation from you. and thus shall I have it in my power to return in
kind your writing favour; and preserve my short-hand besides: which,
till this correspondence be open, I have pretty much neglect.
I order the abandon woman to make out your account. they answer,
that they would do it with a vengeance. indeed they breathe nothing but
vengeance. for now, they say, you will assuredly marry; and your example
will be follow by all your friend and companion--as the old one say,
to the utter ruin of her poor house.
LETTER XIX
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUESDAY MORN. JULY 18, SIX O'CLOCK.
have sit up so late to finish and seal in readiness my letter to the
above period, I be disturb before I wish to have rise, by the
arrival of thy second fellow, man and horse in a foam.
while he bait, I will write a few line, most heartily to congratulate
thee on thy expect rage and impatience, and on thy recovery of mental
feeling.
how much do the idea thou givest I of thy deserved torment, by thy
upright awl, bodkin, pin, and packing-needle, by thy roll hogshead
with iron spike, and by thy macerated side, delight I!
I will, upon every occasion that offer, drive more spike into thy
hogshead, and roll thee down hill, and up, as thou recover to sense,
or rather returnest back to senselessness. Thou know therefore the
term on which thou art to enjoy my correspondence. be not I, who have
all along, and in time, protest against thy barbarous and ungrateful
perfidy to a woman so noble, entitle to drive remorse, if possible,
into thy hitherto-callous heart?
only let I repeat one thing, which perhaps I mention too slightly
before. that the lady be determined to remove to new lodging, where
neither you nor I should be able to find she, have I not solemnly assure
she, that she might depend upon be free from your visit.
these assurance I think I might give she, not only because of your
promise, but because it be necessary for you to know where she be, in
order to address yourself to she by your friend.
enable I therefore to make good to she this my solemn engagement; or
adieu to all friendship, at least to all correspondence, with thee for
ever.
J. BELFORD.
LETTER XX
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUESDAY, JULY 18. AFTERNOON.
I renew my inquiry after the lady's health, in the morning, by my
servant: and, as soon as I have din, I go myself.
I have but a poor account of it: yet send up my compliment. she return
I thank for all my good office; and her excuse, that they could not
be personal just then, be very low and faint: but if I give myself the
trouble of come about six this evening, she should be able, she hop,
to drink a dish of tea with I, and would then thank I herself.
I be very proud of this condescension; and think it look not amiss for
you, as I be your avow friend. methink I want fully to remove from
her mind all doubt of you in this last villanous action: and who know
then what your noble relation may be able to do for you with she, if you
hold your mind? for your servant acquaint I with their having
actually engage Miss Howe in their and your favour, before this curse
affair happen. and I desire the particular of all from yourself, that
I may the well know how to serve you.
she have two handsome apartment, a bed-chamber and dining-room, with
light closet in each. she have already a nurse, (the people of the house
having but one maid,) a woman whose care, diligence, and honesty, Mrs.
Smith highly commend. she have likewise the benefit of a widow
gentlewoman, Mrs. Lovick her name, who lodge over her apartment, and of
whom she seem very fond, have find something in she, she think,
resemble the quality of her worthy Mrs. Norton.
about seven o'clock this morning, it seem, the lady be so ill, that she
yield to their desire to have an apothecary send for--not the fellow,
thou mayest believe, she have have before at Rowland's; but one Mr.
Goddard, a man of skill and eminence; and of conscience too; demonstrate
as well by general character, as by his prescription to this lady: for
pronounce her case to be grief, he order, for the present, only
innocent julep, by way of cordial; and, as soon as her stomach should be
able to bear it, light kitchen-diet; tell Mrs. Lovick, that that, with
air, moderate exercise, and cheerful company, would do she more good than
all the medicine in his shop.
this have give I, as it seem it have the lady, (who also praise his
modest behaviour, paternal look, and genteel address,) a very good
opinion of the man; and I design to make myself acquainted with he, and,
if he advise to call in a doctor, to wish he, for the fair patient's
sake, more than the physician's, (who want not practice,) my worthy
friend Dr. H.--whose character be above all exception, as his humanity, I
be sure, will distinguish he to the lady.
Mrs. Lovick gratify I with an account of a letter she have write from
the lady's mouth to Miss Howe; she be unable to write herself with
steadiness.
it be to this effect; in answer, it seem, to her two letter, whatever
be the content of they:
'that she have be involve in a dreadful calamity, which she be sure,
when know, would exempt she from the effect of her friendly
displeasure, for not answer she first; have be put under an
arrest.--could she have believe it?--that she be release but the day
before: and be now so weak and so low, that she be oblige to account
thus for her silence to she [Miss Howe's] two letter of the 13th and
16th: that she would, as soon as able, answer they--beg of she, mean
time, not to be uneasy for she; since (only that this be a calamity
which come upon she when she be far from be well, a load lay upon
the shoulder of a poor wretch, ready before to sink under too heavy a
burden) it be nothing to the evil she have before suffer: and one
felicity seem likely to issue from it; which be, that she would be
at rest, in an honest house, with considerate and kind-hearted people;
have assurance give she, that she should not be molest by the
wretch, whom it would be death for she to see: so that now she, [Miss
Howe,] need not to send to she by private and expensive conveyance:
nor need Collins to take precaution for fear of be dog to her
lodging; nor need she write by a fictitious name to she, but by her
own.'
you can see I be in a way to oblige you: you see how much she depend
upon my engaging for your forbearing to intrude yourself into her
company: let not your flame impatience destroy all; and make I look
like a villain to a lady who have reason to suspect every man she see to
be so.--upon this condition, you may expect all the service that can
flow from
your sincere well-wisher,
J. BELFORD.
LETTER XXI
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUESDAY NIGHT, JULY 18.
I be just come from the lady. I be admit into the dining-room, where
she be sit in an elbow-chair, in a very weak and low way. she make
an effort to stand up when I enter; but be force to keep her seat.
youwill excuse I, Mr. Belford: I ought to rise to thank you for all your
kindness to I. I be to blame to be so loth to leave that sad place;
for I be in heaven here, to what I be there; and good people about I
too!--I have not have good people about I for a long, long time before;
so that [with a half-smile] I have begin to wonder whither they be all
go.
her nurse and Mrs. Smith, who be present, take occasion to retire: and,
when we be alone, you seem to be a person of humanity, Sir, say she:
you hint, as I be leave my prison, that you be not a stranger to
my sad story. if you know it truly, you must know that I have be most
barbarously treat; and have not deserve it at the man's hand by whom
I have suffer.
I tell she I know enough to be convince that she have the merit of a
saint, and the purity of an angel: and be proceed, when she say, no
flighty compliment! no undue attribute, Sir!
I offer to plead for my sincerity; and mention the word politeness;
and would have distinguish between that and flattery. nothing can be
polite, say she, that be not just: whatever I may have have; I have now
no vanity to gratify.
I disclaim all intention of compliment: all I have say, and what I
should say, be, and should be, the effect of sincere veneration. my
unhappy friend's account of she have entitle she to that.
I then mention your grief, your penitence, your resolution of make
she all the amend that be possible now to be make she: and in the most
earnest manner, I assert your innocence as to the last villanous
outrage.
her answer be to this effect--it be painful to I to think of he. the
amend you talk of cannot be make. this last violence you speak of, be
nothing to what precede it. that cannot be atone for: nor palliate:
this may: and I shall not be sorry to be convince that he cannot be
guilty of so very low a wickedness.----yet, after his vile forgery of
hand--after his baseness in impose upon I the most infamous person
as lady of honour of his own family--what be the iniquity he be not
capable of?
I would then have give she an account of the trial you stand with your
friend: your own previous resolution of marriage, have she honour you
with the request four word: all your family's earnestness to have the
honour of her alliance: and the application of your two cousin to Miss
Howe, by general consent, for that young lady's interest with she: but,
have just touch upon these topic, she cut I short, say, that be
a cause before another tribunal: Miss Howe's letter to she be upon the
subject; and as she would write her thought to she as soon as she be
able.
I then attempt more particularly to clear you of have any hand in the
vile Sinclair's officious arrest; a point she have the generosity to wish
you clear of: and, have mention the outrageous letter you have
write to I on this occasion, she ask, if I have that letter about I?
I own I have.
she wish to see it.
this puzzle I horribly: for you must need think that most of the free
thing, which, among we rake, pass for wit and spirit, must be shocking
stuff to the ear or eye of person of delicacy of that sex: and then
such an air of levity run through thy most serious letter; such a false
bravery, endeavour to carry off ludicrously the subject that most
affect thee; that those letter be generally the least fit to be see,
which ought to be most to thy credit.
something like this I observe to she; and would fain have excuse myself
from show it: but she be so earnest, that I undertake to read some
part of it, resolve to omit the most exceptionable.
I know thou'lt curse I for that; but I think it well to oblige she
than to be suspect myself; and so not have it in my power to serve thee
with she, when so good a foundation be lay for it; and when she know
as bad of thee as I can tell she.
Thou rememberest the content, I suppose, of thy furious letter.* her
remark upon the different part of it, which I read to she, be to the
follow effect:
* see Letter XII. of this volume.
upon the last two line, all undo! undo, by Jupiter! Zounds, Jack,
what shall I do now? a curse upon all my plot and contrivance! thus she
express herself:
'o how light, how unaffected with the sense of its own crime, be the
heart that could dictate to the pen this libertine froth?'
the paragraph which mention the vile arrest affect she a good deal.
in the next I omit thy curse upon thy relation, whom thou wert
gallante: and read on the seven subsequent paragraph down to thy
execrable wish; which be too shocking to read to she. what I read
produce the following reflection from she:
'the plot and contrivance which he curse, and the exulting of the
wicked wretch on find I out, show I that all his guilt be
premeditate: nor doubt I that his dreadful perjury, and inhuman art,
as he go along, be to pass for fine stratagem; for witty sport; and
to demonstrate a superiority of inventive talents!--o my cruel, cruel
brother! have it not be for thee, I have not be throw upon so
pernicious and so despicable a plotter!--but proceed, Sir; pray proceed.'
at that part, Canst thou, o fatal prognosticator! tell I where my
punishment will end?--she sigh. and when I come to that sentence,
pray for my reformation, perhaps--be that there? say she, sigh
again. wretched man!--and shed a tear for thee.--by my faith, Lovelace,
I believe she hat thee not! she have at least a concern, a generous
concern for thy future happiness--what a noble creature hast thou
injure!
she make a very severe reflection upon I, on read the word--on your
knee, for I, beg she pardon--'You have all your lesson, Sir, say she,
when you come to redeem I--you be so condescend as to kneel: I
think it be the effect of your own humanity, and good-nature
earnestness to serve I--excuse I, Sir, I know not that it be in
consequence of a prescribed lesson.'
this concern I not a little; I could not bear to be think such a
wretched puppet, such a Joseph Leman, such a Tomlinson. I endeavour,
therefore, with some warmth, to clear myself of this reflection; and she
again ask my excuse: 'I be avowedly, she say, the friend of a man,
whose friendship, she have reason to be sorry to say, be no credit to any
body.'--And desire I to proceed.
I do; but fare not much well afterwards: for on that passage where
you say, I have always be her friend and advocate, this be her
unanswerable remark: 'I find, Sir, by this expression, that he have always
design against I; and that you all along know that he have. would to
Heaven, you have have the goodness to have contrive some way, that might
not have endanger your own safety, to give I notice of his baseness,
since you approve not of it! but you gentleman, I suppose, have rather
see an innocent fellow-creature ruin, than be think capable of an
action, which, however generous, might be likely to loosen the band of a
wicked friendship!'
after this severe, but just reflection, I would have avoid read the
following, although I have unaware begin the sentence, (but she hold I
to it:) what would I now give, have I permit you to have be a
successful advocate! and this be her remark upon it--'So, Sir, you see,
if you have be the happy mean of prevent the evil design I, you
would have have your friend's thank for it when he come to his
consideration. this satisfaction, I be persuade every one, in the long
run, will enjoy, who have the virtue to withstand, or prevent, a wicked
purpose. I be oblige, I see, to your kind wish--but it be a point
of honour with you to keep his secret; the more indispensable with you,
perhaps, the viler the secret. yet permit I to wish, Mr. Belford, that
you be capable of relish the pleasure that arise to a benevolent
mind from VIRTUOUS friendship!--none other be worthy of the sacred name.
you seem an humane man: I hope, for your own sake, you will one day
experience the difference: and, when you do, think of Miss Howe and
Clarissa Harlowe, (I find you know much of my sad story,) who be the
happy creature on earth in each other's friendship till this friend
of your's'--And there she stopt, and turn from I.
where thou call thyself a villanous plotter; 'to take a crime to
himself, say she, without shame, o what a harden wretch be this man!'
on that passage, where thou sayest, let I know how she have be treat:
if roughly, woe be to the guilty! this be her remark, with an air of
indignation: 'what a man be your friend, sir!--is such a one as he to set
himself up to punish the guilty?--all the rough usage I could receive
from they, be infinitely less'--And there she stopt a moment or two:
then proceeding--'And who shall punish he? what an assuming wretch!--
nobody but himself be entitle to injure the innocent;--he be, I suppose,
on the earth, to act the part which the malignant fiend be suppose to
act below--deal out punishment, at his pleasure, to every inferior
instrument of mischief!'
what, think I, have I be do! I shall have this savage fellow
think I have be play he booty, in read part of his letter to
this sagacious lady!--Yet, if thou art angry, it can only, in reason,
be at thyself; for who would think I might not communicate to she some
of thy sincerity in exculpate thyself from a criminal charge, which
thou wrotest to thy friend, to convince he of thy innocence? but a bad
heart, and a bad cause be confound thing: and so let we put it to its
proper account.
I pass over thy charge to I, to curse they by the hour; and thy name
of dragon and serpent, though so applicable; since, have I read they,
thou must have be suppose to know from the first what creature they
be; vile fellow as thou wert, for bring so much purity among they!
and I close with thy own concluding paragraph, a line! a line! a kingdom
for a line! &c. However, tell she (since she see that I omit some
sentence) that there be farth vehemence in it; but as they be
well fit to show to I the sincerity of the writer than for so
delicate an ear as shebe to hear, I choose to pass they over.
you have read enough, say she--he be a wicked, wicked man!--i see he
intend to have I in his power at any rate; and I have no doubt of what
his purpose be, by what his action have be. you know his vile
Tomlinson, I suppose--you know--but what signify talking?--never be
there such a premeditated false heart in man, [nothing can be truer,
think I!] what have he not vow! what have he not invent! and all for
what?--only to ruin a poor young creature, whom he ought to have
protect; and whom he have first deceive of all other protection!
she arise and turn from I, her handkerchief at her eye: and, after a
pause, come towards I again--'I hope, say she, I talk to a man who have
a well heart: and I thank you, Sir, for all your kind, though
ineffectual plea in my favour formerly, whether the motif for they
be compassion, or principle, or both. that they be ineffectual,
might very probably be owe to your want of earnestness; and that, as
you might think, to my want of merit. I might not, in your eye, deserve
to be saved!--i might appear to you a giddy creature, who have run away
from her true and natural friend; and who therefore ought to take the
consequence of the lot she have draw.'
I be afraid, for thy sake, to let she know how very earnest I have be:
but assure she that I have be her zealous friend; and that my motif
be found upon a merit, that, I believe, be never equal: that,
however indefensible Mr. Lovelace be, he have always do justice to her
virtue: that to a full conviction of her untainted honour it be owe
that he so earnestly desire to call so inestimable a jewel his--and be
proceeding, when she again cut I short--
Enough, and too much, of this subject, sir!--if he will never more let I
behold his face, that be all I have now to ask of him.--indeed, indeed,
clasp her hand, I never will, if I can, by any mean not criminally
desperate, avoid it.
what could I say for thee?--there be no room, however, at that time, to
touch this string again, for fear of bring upon myself a prohibition,
not only of the subject, but of ever attend she again.
I give some distant intimation of money-matter. I should have tell
thee, when I read to she that passage, where thou bidd I force what
sum upon she I can get she to take--she repeat, no, no, no, no!
several time with great quickness; and I durst no more than just
intimate it again--and that so darkly, as leave her room to seem not to
understand I.
indeed I know not the person, man or woman, I should be so much afraid
of disoblige, or incur a censure from, as from she. she have so
much true dignity in her manner, without pride or arrogance, (which, in
those who have either, one be tempt to mortify,) such a pierce eye,
yet soften so sweetly with ray of benignity, that she command all
one's reverence.
methink I have a kind of holy love for this angel of a woman; and it be
matter of astonishment to I, that thou couldst converse with she a
quarter of an hour together, and hold thy devilish purpose.
guard as she be by piety, prudence, virtue, dignity, family, fortune,
and a purity of heart that never woman before her boast, what a real
devil must he be (yet I doubt I shall make thee proud!) who could resolve
to break through so many fence!
for my own part, I be more and more sensible that I ought not to have
content myself with represent against, and expostulate with thee
upon, thy base intention: and indeed I have it in my head, more than
once, to try to do something for she. but, wretch that I be! I be
with-hold by notion of false honour, as she justly reproach I,
because of thy own voluntary communication to I of thy purpose: and
then, as she be bring into such a cursed house, and be so watch by
thyself, as well as by thy infernal agent, I think (know my man!)
that I should only accelerate the intended mischiefs.--moreover, find
thee so much over-awed by her virtue, that thou hadst not, at thy first
carry she thither, the courage to attempt she; and that she have, more
than once, without know thy base view, oblige thee to abandon they,
and to resolve to do her justice, and thyself honour; I hardly doubt,
that her merit would be triumphant at last.
it be my opinion, (if thou holdest thy purpose to marry,) that thou
canst not do well than to procure thy real aunt, and thy real cousin,
to pay she a visit, and to be thy advocate. but if they decline
personal visit, letter from they, and from my Lord M. support by Miss
Howe's interest, may, perhaps, effect something in thy favour.
but these be only my hope, found on what I wish for thy sake. the
lady, I really think, would choose death rather than thee: and the two
woman be of opinion, though they know not half of what she have suffer,
that her heart be actually break.
at take my leave, I tender my good service to she, and besought she
to permit I frequently to inquire after her health.
she make I no answer, but by bow her head.
LETTER XXII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY, JULY 19.
this morning I take a chair to Smith's; and, be tell that the lady have
a very bad night, but be up, I send for her worthy apothecary; who, on
his come to I, approve of my proposal of call in Dr. H., I bid
the woman acquaint she with the design visit.
it seem she be at first displease; yet withdraw her objection: but,
after a pause, ask they, what she should do? she have effect of value,
some of which she intend, as soon as she could, to turn into money,
but, till then, have not a single guinea to give the doctor for his fee.
Mrs. Lovick say, she have five guineas by she; they be at her service.
she would accept of three, she say, if she would take that (pull a
diamond ring from her finger) till she repay she; but on no other term.
have be tell I be below with Mr. Goddard, she desire to speak one
word with I, before she see the Doctor.
she be sit in an elbow-chair, lean her head on a pillow; Mrs.
Smith and the widow on each side her chair; her nurse, with a phial of
hartshorn, behind she; in her own hand her salt.
raise her head at my entrance, she inquire if the Doctor know Mr.
Lovelace.
I tell she no; and that I believe you never see he in your life.
be the Doctor my friend?
he be; and a very worthy and skilful man. I name he for his eminence
in his profession: and Mr. Goddard say he know not a well physician.
I have but one condition to make before I see the gentleman; that he
refuse not his fee from I. if I be poor, Sir, I be proud. I will not
be under obligation, you may believe, Sir, I will not. I suffer this
visit, because I would not appear ungrateful to the few friend I have
leave, nor obstinate to such of my relation, as may some time hence, for
their private satisfaction, inquire after my behaviour in my sick hour.
so, Sir, you know the condition. and donot let I be vex. 'I be very
ill! and cannot debate the matter.'
see she so determined, I tell she, if it must be so, it should.
then, Sir, the gentleman may come. but I shall not be able to answer
many question. Nurse, you can tell he at the window there what a night
I have have, and how I have be for two day past. and Mr. Goddard, if
he be here, can let he know what I have take. pray let I be as little
question as possible.
the Doctor pay his respect to she with the gentlemanly address for
which he be note: and she cast up her sweet eye to he with that
benignity which accompany she every graceful look.
I would have retire: but she forbid it.
he take her hand, the lily not of so beautiful a white: indeed, Madam,
you be very low, say he: but give I leave to say, that you can do more
for yourself than all the faculty can do for you.
he then withdraw to the window. and, after a short conference with the
woman, he turn to I, and to Mr. Goddard, at the other window: we can
do nothing here, (speak low,) but by cordial and nourishment. what
friend have the lady? she seem to be a person of condition; and, ill as
she be, a very fine woman.----a single lady, I presume?
I whisperingly tell he she be. that there be extraordinary
circumstance in her case; as I would have apprize he, have I meet with
he yesterday: that her friend be very cruel to she; but that she
could not hear they name without reproach herself; though they be
much more to blame than she.
I know I be right, say the Doctor. a love-case, Mr. Goddard! a
love-case, Mr. Belford! there be one person in the world who can do she
more service than all the faculty.
Mr. Goddard say he have apprehend her disorder be in her mind; and have
treat she accordingly: and then tell the doctor what he have do: which
he approve of, again take her charming hand, say, my good young
lady, you will require very little of our assistance. you must, in a
great measure, be your own assistance. you must, in a great measure, be
your own doctress. come, dear Madam, [forgive I the familiar
tenderness; your aspect command love as well as reverence; and a father
of child, some of they old than yourself, may be excuse for his
familiar address,] cheer up your spirit. resolve to do all in your
power to be well; and youwill soon grow well.
you be very kind, Sir, say she. I will take whatever you direct. my
spirit have be hurry. I shall be well, I believe, before I be
bad. the care of my good friend here, look at the woman, shall not
meet with an ungrateful return.
the Doctor write. he would fain have decline his fee. as her malady,
he say, be rather to be relieve by the soothing of a friend, than by
the prescription of a physician, he should think himself greatly
honour to be admit rather to advise she in the one character, than
to prescribe to she in the other.
she answer, that she should be always glad to see so humane a man: that
his visit would keep she in charity with his sex: but that, where [sic]
she able to forget that he be her physician, she might be apt to abate
of the confidence in his skill, which might be necessary to effect the
amendment that be the end of his visit.
and when he urge she still far, which he do in a very polite
manner, and as pass by the door two or three time a day, she say she
should always have pleasure in consider he in the kind light he
offer himself to she: that that might be very generous in one person to
offer, which would be as ungenerous in another to accept: that indeed she
be not at present high in circumstance; and he see by the tender, (which
he must accept of,) that she have great respect to her own convenience
than to his merit, or than to the pleasure she should take in his visit.
we all withdraw together; and the Doctor and Mr. Goddard have a great
curiosity to know something more of her story, at the motion of the
latter we go into a neighbour coffee-house, and I give they, in
confidence, a brief relation of it; make all as light for you as I
could; and yet youwill suppose, that, in order to do but common justice
to the lady's character, heavy must be that light.
three O'CLOCK, AFTERNOON.
I just now call again at Smith's; and be tell she be somewhat well;
which she attribute to the soothing of her Doctor. she express
herself highly pleased with both gentleman; and say that their behaviour
to she be perfectly paternal.----
paternal, poor lady!----never have be, till very lately, from under
her parent' wing, and now abandon by all her friend, she be for
find out something paternal and maternal in every one, (the latter
quality in Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith,) to supply to herself the father
and mother her dutiful heart pant after.
Mrs. Smith tell I, that, after we be go, she give the key of her
trunk and drawer to she and the widow Lovick, and desire they to take
an inventory of they; which they do in her presence.
they also inform I, that she have request they to find she a
purchaser for two rich dressed suit; one never wear, the other not above
once or twice.
this shock I exceedingly--perhaps it may thee a little!!!--h reason
for so do, she tell they, be, that she should never live to wear
they: that her sister, and other relation, be above wear they: that
her mother would not endure in her sight any thing that be shebe: that
she want the money: that she would not be oblige to any body, when she
have effect by she for which she have no occasion: and yet, say she, I
expect not that they will fetch a price answerable to their value.
they be both very much concerned, as they own; and ask my advice
upon it: and the richness of her apparel have give they a still high
notion of her rank than they have before, they suppose she must be of
quality; and again want to know her story.
I tell they, that she be indeed a woman of family and fortune: I still
give they room to suppose she marry: but leave it to she to tell they
all in her own time and manner: all I would say be, that she have be
very vilely treat; deserve it not; and be all innocence and purity.
you may suppose that they both express their astonishment, that there
could be a man in the world who could ill treat so fine a creature.
as to the disposing of the two suit of apparel, I tell Mrs. Smith that
she should pretend that, upon inquiry, she have find a friend who would
purchase the rich of they; but (that she might not mistrust) would
stand upon a good bargain. and have twenty guineas about I, I leave
they with she, in part of payment; and bid she pretend to get she to part
with it for as little more as she could induce she to take.
I be set out for Edgeware with poor Belton--more of whom in my next.
I shall return to-morrow; and leave this in readiness for your messenger,
if he call in my absence.
ADIEU.
LETTER XXIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[in answer to letter XXI. of this volume.]
M. HALL, WED. NIGHT, JULY 19.
you might well apprehend that I should think you be play I booty in
communicate my letter to the lady.
you ask, who would think you might not read to she the least
exceptionable part of a letter write in my own defence?--I'll tell you
who--the man who, in the same letter that he ask this question, tell
the friend whom he expose to her resentment, 'that there be such an air
of levity run through his most serious letter, that those of this be
least fit to be see which ought to be most to his credit:' and now what
think thou of thyself-condemn folly? be, however, I charge thee,
more circumspect for the future, that so this clumsy error may stand
singly by itself.
'it be painful to she to think of I!' 'libertine froth!' 'so pernicious
and so despicable a plotter!' 'a man whose friendship be no credit to any
body!' 'hardened wretch!' 'the devil's counterpart!' 'a wicked, wicked
man!'--But do she, could she, dare she, to say, or imply all this?--and
say it to a man whom she praise for humanity, and prefer to myself for
that virtue; when all the humanity he show, and she know it too, be by
my direction--so rob I of the credit of my own work; admirably
entitle, all this show she, to thy refinement upon the word resentment
and revenge. but thou wert always aim and blunder at some thing
thou never couldst make out.
the praise thou givest to her ingenuousness, be another of thy peculiar.
I think not as thou dost, of her tell-tale recapitulation and
exclamations:--what end can they answer?--only that thou hast a holy love
for she, [the devil fetch thee for thy oddity!] or it be extremely
provoking to suppose one see such a charming creature stand upright
before a libertine, and talk of the sin against she, that cannot be
forgiven!--i wish, at my heart, that these chaste lady would have a
little modesty in their anger!--it would sound very strange, if I Robert
Lovelace should pretend to have more true delicacy, in a point that
require the utmost, than Miss Clarissa Harlowe.
I think I will put it into the head of her nurse Norton, and her Miss
Howe, by some one of my agent, to chide the dear novice for her
proclamation.
but to be serious: let I tell thee, that, severe as she be, and saucy,
in ask so contemptuously, 'what a man be your friend, Sir, to set
himself to punish guilty people!' I will never forgive the cursed woman,
who could commit this last horrid violence on so excellent a creature.
the barbarous insult of the two nymph, in their visit to she; the
choice of the most execrable den that could be find out, in order, no
doubt, to induce she to go back to theirs; and the still more execrable
attempt, to propose to she a man who would pay the debt; a snare, I make
no question, lay for her despairing and resent heart by that devilish
Sally, (think she, no doubt, a woman,) in order to ruin she with I;
and to provoke I, in a fury, to give she up to their remorseless
cruelty; be outrage, that, to express myself in her style, I never can,
never will forgive.
but as to thy opinion, and the two woman's at Smith's, that her heart be
break! that be the true woman's language: I wonder how thou cam into
it: thou who hast see and hear of so many female death and revival.
Iwill tell thee what make against this notion of theirs.
her time of life, and charming constitution: the good she ever delight
to do, and fancifie she be bear to do; and which she may still continue
to do, to as high a degree as ever; nay, high: since I be no sordid
varlet, thou know: her religious turn: a turn that will always teach
she to bear inevitable evil with patience: the contemplation upon she
last noble triumph over I, and over the whole crew; and upon she
succeed escape from we all: she will unviolate: and the inward pride
of have not deserve the treatment she have meet with.
how be it possible to imagine, that a woman, who have all these
consolation to reflect upon, will die of a broken heart?
on the contrary, I make no doubt, but that, as she recover from the
dejection into which this last scurvy villany (which none but wretch
of her own sex could have be guilty of) have throw she, return love
will re-enter her time-pacify mind: her thought will then turn once
more on the conjugal pivot: of course she will have lively notion in
her head; and these will make she perform all her circumvolution with
ease and pleasure; though not with so high a degree of either, as if the
dear proud rogue could have exalt herself above the rest of her sex, as
she turn round.
Thou askest, on recite the bitter invective that the lady make against
thy poor friend, (stand before she, I suppose, with thy finger in thy
mouth,) what couldst thou say for I?
have I not, in my former letter, suggest an hundred thing, which a
friend, in earnest to vindicate or excuse a friend, might say on such an
occasion?
but now to current topic, and the present state of matter here.--it be
true, as my servant tell thee, that Miss Howe have engage, before this
cursed woman's officiousness, to use her interest with her friend in my
behalf: and yet she tell my cousin, in the visit they make she, that it
be her opinion that she would never forgive I. I send to thee enclosed
copy of all that pass on this occasion between my cousin Montague,
Miss Howe, myself, Lady Betty, Lady Sarah, and Lord M.
I long to know what Miss Howe write to her friend, in order to induce she
to marry the despicable plotter; the man whose friendship be no credit to
any body; the wicked, wicked man. Thou hadst the two letter in thy
hand. have they be in mine, the seal would have yield to the touch of
my warm finger, (perhaps without the help of the post-office bullet;) and
the fold, as other placation have do, open of themselves to oblige
my curiosity. a wicked omission, Jack, not to contrive to send they down
to I by man and horse! it might have pass, that the messenger who
bring the second letter, take they both back. I could have return
they by another, when copy, as from Miss Howe, and nobody but myself
and thee the wiser.
thatbe a charming girl! her spirit, her delightful spirit!--not to be
married to it--how I wish to get that lively bird into my cage! how would
I make her flutter and fly about!--till she leave a feather upon every
wire!
have I begin there, I be confident, as I have heretofore say,* that I
should not have have half the difficulty with she as I have have with her
charming friend. for these passionate girl have high pulse, and a
clever fellow may make what sport he please with their unevenness--now
too high, now too low, you need only to provoke and appease they by
turn; to bear with they, and to forbear to tease and ask pardon; and
sometimes to give yourself the merit of a sufferer from they; then
catch they in the moment of concession, conscious of their ill usage
of you, they be all your own.
* see Vol. VI. Letter VII.
but these sedate, contemplative girl, never out of temper but with
reason; when that reason be give they, hardly ever pardon, or afford you
another opportunity to offend.
it be in part the apprehension that this would be so with my dear Miss
Harlowe, that make I carry she to a place where I believe she would be
unable to escape I, although I be not to succeed in my first attempt.
else widow sorling's would have be as well for I as widow Sinclair's.
for early I see that there be no credulity in she to graft upon: no
pretend to whine myself into her confidence. she be proof against
amorous persuasion. she have reason in her love. her penetration and
good sense make she hate all compliment that have not truth and nature in
they. what could I have do with she in any other place? and yet how
long, even there, be I keep in awe, in spite of natural incitement, and
unnatural instigation, (as I now think they,) by the mere force of that
native dignity, and obvious purity of mind and manner, which fill every
one with reverence, if not with holy love, as thou call it,* the
moment he see her!--else, think thou not, it be easy for I to be a
fine gentleman, and a delicate lover, or, at least a specious and
flattering one?
* see Letter XXI. of this volume.
Lady Sarah and Lady Betty, find the treaty, upon the success of which
they have set their foolish heart, likely to run into length, be about
depart to their own seat; have take from I the good security the
nature of the case will admit of, that be to say, my word, to marry the
lady, if she will have I.
and after all, (methink thou ask,) art thou still resolve to repair,
if reparation be put into thy power?
why, Jack, I must need own that my heart have now-and-then some
retrograde motion upon think seriously of the irrevocable ceremony.
we do not easily give up the desire of our heart, and what we imagine
essential to our happiness, let the expectation or hope of compass it
be ever so unreasonable or absurd in the opinion of other. recurring
there will be; hankering that will, on every but-remotely-favourable
incident, (however before discourage and beat back by ill success,)
pop up, and abate the satisfaction we should otherwise take in
contrariant overture.
'tis ungentlemanly, Jack, man to man, to lie.----but matrimony I do not
heartily love--although with a CLARISSA--yet I be in earnest to marry
she.
but I be often think that if now this dear creature, suffer time,
and my penitence, my relation' prayer, and Miss Howe's mediation to
soften her resentment, (her revenge thou hast prettily* distinguish
away,) and to recall repulse inclination, should consent to meet I at
the altar--how vain will she then make all thy eloquent period of
execration!--How many charming interjection of her own will she spoil!
and what a couple of old patriarch shall we become, go in the
mill-horse round; get son and daughter; provide nurse for they
first, governor and governess next; teach they lesson their
father never practise, nor which their mother, as her parent will say,
be much the well for! and at last, perhaps, when life shall be turn
into the dully sober stillness, and I become desirous to forget all my
past roguery, what comfortable reflection will it afford to find they
all revive, with equal, or probably great trouble and expense, in the
person and manner of so many young Lovelaces of the boy; and to have
the girl run away with varlet, perhaps not half so ingenious as myself;
clumsy fellow, as it might happen, who could not afford the baggage one
excuse for their weakness, besides those disgraceful one of sex and
nature!--O Belford! who can bear to think of these things!----Who, at my
time of life especially, and with such a bias for mischief!
* see Letter XVIII. of this volume.
of this I be absolutely convinced, that if a man ever intend to marry,
and to enjoy in peace his own reflection, and not be afraid
retribution, or of the consequence of his own example, he should never
be a rake.
this look like conscience; donot it, Belford?
but, be in earnest still, as I have say, all I have to do in my
present uncertainty, be, to brighten up my faculty, by file off the
rust they have contract by the town smoke, a long imprisonment in my
close attendance to so little purpose on my fair perverse; and to brace
up, if I can, the relaxed fibre of my mind, which have be twitch and
convulse like the nerve of some totter paralytic, by mean of the
tumult she have excite in it; that so I may be able to present to her a
husband as worthy as I can be of her acceptance; or, if she reject I, be
in a capacity to resume my usual gaiety of heart, and show other of the
misleading sex, that I be not discourage, by the difficulty I have meet
with from this sweet individual of it, from endeavour to make myself
as acceptable to they as before.
in this latter case, one tour to France and Italy, I dare say, will do
the business. Miss Harlowe will by that time have forget all she have
suffer from her ungrateful Lovelace: though it will be impossible that
her Lovelace should ever forget a woman, whose equal he despair to meet
with, be he to travel from one end of the world to the other.
if thou continu pay off the heavy debt my long letter, for so
many week together, have make thee groan under, I will endeavour to
restrain myself in the desire I have, (importunate as they be,) of
go to town, to throw myself at the foot of my soul's beloved. policy
and honesty, both join to strengthen the restraint my own promise and thy
engagement have lay I under on this head. I would not afresh provoke:
on the contrary, would give time for her resentment to subside, that so
all that follow may be her own act and deed.
***
Hickman, [I have a mortal aversion to that fellow!] have, by a line which
I have just now receive, request an interview with I on Friday at Mr.
Dormer's, as at a common friend's. do the business he want to meet I
upon require that it should be at a common friend's?--a challenge
imply: be it not, Belford?--I shall not be civil to he, I doubt. he
have be an intermeddler?--then I envy he on Miss Howe's account: for if
I have a right notion of this Hickman, it be impossible that that virago
can ever love he.
every one know that the mother, (saucy as the daughter sometimes be,)
cram he down her throat. her mother be one of the most
violent-spirited woman in England. her late husband could not stand in
the matrimonial contention of who should? but tipt off the perch in it,
neither know how to yield, nor know how to conquer.
a charming encouragement for a man of intrigue, when he have reason to
believe that the woman he have a view upon have no love for her husband!
what good principle must that wife have, who be keep in against
temptation by a sense of her duty, and plighted faith, where affection
have no hold of she!
Pr'ythee letus know, very particularly, how it fare with poor Belton.
'tis an honest fellow. something more than his Thomasine seem to stick
with he.
Thou hast not be preach to he conscience and reformation, hast
thou?--Thou shouldest not take liberty with he of this sort, unless
thou thought he absolutely irrecoverable. a man in ill health, and
crop-sick, cannot play with these solemn thing as thou canst, and be
neither well nor bad for them.--repentance, Jack, I have a notion,
should be set about while a man be in health and spirit. whatbe a man
fit for, [not to begin a new work, surely!] when he be not himself, nor
master of his faculties?--hence, as I apprehend, it be that a death-bed
repentance be suppose to be such a precarious and ineffectual thing.
as to myself, I hope I have a great deal of time before I; since I
intend one day to be a reform man. I have very serious reflection
now-and-then. yet be I half afraid of the truth of what my charmer once
tell I, that a man cannot repent when he will.--not to hold it, I
suppose she mean! by fit and start I have repent a thousand time.
cast my eye over the two precede paragraph, I fancy there be
something like contradiction in they. but I will not reconsider they.
the subject be a very serious one. I donot at present quite understand
it. but now for one more airy.
Tourville, Mowbray, and myself, pass away our time as pleasantly as
possibly we can without thee. I wish we donot add to Lord M.'s gouty
day by the joy we give he.
this be one advantage, as I believe I have elsewhere observe, that we
male-delinquent in love-matter have of the other sex:--for while they,
poor thing! sit sigh in hole and corner, or run to wood and grove
to bemoan themselves on their baffled hope, we can rant and roar, hunt
and hawk; and, by new love, banish from our heart all remembrance of
the old one.
merrily, however, as we pass our time, my reflection upon the injury
do to this noble creature bring a qualm upon my heart very often. but
I know she will permit I to make her amend, after she have plague I
heartily; and thatbe my consolation.
an honest fellow still--clap thy wing, and crow, jack!----
LETTER XXIV
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY MORN. JUNE* 20.
* text error: should be JULY.
what, my dearest creature, have be your sufferings!--what must have
be your anguish on so disgraceful an insult, commit in the open
street, and in the broad day!
no end, I think, of the undeserved calamity of a dear soul, who have
be so unhappily drive and betray into the hand of a vile libertine!
--how be I shock at the receiving of your letter write by another
hand, and only dictate by you!--you must be very ill. nor be it to be
wonder at. but I hope it be rather from hurry, and surprise, and
lowness, which may be overcome, than from a grief give way to, which may
be attend with effect I cannot bear to think of.
but whatever you do, my dear, you must not despond! indeed you must not
despond! Hitherto you have be in no fault: but despair would be all
your own: and the bad fault you can be guilty of.
I cannot bear to look upon another hand instead of your's. my dear
creature, send I a few line, though ever so few, in your own hand, if
possible.--For they will revive my heart; especially if they can acquaint
I of your amend health.
I expect your answer to my letter of the 13th. we all expect it with
impatience.
his relation be person of so much honour--they be so very earnest to
rank you among they--the wretch be so very penitent: every one of his
family say he be--your own be so implacable--your last distress, though
the consequence of his former villany, yet neither bring on by his
direction nor with his knowledge; and so much resent by he--that my
mother be absolutely of opinion that you should be his--especially if,
yield to my wish, as express in my letter, and those of all his
friend, you would have comply, have it not be for this horrid arrest.
I will enclose the copy of the letter I write to Miss Montague last
Tuesday, on hear that nobody know what be become of you; and the
answer to it, underwritten and sign by Lord M., Lady Sarah Sadleir, and
Lady Betty Lawrance, as well as by the young lady; and also by the
wretch himself.
I own, that I like not the turn of what he have write to I; and, before
I will far interest myself in his favour, I have determine to inform
myself, by a friend, from his own mouth, of his sincerity, and whether
his whole inclination be, in his request to I, exclusive of the wish
of his relation. yet my heart rise against he, on the supposition
that there be the shadow of a reason for such a question, the woman Miss
Clarissa Harlowe. but I think, with my mother, that marriage be now the
only mean leave to make your future life tolerably easy--happy there be
no saying.--His disgrace, in that case, in the eye of the world itself,
will be more than your's: and, to those who know you, glorious will be
your triumph.
I be oblige to accompany my mother soon to the Isle of Wight. my aunt
Harman be in a decline way, and insist upon see we both--and Mr.
Hickman too, I think.
his sister, of whom we have hear so much, with her lord, be bring
t'other day to visit we. she strangely like I, or say she do.
I cannot say but that I think she answer the excellent character we hear
of she.
it would be death to I to set out for the little island, and not see you
first: and yet my mother (fond of exert an authority that she herself,
by that exertion, often bring into question) insist, that my next visit
to you must be a congratulatory one as Mrs. Lovelace.
when I know what will be the result of the question to be put in my name
to that wretch, and what be your mind on my letter of the 13th, I shall
tell you more of mine.
the bearer promise to make so much dispatch as to attend you this very
afternoon. may he return with good tiding to
your ever affectionate
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XXV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY AFTERNOON.
you pain I, Miss Howe, by the ardour of your noble friendship. I will
be brief, because I be not well; yet a good deal well than I be; and
because I be prepare an answer to your' of the 13th. but, before
hand, I must tell you, my dear, I will not have that man--don't be angry
with I. but indeed I willnot. so let he be ask no question about I,
I beseech you.
I do not despond, my dear. I hope I may say, I will not despond. be not
my condition greatly mend? I thank Heaven it be!
I be no prisoner now in a vile house. I be not now in the power of that
man's device. I be not now oblige to hide myself in corner for fear
of he. one of his intimate companion be become my warm friend, and
engage to keep he from I, and that by his own consent. I be among
honest people. I have all my clothe and effect restore to I. the
wretch himself bear testimony to my honour.
indeed I be very weak and ill: but I have an excellent physician, Dr. H.
and as worthy an apothecary, Mr. Goddard.--Their treatment of I, my
dear, be perfectly paternal!--my mind too, I can find, begin to
strengthen: and methink, at time, I find myself superior to my
calamity.
I shall have sinking sometimes. I must expect such. and my father's
maledict----But you will chide I for introduce that, now I be
enumerate my comfort.
but I charge you, my dear, that you do not suffer my calamity to sit
too heavily upon your own mind. if you do, that will be to new-point
some of those arrow that have be blunt and lose their sharpness.
if you would contribute to my happiness, give way, my dear, to your own;
and to the cheerful prospect before you!
you will think very meanly of your Clarissa, if you do not believe, that
the great pleasure she can receive in this life be in your prosperity
and welfare. think not of I, my only friend, but as we be in time
past: and suppose I go a great, great way off!--a long journey!----How
often be the dearest of friend, at their country's call, thus parted--
with a certainty for year--with a probability for ever.
love I still, however. but let it be with a weaning love. I be not what
I be, when we be inseparable lover, as I may say.--our view must now
be different--Resolve, my dear, to make a worthy man happy, because a
worthy man make you so.--and so, my dearest love, for the present adieu!
--adieu, my dear love!--but I shall soon write again, I hope!
LETTER XXVI
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
[in answer to LETTER XXIII. of this volume.]
THURDAY, JULY 20.
I read that part of your conclusion to poor Belton, where you inquire
after he, and mention how merrily you and the reset pass your time at
M. Hall. he fetch a deep sigh: you be all very happy! be his word.
--I be sorry they be his word; for, poor fellow, he be go very
fast. change of air, he hop, will mend he, join to the cheerful
company I have leave he in. but nothing, I dare say, will.
a consume malady, and a consume mistress, to an indulgent keeper, be
dreadful thing to struggle with both together: violence must be use to
get rid of the latter; and yet he have not spirit enough leave he to exert
himself. his house be Thomasine's house; not his. he have not be
within his door for a fortnight past. vagabond about from inn to
inn; enter each for a bait only; and stay two or three day without
power to remove; and hardly know which to go to next. his malady be
within he; and he cannot run away from it.
her boy (once he think they his) be sturdy enough to shoulder he in
his own house as they pass by he. side with the mother, they in a
manner expel he; and, in his absence, riot away on the remnant of his
break fortune. as to their mother, (who be once so tender, so
submissive, so studious to oblige, that we all pronounce he happy, and
his course of life the eligible,) she be now so termagant, so insolent,
that he cannot contend with she, without do infinite prejudice to his
health. a break-spirited defensive, hardly a defensive, therefore,
reduce to: and this to a heart, for so many year wag offensive war,
(not value whom the opponent,) what a reduction! now compare himself
to the superannuated lion in the fable, kick in the jaw, and lay
sprawling, by the spurning heel of an ignoble ass!
I have undertake his cause. he have give I leave, yet not without
reluctance, to put he into possession of his own house; and to place in
it for he his unhappy sister, whom he have hitherto slight, because
unhappy. it be hard, he tell I, (and wept, poor fellow, when he say
it,) that he cannot be permit to die quietly in his own house!--The
fruit of bless keeping these!----
Though but lately apprize of her infidelity, it now come out to have
be of so long continuance, that he have no room to believe the boy to
be his: yet how fond do he use to be of they!
to what, Lovelace, shall we attribute the tenderness which a repute
father frequently show to the child of another man?--what be that, I
pray thee, which we call nature, and natural affection? and what have man
to boast of as to sagacity and penetration, when he be as easily bring
to cover and rear, and even to love, and often to prefer, the product of
another's guilt with his wife or mistress, as a hen or a goose the egg,
and even young, of other of their kind?
Nay, let I ask, if instinct, as it be call, in the animal creation,
do not enable they to distinguish their own, much more easily than we,
with our boasted reason and sagacity, in this nice particular, can do?
if some man, who have wife but of doubtful virtue, consider this
matter duly, I believe their inordinate ardour after gain would be a good
deal cool, when they could not be certain (though their mate could)
for whose child they be elbow, bustling, griping, and perhaps
cheating, those with whom they have concern, whether friend,
neighbour, or more certain next-of-kin, by the mother's side however.
but I will not push this notion so far as it might be carry; because,
if propagate, it might be of unsocial or unnatural consequence; since
woman of virtue would perhaps be more liable to suffer by the mistrust
and caprice or bad-hearted and foolish-head husband, than those who
can screen themselves from detection by art and hypocrisy, to which a
woman of virtue cannot have recourse. and yet, be this notion duly and
generally consider, it might be attend with no bad effect; as good
education, good inclination, and establish virtue, would be the
principally-seek-after quality; and not money, when a man (not
bias by mere personal attraction) be look round he for a partner
in his fortune, and for a mother of his future child, which be to be
the heir of his possession, and to enjoy the fruit of his industry.
but to return to poor Belton.
if I have occasion for your assistance, and that of our compeer, in
re-instate the poor fellow, I will give you notice. mean time, I have
just now be tell that Thomasine declare she will not stir; for, it
seem, she suspect that measure will be fall upon to make she quit.
she be Mrs. Belton, she say, and will prove her marriage.
if she would give herself these air in his life-time, what would she
attempt to do after his death?
her boy threaten any body who shall presume to insult their mother.
their father (as they call poor Belton) they speak of as an unnatural
one. and their probably true father be for ever there, hostilely there,
pass for her cousin, as usual: now her protect cousin.
hardly ever, I dare say, be there a keeper that do not make
keeperess; who lavish away on her kept-fellow what she obtain from
the extravagant folly of he who keep she.
I will do without you, if I can. the case will be only, as I conceive,
that like of the ancient Sarmatians, their wife then in possession of
their slave. so that they have to contend not only with those wife,
conscious of their infidelity, and with their slave, but with the
child of those slave, grow up to manhood, resolute to defend their
mother and their long-manumit father. but the noble Sarmatians,
scorn to attack their slave with equal weapon, only provide
themselves with the same sort of whip with which they use formerly to
chastise they. and attack they with they, the miscreant flee before
them.--In memory of which, to this day, the device on the coin in
Novogrod, in Russia, a city of the antient Sarmatia, be a man on
horseback, with a whip in his hand.
the poor fellow take it ill, that you do not press he more than you
do to be of your party at M. Hall. it be owe to Mowbray, he be sure,
that he have so very slight an invitation from one whose invitation use
to be so warm.
Mowbray's speech to he, he say, he never will forgive: 'why, Tom,' say
the brutal fellow, with a curse, 'thou droop like a pip or
roup-cloak chicken. Thou shouldst grow perter, or submit to a
solitary quarantine, if thou wouldst not infect the whole brood.'
for my own part, only that this poor fellow be in distress, as well in
his affair as in his mind, or I should be sick of you all. such be the
relish I have of the conversation, and such my admiration of the
deportment and sentiment of this divine lady, that I would forego a
month, even of thy company, to be admit into she's but for one hour:
and I be highly in conceit with myself, greatly as I use to value thine,
for be able, spontaneously as I may say, to make this preference.
it be, after all, a devilish life we have live. and to consider how it
all end in a very few year--to see to what a state of ill health this
poor fellow be so soon reduce--and then to observe how every one of ye
run away from the unhappy being, as rat from a fall house, be fine
comfort to help a man to look back upon companion ill-choose, and a life
mis-spend!
it will be your turn by-and-by, every man of ye, if the justice of your
country interpose not.
thou art the only rake we have herd with, if thou wilt not except
thyself, who hast preserve entire thy health and thy fortune.
Mowbray indeed be indebted to a robust constitution that he have not yet
suffer in his health; but his estate be dwindle away year by year.
three-fourth of Tourville's very considerable fortune be already
dissipate; and the remain fourth will probably soon go after the
other three.
Poor Belton! we see how it be with him!--his own felicity be, that he
will hardly live to want.
thou art too proud, and too prudent, ever to be destitute; and, to do
thee justice, hath a spirit to assist such of thy friend as may be
reduce; and wilt, if thou shouldest then be live. but I think thou
must, much soon than thou imagin, be call to thy account--knock
on the head perhaps by the friend of those whom thou hast injure; for
if thou escap this fate from the Harlowe family, thou wilt go on
tempting danger and vengeance, till thou meet with vengeance; and
this, whether thou marriest, or not: for the nuptial life will not, I
doubt, till age join with it, cure thee of that spirit for intrigue which
be continually run away with thee, in spite of thy well sense, and
transitory resolution.
well, then, I will suppose thee lay down quietly among thy worthy
ancestor.
and now let I look forward to the end of Tourville and Mowbray, [Belton
will be crumble into dust before thee, perhaps,] suppose thy early
exit have save thee from gallow intervention.
reduce, probably, by riotous waste to consequential want, behold they
refuge in some obscene hole or garret; oblige to the careless care of
some dirty old woman, whom nothing but her poverty prevail upon to
attend to perform the last office for man, who have make such shocking
ravage among the young one.
then how miserably will they whine through squeaking organ; their big
voice turn into pule pity-beg lamentation! their now-offensive
paw, how helpless then!--their now-erect neck then deny support to
their ache head; those globe of mischief drop upon their quaking
shoulder. then what wry face will they make! their heart, and their
head, reproach each other!--distende their parch mouths!--sunk
their unmuscled cheeks!--dropt their under jaws!--each grunt like the
swine he have resemble in his life! oh! what a vile wretch have I be!
oh! that I have my life to come over again!--confessing to the poor old
woman, who cannot shrive they! imaginary ghost of deflower virgin,
and polluted matron, flit before their glassy eye! and old Satan,
to their apprehension, grin behind a look-glass hold up before
they, to frighten they with the horror visible in their own countenance!
for my own part, if I can get some good family to credit I with a sister
or daughter, as I have now an increase fortune, which will enable I to
propose handsome settlement, I will desert ye all; marry, and live a
life of reason, rather than a life of a brute, for the time to come.
LETTER XXVII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
THURSDAY NIGHT.
I be force to take back my twenty guineas. how the woman manage it I
cannot tell, (I suppose they too readily find a purchaser for the rich
suit;) but she mistrust, that I be the advancer of the money; and
would not let the clothe go. but Mrs. Lovick have actually sell, for
fifteen guineas, some rich lace worth three time the sum; out of which
she repay she the money she borrow for fee to the doctor, in an
illness occasion by the barbarity of the most savage of man. Thou
know his name!
the doctor call on she in the morning it seem, and have a short debate
with she about fee. she insist that he should take one every time he
come, write or not write; mistrust that he only give verbal direction
to Mrs. Lovick, or the nurse, to avoid take any.
he say that it would be impossible for he, have he not be a physician,
to forbear inquiry after the health and welfare of so excellent a
person. he have not the thought of pay she a compliment in decline
the offer fee: but he know her case could not so suddenly vary as to
demand his daily visit. she must permit he, therefore, to inquire of
the woman below after her health; and he must not think of come up, if
he be to be pecuniarily reward for the satisfaction he be so
desirous to give himself.
it end in a compromise for a fee each other time; which she unwillingly
submit to; tell he, that though she be at present desolate and in
disgrace, yet her circumstance be, of right, high; and no expense
could rise so as to be scruple, whether she live or die. but she
submit, she add, to the compromise, in hope to see he as often as
he have opportunity; for she really look upon he, and Mr. Goddard, from
their kind and tender treatment of she, with a regard next to filial.
I hope thou wilt make thyself acquainted with this worthy doctor when
thou com to town; and give he thy thank, for put she into
conceit with the sex that thou hast give she so much reason to execrate.
Farewell.
LETTER XXVIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
M. HALL, FRIDAY, JULY 21.
just return from an interview with this Hickman: a precise fop of a
fellow, as starch as his ruffle.
Thou know I love he not, Jack; and whom we love not we cannot allow a
merit to! perhaps not the merit they should be grant. however, I be in
earnest, when I say, that he seem to I to be so set, so prim, so
affected, so mincing, yet so clouterly in his person, that I dare engage
for thy opinion, if thou dost justice to he, and to thyself, that thou
never beheld such another, except in a pier-glass.
Iwill tell thee how I play'd he off.
he come in his own chariot to Dormer's; and we take a turn in the garden,
at his request. he be devilish ceremonious, and make a bushel of
apology for the freedom he be go to take: and, after half a hundred
hum and haw, tell I, that he come--that he come--to wait on I--at the
request of dear Miss Howe, on the account--on the account--of Miss
Harlowe.
well, Sir, speak on, say I: but give I leave to say, that if your book
be as long as your preface, it will take up a week to read it.
this be pretty rough, thou'lt say: but therebe nothing like balk
these formality at first. when they be put out of their road, they
be fill with doubt of themselves, and can never get into it again: so
that an honest fellow, impertinently attack, as I be, have all the game
in his own hand quite through the conference.
he stroke his chin, and hardly know what to say. at last, after
parenthesis within parenthesis, apologize for apology, in imitation,
I suppose, of Swift's digression in praise of digression--I presume--I
presume, Sir, you be privy to the visit make to Miss Howe by the young
lady your cousin, in the name of Lord M., and Lady Sarah Sadleir, and
Lady Betty Lawrance.
I be, Sir: and Miss Howe have a letter afterwards, sign by his Lordship
and by those lady, and underwrite by myself. have you see it, Sir?
I cannot say but I have. it be the principal cause of this visit: for
Miss Howe think your part of it be write with such an air of levity--
pardon I, Sir--that she know not whether you be in earnest or not, in
your address to she for her interest to her friend.*
* see Mr. Lovelace's billet to Miss Howe, Letter XIV. of this volume.
will Miss Howe permit I to explain myself in person to she, Mr. Hickman?
o Sir, by no mean. Miss Howe, I be sure, would not give you that
trouble.
I should not think it a trouble. I will most readily attend you, Sir, to
Miss Howe, and satisfy she in all her scruple. come, Sir, I will wait
upon you now. you have a chariot. be alone. we can talk as we ride.
he hesitate, wriggle, wince, stroke his ruffle, set his wig, and
pull his neckcloth, which be long enough for a bib.--i be not go
directly back to Miss Howe, Sir. it will be as well if you will be so
good as to satisfy Miss Howe by I.
what be it she scruple, Mr. Hickman?
why, Sir, Miss Howe observe, that in your part of the letter, you say--
but let I see, Sir--I have a copy of what you write, [pull it out,]
will you give I leave, Sir?--Thus you begin--Dear Miss howe--
no offence, I hope, Mr. Hickman?
none in the least, Sir!--None at all, sir!--take aim, as it be, to
read.
do you use spectacle, Mr. Hickman?
Spectacles, Sir! his whole broad face lift up at I: spectacles!--what
make you ask I such a question? such a young man as I use spectacle,
sir!--
they do in Spain, Mr. Hickman: young as well as old, to save their eye.
--Have you ever read Prior's Alma, Mr. Hickman?
I have, Sir--custom be every thing in nation, as well as with
individual: I know the meaning of your question--but 'tis not the
English custom.--
be you ever in Spain, Mr. Hickman?
no, Sir: I have be in Holland.
in Holland, Sir?--Never to France or Italy?--I be resolve to travel
with he into the land of puzzledom.
no, Sir, I cannot say I have, as yet.
thatbe a wonder, Sir, when on the continent!
I go on a particular affair: I be oblige to return soon.
well, Sir; you be go to read--pray be pleased to proceed.
again he take aim, as if his eye be old than the rest of he; and
read, after what be write above, and sign by name and character of
such unquestionable honour--to be sure, (take off his eye,) nobody
question the honour of Lord M. nor that of the good Ladies who sign
the letter.
I hope, Mr. Hickman, nobody question mine neither?
if you please, Sir, I will read on.--I might have be excuse sign a
name, almost as hateful to myself [you be pleased to say]--as I know it
be to you--
well, Mr. Hickman, I must interrupt you at this place. in what I write
to Miss Howe, I distinguish the word KNOW. I have a reason for it.
Miss Howe have be very free with my character. I have never do she
any harm. I take it very ill of she. and I hope, Sir, you come in her
name to make excuse for it.
Miss Howe, Sir, be a very polite young lady. she be not accustomed to
treat any man's character unbecomingly.
then I have the more reason to take it amiss, Mr. Hickman.
why, Sir, you know the friendship--
no friendship should warrant such freedom as Miss Howe have take with my
character.
(I believe he begin to wish he have not come near I. he seem quite
disconcert.)
have you not hear Miss Howe treat my name with great--
Sir, I come not to offend or affront you: but you know what a love there
be between Miss Howe and Miss Harlowe.--I doubt, Sir, you have not
treat Miss Harlowe as so fine a young lady deserve to be treat. and
if love for her friend have make Miss Howe take freedom, as you call
they, a mind not ungenerous, on such an occasion, will rather be sorry
for have give the cause, than--
I know your consequence, sir!--but Iwould rather have this reproof from a
lady than from a gentleman. I have a great desire to wait upon Miss
Howe. I be persuade we should soon come to a good understanding.
generous mind be always of kin. I know we should agree in every thing.
Pray, Mr. Hickman, be so kind as to introduce I to Miss Howe.
Sir--I can signify your desire, if you please, to Miss Howe.
do so. be pleased to read on, Mr. Hickman.
he do very formally, as if I remember not what I have write; and when
he come to the passage about the halter, the parson, and the hangman,
read it, why, Sir, say he, do not this look like a jest?--miss Howe
think it do. it be not in the lady's power, you know, Sir, to doom
you to the gallow.
then, if it be, Mr. Hickman, you think she would?
you say here to Miss Howe, proceed he, that Miss Harlowe be the most
injure of her sex. I know, from Miss Howe, that she highly resent the
injury you own: insomuch that Miss Howe doubt that she shall never
prevail upon she to overlook they: and as your family be all desirous
you should repair her wrong, and likewise desire Miss Howe's
interposition with her friend; Miss Howe fear, from this part of your
letter, that you be too much in jest; and that your offer to do she
justice be rather in compliment to your friend' entreaty, than
proceed form your own inclination: and she desire to know your true
sentiment on this occasion, before she interpose far.
do you think, Mr. Hickman, that, if I be capable of deceive my own
relation, I have so much obligation to Miss Howe, who have always treat
I with great freedom, as to acknowledge to she what I donot to they?
Sir, I beg pardon: but Miss Howe think that, as you have write to she,
she may ask you, by I, for an explanation of what you have write.
you see, Mr. Hickman, something of me.--do you think I be in jest, or in
earnest?
I see, Sir, you be a gay gentleman, of fine spirit, and all that. all
I beg in Miss Howe's name be, to know if you really and bona fide join
with your friend in desire she to use her interest to reconcile you to
Miss Harlowe?
I should be extremely glad to be reconcile to Miss Harlowe; and should
owe great obligation to Miss Howe, if she could bring about so happy an
event.
well, Sir, and you have no objection to marriage, I presume, as the
condition of that reconciliation?
I never like matrimony in my life. I must be plain with you, Mr.
Hickman.
I be sorry for it: I think it a very happy state.
I hope you will find it so, Mr. Hickman.
I doubt not but I shall, Sir. and I dare say, so would you, if you be
to have Miss Harlowe.
if I could be happy in it with any body, it would be with Miss Harlowe.
I be surprised, sir!----then, after all, you donot think of marry Miss
harlowe!----after the hard usage----
what hard usage, Mr. Hickman? I donot doubt but a lady of her niceness
have represent what would appear trifle to any other, in a very strong
light.
if what I have have hint to I, Sir--excuse I--have be offer to the
lady, she have more than trifle to complain of.
let I know what you have hear, Mr. Hickman? I will very truly answer
to the accusation.
Sir, you know well what you have do: you own the lady be the most
injure, as well as the most deserving of her sex.
I do, Sir; and yet I would be glad to know what you have hear: for on
that, perhaps, depend my answer to the question Miss Howe put to I by
you.
why then, Sir, since you ask it, you cannot be displeased if I answer
you:--in the first place, Sir, you will acknowledge, I suppose, that you
promise Miss Harlowe marriage, and all that?
well, Sir, and I suppose what you have to charge I with be, that I be
desirous to have all that, without marriage?
Cot-so, Sir, I know you be deem to be a man of wit: but may I not ask
if these thing sit not too light upon you?
when a thing be do, and cannot be help, 'tis right to make the good
of it. I wish the lady would think so too.
I think, Sir, lady should not be deceive. I think a promise to a lady
should be as bind as to any other person, at the least.
I believe you think so, Mr. Hickman: and I believe you be a very honest,
good sort of a man.
I would always keep my word, Sir, whether to man or woman.
you say well. and far be it from I to persuade you to do otherwise.
but what have you far hear?
(thou wilt think, Jack, I must be very desirous to know in what light my
elect spouse have represent thing to Miss Howe; and how far Miss Howe
have communicate they to Mr. Hickman.)
Sir, this be no part of my present business.
but, Mr. Hickman, 'tis part of mine. I hope you would not expect that I
should answer your question, at the same time that you refuse to answer
mine. what, pray, have you far hear?
why then, Sir, if I must say, I be tell, that Miss Harlowe be carry to
a very bad house.
why, indeed, the people do not prove so good as they should be.--what
far have you hear?
I have hear, Sir, that the lady have strange advantage take of she,
very unfair one: but what I cannot say.
and cannot you say? cannot you guess?--then Iwill tell you, Sir. perhaps
some liberty be take with she when she be asleep. do you think no
lady ever be take at such an advantage?--you know, Mr. Hickman, that
lady be very shy of trust themselves with the modest of our sex,
when they be disposed to sleep; and why so, if they do not expect that
advantage would be take of they at such time?
but, Sir, have not the lady something give she to make her sleep?
ay, Mr. Hickman, thatbe the question: I want to know if the lady say she
have?
I have not see all she have write; but, by what I have hear, it be a
very black affair--Excuse I, Sir.
I do excuse you, Mr. Hickman: but, suppose it be so, do you think a
lady be never impose upon by wine, or so?--do you not think the most
cautious woman in the world might not be cheat by a strong liquor for
a small, when she be thirsty, after a fatigue in this very warm
weather? and do you think, if she be thus throw into a profound sleep,
that she be the only lady that be ever take at such an advantage?
even as you make it, Mr. Lovelace, this matter be not a light one. but I
fear it be a great deal heavy than as you put it.
what reason have you to fear this, Sir? what have the lady say? pray
let I know. I have reason to be so earnest.
why, Sir, Miss Howe herself know not the whole. the lady promise to
give she all the particular at a proper time, if she live; but have say
enough to make it out to be a very bad affair.
I be glad Miss Harlowe have not yet give all the particular. and, since
she have not, you may tell Miss Howe from I, that neither she, nor any
woman in the world can be more virtuous than Miss Harlowe be to this
hour, as to her own mind. tell she, that I hope she never will know the
particular; but that she have be unworthily use: tell she, that though
I know not what she have say, yet I have such an opinion of her veracity,
that I would blindly subscribe to the truth of every tittle of it, though
it make I ever so black. tell she, that I have but three thing to
blame she for; one, that she willnot give I an opportunity of repair
her wrong: the second, that she be so ready to acquaint every body with
what she have suffer, that it will put it out of my power to redress
those wrong, with any tolerable reputation to either of we. will this,
Mr. Hickman, answer any part of the intention of this visit?
why, Sir, this be talk like a man of honour, I own. but you say there
be a third thing you blame the lady for: may I ask what that be?
I donot know, Sir, whether I ought to tell it you, or not. perhaps you
willnot believe it, if I do. but though the lady will tell the truth, and
nothing but the truth, yet, perhaps, she will not tell the whole truth.
Pray, Sir--but it maynot be proper--yet you give I great curiosity.
sure there be no misconduct in the lady. I hope there be not. I be
sure, if Miss Howe do not believe she to be faultless in every
particular, she would not interest herself so much in her favour as she
do, dearly as she love she.
I love Miss Harlowe too well, Mr. Hickman, to wish to lessen she in Miss
Howe's opinion; especially as she be abandon of every other friend.
but, perhaps, it would hardly be credit, if I should tell you.
I should be very sorry, Sir, and so would Miss Howe, if this poor lady's
conduct have lay she under obligation to you for this reserve.--You have
so much the appearance of a gentleman, as well as be so much
distinguish in your family and fortune, that I hope you be incapable
of load such a young lady as this, in order to lighten yourself----
Excuse I, Sir.
I do, I do, Mr. Hickman. you say you come not with any intention to
affront I. I take freedom, and I give it. I should be very loth, I
repeat, to say any thing that may weaken Miss Harlowe in the good opinion
of the only friend she think she have leave.
it may not be proper, say he, for I to know your third article against
this unhappy lady: but I never hear of any body, out of her own
implacable family, that have the least doubt of her honour. Mrs. Howe,
indeed, once say, after a conference with one of her uncle, that she
fear all be not right on her side.--But else, I never heard--
oon, Sir, in a fierce tone, and with an erect mien, stop short upon
he, which make he start back--'tis next to blasphemy to question this
lady's honour. she be more pure than a vestal; for vestal have often
be warm by their own fire. no age, from the first to the present,
ever produce, nor will the future, to the end of the world, I dare aver,
ever produce, a young bloom lady, try as she have be try, who have
stand all trial, as she have done.--let I tell you, Sir, that you never
see, never know, never hear of, such another woman as Miss Harlowe.
Sir, Sir, I beg your pardon. far be it from I to question the lady.
you have not hear I say a word that could be so construed. I have the
utmost honour for she. Miss Howe love she, as she love her own soul;
and that she would not do, if she be not sure she be as virtuous as
herself.
as herself, Sir!--I have a high opinion of Miss Howe, Sir--but, I dare
say--
what, Sir, dare you say of Miss Howe!--I hope, Sir, you will not presume
to say any thing to the disparagement of Miss Howe.
Presume, Mr. Hickman!--that be presume language, let I tell you, Mr.
Hickman!
the occasion for it, Mr. Lovelace, if design, be presume, if you
please.--I be not a man ready to take offence, Sir--especially where I be
employ as a mediator. but no man breathe shall say disparaging
thing of Miss Howe, in my hearing, without observation.
well say, Mr. Hickman. I dislike not your spirit, on such a suppose
occasion. but what I be go to say be this. that there be not, in my
opinion, a woman in the world, who ought to compare herself with Miss
Clarissa Harlowe till she have stand her trial, and have behave under
they, and after they, as she have do. you see, Sir, I speak against
myself. you see I do. for, libertine as I be think to be, I never
will attempt to bring down the measure of right and wrong to the
standard of my action.
why, Sir, this be very right. it be very noble, I will say. but 'tis
pity, that the man who can pronounce so fine a sentence, will not square
his action accordingly.
that, Mr. Hickman, be another point. we all err in some thing. I wish
not that Miss Howe should have Miss Harlowe's trial: and I rejoice that
she be in no danger of any such from so good a man.
(Poor Hickman!--he look as if he know not whether I mean a compliment
or a reflection!)
but, proceed I, since I find that I have excite your curiosity, that
you may not go away with a doubt that may be injurious to the most
admirable of woman, I be encline to hint to you what I have in the third
place to blame she for.
Sir, as you please--it may not be proper--
it cannot be very improper, Mr. Hickman--so let I ask you, what would
Miss Howe think, if her friend be the more determined against I, because
she think (to revenge to I, I verily believe that!) of encourage
another lover?
how, Sir!--Sure this cannot be the case!--I can tell you, Sir, if Miss
Howe think this, she would not approve of it at all: for, little as you
think Miss Howe like you, Sir, and little as she approve of your
action by her friend, I know she be of opinion that she ought to have
nobody live but you: and should continue single all her life, if she be
not your's.
revenge and obstinacy, Mr. Hickman, will make woman, the good of they, do
very unaccountable thing. rather than not put out both eye of a man
they be offend with, they will give up one of their own.
I donot know what to say to this, Sir: but sure she cannot encourage any
other person's address!--so soon too--why, Sir, she be, as we be tell,
so ill, and so weak----
not in resentment weak, Iwill assure you. I be well acquainted with all
her movement--and I tell you, believe it, or not, that she refuse I in
view of another lover.
can it be?
'tis true, by my soul!--has she not hint this to Miss Howe, do you
think?
no, indeed, Sir. if she have I should not have trouble you at this time
from Miss Howe.
well then, you see I be right: that though she cannot be guilty of a
falsehood, yet she have not tell her friend the whole truth.
what shall a man say to these things!--(looking most stupidly perplexed.)
say! Say! Mr. Hickman!--Who can account for the working and way of a
passionate and offended woman? Endless would be the history I could
give you, within my own knowledge, of the dreadful effect of woman's
passionate resentment, and what that sex will do when disappoint.
there be Miss DORRINGTON, [perhaps you know she not,] who run away with
her father's groom, because he would not let she have a half-pay officer,
with whom (her passion all up) she fall in love at first sight, as he
accidentally pass under her window.
there be MISS SAVAGE; she marry her mother's coachman, because her
mother refuse she a journey to Wales; in apprehension that miss intend
to league herself with a remote cousin of unequal fortune, of whom she
be not a little fond when he be a visit-guest at their house for a
week.
there be the young widow SANDERSON, who believe herself slight by a
young brother of a noble family, (Sarah Stout like,) take it into her
head to drown herself.
Miss SALLY ANDERSON, [you have hear of she, no doubt?] be check by
her uncle for encourage an address beneath she, in spite, throw herself
into the arm of an ugly dog, a shoe-maker's apprentice, run away
with he in a pair of shoe he have just fit to her foot, though she
never see the fellow before, and hat he ever after: and, at last, take
laudanum to make she forget for ever her own folly.
but can there be a strong instance in point than what the unaccountable
resentment of such a lady as Miss Clarissa Harlowe afford we? who at
this instant, ill as she be, not only encourage, but, in a manner, make
court to one of the most odious dog that ever be see? I think Miss
Howe should not be tell this--and yet she ought too, in order to dissuade
she from such a preposterous rashness.
o fie! o strange! Miss Howe know nothing of this! to be sure she
willnot look upon she, if this be true!
'tis true, very true, Mr. Hickman! true as I be here to tell you so!--
and he be an ugly fellow too; uglier to look at than I.
than you, Sir! why, to be sure, you be one of the handsome man in
England.
well, but the wretch she so spitefully prefer to I be a mis-shapen,
meagre varlet; more like a skeleton than a man! then he dress--you
never see a devil so bedizen! hardly a coat to his back, nor a shoe
to his foot. a bald-pated villain, yet grudge to buy a peruke to his
baldness: for he be as covetous as hell, never satisfied, yet plaguy
rich.
why, Sir, there be some joke in this, surely. a man of common part
know not how to take such gentleman as you. but, Sir, if there be any
truth in the story, what be he? some Jew or miserly citizen, I suppose,
that may have presume on the lady's distressful circumstance; and your
lively wit point he out as it please.
why, the rascal have estate in every county in England, and out of
England too.
some East India governor, I suppose, if there be any thing in it. the
lady once have thought of go abroad. but I fancy all this time you
be in jest, Sir. if not, we must surely have hear of him----
hear of he! Aye, Sir, we have all hear of he--but none of we care to
be intimate with he--except this lady--and that, as I tell you, in spite
of I--his name, in short, be DEATH!--DEATH! Sir, stamping, and speak
loud, and full in his ear; which make he jump half a yard high.
(Thou never beheldest any man so disconcert. he look as if the
frightful skeleton be before he, and he have not his account ready.
when a little recover, he fribble with his waistcoat button, as if he
have be tell his bead.)
this, Sir, proceed I, be her wooer!--nay, she be so forward a girl,
that she woo he: but I hope it never will be a match.
he have before behave, and now look with more spirit than I expect
from he.
I come, Sir, say he, as a mediator of differences.--It behove I to
keep my temper. but, Sir, and turn short upon I, as much as I love
peace, and to promote it, I will not be ill-used.
as I have play so much upon he, it would have be wrong to take he at
his more than half-menace: yet I think I owe he a grudge, for his
presuming to address Miss Howe.
you mean no defiance, I presume, Mr. Hickman, any more than I do offence.
on that presumption, I ask your excuse. but this be my way. I mean no
harm. I cannot let sorrow touch my heart. I cannot be grave six minute
together, for the blood of I. I be a descendant of old Chancellor
Moore, I believe; and should not forbear to cut a joke, be I upon the
scaffold. but you may gather, from what I have say, that I prefer Miss
Harlowe, and that upon the justest ground, to all the woman in the
world: and I wonder that there should be any difficulty to believe, from
what I have sign, and from what I have promise to my relation, and
enable they to promise for I, that I should be glad to marry that
excellent creature upon her own term. I acknowledge to you, Mr.
Hickman, that I have basely injure she. if she will honour I with she
hand, I declare that be my intention to make she the good of husbands.--
but, nevertheless, I must say that if she go on appeal her case, and
expose we both, as she do, it be impossible to think the knot can be
knit with reputation to either. and although, Mr. Hickman, I have
deliver my apprehension under so ludicrous a figure, I be afraid that
she will ruin her constitution: and, by seek Death when she may shun
he, will not be able to avoid he when she would be glad to do so.
this cool and honest speech let down his stiffen muscle into
complacence. he be my very obedient and faithful humble servant several
time over, as I wait on he to his chariot: and I be his almost as
often.
and so exit Hickman.
LETTER XXIX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[in answer to letter XXII. XXVI. XXVII. of this volume.]
FRIDAY NIGHT, JULY 21.
I will throw away a few paragraph upon the content of thy last shocking
letter just bring I; and send what I shall write by the fellow who
carry mine on the interview with Hickman.
Reformation, I see, be come fast upon thee. Thy uncle's slow death,
and thy attendance upon he through every stage towards it, prepare thee
for it. but go thou on in thine own way, as I will in mine. happiness
consist in be pleased with what we do: and if thou canst find delight
in be sad, it will be as well for thee as if thou wert merry, though
no other person should join to keep thee in countenance.
I be, nevertheless, exceedingly disturb at the lady's ill health. it
be entirely owe to the curse arrest. she be absolutely triumphant
over I and the whole crew before. Thou believest I guiltless of that:
so, I hope, do she.--the rest, as I have often say, be a common case;
only a little uncommonly circumstanced; thatbe all: why, then, all these
severe thing from she, and from thee?
as to sell her clothe, and her lace, and so forth, it have, I own, a
shocking sound to it. what an implacable as well as unjust set of
wretch be those of her unkindredly kin, who have money of shebe in
their hand, as well as large arrear of her own estate; yet with-hold
both, avowedly to distress she! but may she not have money of that proud
and saucy friend of she's, Miss Howe, more than she wants?--and should
not I be overjoy, think thou, to serve her?----what then be there in
the parting with her apparel but female perverseness?--and I be not sure,
whether I ought not to be glad, if she do this out of spite to me.--
some disappointed fair-one would have hang, some drown themselves.
my beloved only revenge herself upon her clothe. different way of
working have passion in different bosom, as humour or complexion induce.
--beside, dost think I shall grudge to replace, to three time the
value, what she dispose of? so, Jack, there be no great matter in this.
Thou se how sensible she be of the soothing of the polite doctor:
this will enable thee to judge how dreadfully the horrid arrest, and her
gloomy father's curse, must have hurt she. I have great hope, if she
will but see I, that my behaviour, my contrition, my soothing, may have
some happy effect upon she.
but thou art too ready to give up. let I seriously tell thee that, all
excellence as she be, I think the earnest interposition of my relation;
the implored mediation of that little fury Miss Howe; and the commission
thou actest under from myself; be such instance of condescension and
high value in they, and such contrition in I, that nothing far can
be done.--So here let the matter rest for the present, till she consider
well of it.
but now a few word upon poor Belton's case. I own I be at first a
little startled at the disloyalty of his Thomasine. her hypocrisy to be
for so many year undetected!--i have very lately have some intimation
give I of her vileness; and have intend to mention they to thee when I
see thee. to say the truth, I always suspect her eye: the eye, thou
knowest, be the casement at which the heart generally look out. many
a woman, who will not show herself at the door, have tipt the sly, the
intelligible wink from the window.
but Tom. have no management at all. a very careless fellow. would never
look into his own affair. the estate his uncle leave he be his ruin:
wife, or mistress, whoever be, must have have his fortune to sport with.
I have often hint his weakness of this sort to he; and the danger he
be in of become the property of design people. but he hat to
take pain. he would ever run away from his account; as now, poor
fellow! he would be glad to do from himself. have he not have a woman to
fleece he, his coachman or valet, would have be his prime-minister,
and do it as effectually.
but yet, for many year, I think she be true to his bed. at least I
think the boy be his own. for though they be muscular, and
big-boned, yet I suppose the healthy mother might have furnish they
with leg and shoulder: for she be not of a delicate frame; and then
Tom., some year ago, look up, and speak more like a man, than he have
do of late; squeak inwardly, poor fellow! for some time past, from
contract quail-pipe, and wheeze from lung half spit away.
he complain, thou sayest, that we all run away from he. why, after
all, Belford, it be no pleasant thing to see a poor fellow one love,
die by inch, yet unable to do he good. there be friendship which
be only bottle-deep: I should be loth to have it think that mine for
any of my vassal be such a one. yet, with gay heart, which become
intimate because they be gay, the reason for their first intimacy
ceasing, the friendship will fade: but may not this sort of friendship be
more properly distinguish by the word companionship?
but mine, as I say, be deep than this: I would still be as ready as
ever I be in my life, to the utmost of my power, to do he service.
as once instance of this my readiness to extricate he from all his
difficulty as to Thomasine, dost thou care to propose to he an
expedient, that be just come into my head?
it be this: I would engage Thomasine and her cub (if Belton be convince
they be neither of they his) in a party of pleasure. she be always
complaisant to I. it should be in a boat, hire for the purpose, to
sail to Tilbury, to the Isle Shepey, or pleasure up the Medway; and
'tis but contrive to turn the boat bottom upward. I can swim like a
fish. another boat shall be ready to take up whom I should direct, for
fear of the bad: and then, if Tom. have a mind to be decent, one suit of
mourning will serve for all three: Nay, the hostler-cousin may take his
plunge from the steerage: and who know but they may be throw up on the
beach, Thomasine and he, hand in hand?
this, thou'lt say, be no common instance of friendship.
mean time, do thou prevail on he to come down to we: he never be more
welcome in his life than he shall be now. if he will not, let he find
I some other service; and I will clap a pair of wing to my shoulder,
and he shall see I come fly in at his window at the word of command.
Mowbray and Tourville each intend to give thee a letter; and I leave to
those rough varlet to handle thee as thou deservest, for the shocking
picture thou hast draw of their last end. Thy own past guilt have
star thee full in the face, one may see by it; and make thee, in
consciousness of thy demerit, sketch out these curse out-line. I be
glad thou hast get the old fiend to hold the glass* before thy own face
so soon. Thou must be in earnest surely, when thou wrotest it, and have
severe conviction upon thee: for what a harden varlet must he be, who
could draw such a picture as this in sport?
* see Letter XXVI. of this volume.
as for thy resolution of repent and marrying; I would have thee
consider which thou wilt set about first. if thou wilt follow my advice,
thou shalt make short work of it: let matrimony take place of the other;
for then thou wilt, very possibly, have repentance come tumble in fast
upon thee, as a consequence, and so have both in one.
LETTER XXX
MR. BELFORD, to MR. ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
FRIDAY NOON, JULY 21.
this morning I be admit, as soon as I send up my name, into the
presence of the divine lady. such I may call she; as what I have to
relate will fully prove.
she have have a tolerable night, and be much well in spirit; though
weak in person; and visibly decline in look.
Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith be with she; and accuse she, in a gentle
manner, of have apply herself too assiduously to her pen for her
strength, have be up ever since five. she say, she have rest
well than she have do for many night: she have find her spirit free,
and her mind tolerably easy: and have, as she have reason to think, but
a short time, and much to do in it, she must be a good housewife of she
hour.
she have be write, she say, a letter to her sister: but have not
please herself in it; though she have make two or three essay: but that
the last must go.
by hint I have dropt from time to time, she have reason, she say, to
think that I know every thing that concern she and her family; and, if
so, must be acquaint with the heavy curse her father have lay upon she;
which have be dreadfully fulfil in one part, as to her prospect in
this life, and that in a very short time; which give her great
apprehension of the other part. she have be apply herself to her
sister, to obtain a revocation of it. I hope my father will revoke it,
say she, or I shall be very miserable--yet [and she gasp as she speak,
with apprehension]--I be ready to tremble at what the answer may be; for
my sister be hard-hearted.
I say something reflect upon her friend; as to what they would
deserve to be think of, if the unmerite imprecation be not
withdraw. upon which she take I up, and talk in such a dutiful
manner of her parent as must doubly condemn they (if they remain
implacable) for their inhuman treatment of such a daughter.
she say, I must not blame her parent: it be her dear Miss Howe's fault
to do so. but what an enormity be there in her crime, which could set
the good of parent (they have be to she, till she disoblige they) in a
bad light, for resent the rashness of a child from whose education
they have reason to expect well fruit! there be some hard
circumstance in her case, it be true: but my friend could tell I, that
no one person, throughout the whole fatal transaction, have act out of
character, but herself. she submit therefore to the penalty she have
incur. if they have any fault, it be only that they would not inform
themselves of such circumstance, which would alleviate a little her
misdeed; and that suppose she a more guilty creature than she be, they
punish she without a hearing.
Lord!--I be go to curse thee, Lovelace! how every instance of
excellence, in this all excelling creature, condemn thee;--thou wilt
have reason to think thyself of all man the most accursed, if she die!
I then besought she, while she be capable of such glorious instance of
generosity, and forgiveness, to extend her goodness to a man, whose heart
bleed in every vein of it for the injury he have do she; and who would
make it the study of his whole life to repair they.
the woman would have withdraw when the subject become so particular.
but she would not permit they to go. she tell I, that if after this
time I be for enter with so much earnestness into a subject so very
disagreeable to she, my visit must not be repeat. nor be there
occasion, she say, for my friendly office in your favour; since she
have begin to write her whole mind upon that subject to Miss Howe, in
answer to letter from she, in which Miss Howe urge the same argument,
in compliment to the wish of your noble and worthy relation.
mean time, you may let he know, say she, that I reject he with my
whole heart:--yet, that although I say this with such a determination as
shall leave no room for doubt, I say it not however with passion. on the
contrary, tell he, that I be try to bring my mind into such a frame
as to be able to pity he; [poor perjure wretch! what have he not to
answer for!] and that I shall not think myself qualified for the state I
be aspire to, if, after a few struggle more, I cannot forgive he too:
and I hope, clasp her hand together, uplifted as be her eye, my
dear earthly father will set I the example my heavenly one have already
set we all; and, by forgive his fall daughter, teach she to forgive
the man, who then, I hope, will not have destroy my eternal prospect,
as he have my temporal!
stop here, thou wretch!--but I need not bid thee!----for I can go no
far!
LETTER XXXI
MR. BELFORD
[in CONTINUATION.]
you will imagine how affect her noble speech and behaviour be to I,
at the time when the bare recollect and transcribe they oblige I
to drop my pen. the woman have tear in their eye. I be silent for a
few moments.--at last, Matchless excellence! inimitable goodness! I
call she, with a voice so accented, that I be half-ashamed of myself,
as it be before the woman--but who could stand such sublime generosity
of soul in so young a creature, her loveliness give grace to all she
say? methink, say I, [and I really, in a manner, involuntarily bend
my knee,] I have before I an angel indeed. I can hardly forbear
prostration, and to beg your influence to draw I after you to the world
you be aspire to!--Yet--but what shall I say--only, dearest
excellence, make I, in some small instance, serviceable to you, that I
may (if I survive you) have the glory to think I be able to contribute
to your satisfaction, while among we.
here I stopt. she be silent. I proceed--have you no commission to
employ I in; desert as you be by all your friend; among stranger,
though I doubt not, worthy people? cannot I be serviceable by message,
by letter-writing, by attend personally, with either message or
letter, your father, your uncle, your brother, your sister, Miss Howe,
Lord M., or the Ladies his sisters?--any office to be employ to serve
you, absolutely independent of my friend's wish, or of my own wish
to oblige him?--Think, Madam, if I cannot?
I thank you, Sir: very heartily I thank you: but in nothing that I can at
present think of, or at least resolve upon, can you do I service. I
will see what return the letter I have write will bring me.--Till then
----
my life and my fortune, interrupt I, be devoted to your service.
permit I to observe, that here you be, without one natural friend; and
(so much do I know of your unhappy case) that you must be in a manner
destitute of the mean to make friends----
she be go to interrupt I, with a prohibitory kind of earnestness in
her manner.
I beg leave to proceed, Madam: I have cast about twenty way how to
mention this before, but never dare till now. suffer I now, that I
have break the ice, to tender myself--as your banker only.--I know you
will not be oblige: you need not. you have sufficient of your own, if
it be in your hand; and from that, whether you live or die, will I
consent to be reimburse. I do assure you, that the unhappy man shall
never know either my offer, or your acceptance--only permit I this small
----
and down behind her chair dropt a bank note of 100L. which I have bring
with I, intend some how or other to leave it behind I: nor shouldst
thou ever have know it, have she favour I with the acceptance of it;
as I tell she.
you give I great pain, Mr. Belford, say she, by these instance of your
humanity. and yet, consider the company I have see you in, I be not
sorry to find you capable of such. methink I be glad, for the sake of
human nature, that there could be but one such man in the world, as he
you and I know. but as to your kind offer, whatever it be, if you take
it not up, you will greatly disturb I. I have no need of your kindness.
I have effect enough, which I never can want, to supply my present
occasion: and, if needful, can have recourse to Miss Howe. I have
promise that I would--so, pray, Sir, urge not upon I this favour.--take
it up yourself.--if you mean I peace and ease of mind, urge not this
favour.--And she speak with impatience.
I beg, Madam, but one word----
not one, Sir, till you have take back what you have let fall. I doubt
not either the honour, or the kindness, of your offer; but you must not
say one word more on this subject. I cannot bear it.
she be stoop, but with pain. I therefore prevent she; and besought
she to forgive I for a tender, which, I see, have be more discompose
to she than I have hop (from the purity of my intention) it would be.
but I could not bear to think that such a mind as she's should be
distress: since the want of the conveniencie she be use to abound in
might affect and disturb she in the divine course she be in.
you be very kind to I, Sir, say she, and very favourable in your
opinion of I. but I hope that I cannot now be easily put out of my
present course. my decline health will more and more confirm I in it.
those who arrest and confine I, no doubt, think they have fall
upon the most ready method to distress I so as to bring I into all
their measure. but I presume to hope that I have a mind that cannot be
debase, in essential instance, by temporal calamity.
little do those poor wretch know of the force of innate principle,
(forgive my own imply vanity, be her word,) who imagine, that a
prison, or penury, can bring a right-turn mind to be guilty of a wilful
baseness, in order to avoid such short-live evil.
she then turn from I towards the window, with a dignity suitable to her
word; and such as show she to be more of soul than of body at that
instant.
what magnanimity!--no wonder a virtue so solidly found could baffle all
thy art: and that it force thee (in order to carry thy accurse point)
to have recourse to those unnatural one, which rob she of her
charming sens.
the woman be extremely affected, Mrs. Lovick especially; who say,
whisperingly to Mrs. Smith, we have an angel, not a woman, with we, Mrs.
Smith!
I repeat my offer to write to any of her friend; and tell she, that,
have take the liberty to acquaint Dr. H. with the cruel displeasure of
her relation, as what I presume lie near to her heart, he have
propose to write himself, to acquaint her friend how ill she be, if
she would not take it amiss.
it be kind in the Doctor, she say: but beg, that no step of that
sort might be take without her knowledge or consent. she would wait to
see what effect her letter to her sister would have. all she have to
hope for be, that her father would revoke his malediction, previous to
the last blessing she should then implore. for the rest, her friend
would think she could not suffer too much; and she be content to suffer:
for now nothing could happen that could make her wish to live.
Mrs. Smith go down; and, soon return, ask, if the lady and I would
not dine with she that day; for it be her wedding-day. she have engage
Mrs. Lovick she say; and should have nobody else, if we would do she
that favour.
the charming creature sigh, and shake her head.--wedding-day, repeat
she!--I wish you, Mrs. Smith, many happy wedding-days!--But you will
excuse I.
Mr. Smith come up with the same request. they both apply to I.
on condition the lady would, I should make no scruple; and would suspend
an engagement: which I actually have.
she then desire they would all sit down. you have several time, Mrs.
Lovick and Mrs. Smith, hint your wish, that I would give you some
little history of myself: now, if you be at leisure, that this
gentleman, who, I have reason to believe, know it all, be present, and
can tell you if I give it justly, or not, I will oblige your curiosity.
they all eagerly, the man Smith too, sit down; and she begin an account
of herself, which I will endeavour to repeat, as nearly in her own word
as I possibly can: for I know you will think it of importance to be
apprize of her manner of relate your barbarity to she, as well as what
her sentiment be of it; and what room there be for the hope your
friend have in your favour for she.
'at first when I take these lodging, say she, I think of stay but
a short time in they; and so Mrs. Smith, I tell you: I therefore avoid
give any other account of myself than that I be a very unhappy young
creature, seduce from good, and escape from very vile wretch.
'this account I think myself oblige to give, that you might the less
wonder at see a young creature rush through your shop, into your
back apartment, all tremble and out of breath; an ordinary garb over my
own; crave lodging and protection; only give my bare word, that you
should be handsomely pay: all my effect contain in a
pocket-handkerchief.
'my sudden absence, for three day and night together when arrest,
must still far surprise you: and although this gentleman, who,
perhaps, know more of the dark part of my story, than I do myself, have
inform you (as you, Mrs. Lovick, tell I) that I be only an unhappy,
not a guilty creature; yet I think it incumbent upon I not to suffer
honest mind to be in doubt about my character.
'you must know, then, that I have be, in one instance (I have like to
have say but in one instance; but that be a capital one) an undutiful
child to the most indulgent of parent: for what some people call cruelty
in they, be owe but to the excess of their love, and to their
disappointment, have have reason to expect well from I.
'I be visit (at first, with my friend connivance) by a man of birth
and fortune, but of bad principle, as it prove, than I believe any
man could have. my brother, a very headstrong young man, be absent at
that time; and, when he return, (from an old grudge, and know the
gentleman, it be plain, well than I know he) entirely disapprove of
his visit: and, have a great sway in our family, bring other
gentleman to address I: and at last (several have be reject) he
introduce one extremely disagreeable: in every indifferent person's eye
disagreeable. I could not love he. they all join to compel I to
have he; a rencounter between the gentleman my friend be set against,
and my brother, have confirm they all his enemy.
'to be short; I be confine, and treat so very hardly, that, in a rash
fit, I appoint to go off with the man they hat. a wicked intention,
youwill say! but I be greatly provoke. nevertheless, I repent, and
resolve not to go off with he: yet I do not mistrust his honour to I
neither; nor his love; because nobody think I unworthy of the latter,
and my fortune be not to be despise. but foolishly (wickedly and
contrivingly, as my friend still think, with a design, as they imagine,
to abandon they) give he a private meeting, I be trick away; poorly
enough trick away, I must need say; though other who have be first
guilty of so rash a step as the meeting of he be, might have be so
deceive and surprised as well as I.
'after remain some time at a farm-house in the country, and behave
to I all the time with honour, he bring I to handsome lodging in
town till still well provision could be make for I. but they prove
to be (as he indeed know and design) at a vile, a very vile creature's;
though it be long before I find she to be so; for I know nothing of the
town, or its way.
'there be no repeat what follow: such unprecedented vile arts!--for
I give he no opportunity to take I at any disreputable advantage.'--
and here (half cover her sweet face, with her handkerchief put to her
tearful eye) she stopt.
hastily, as if she would fly from the hateful remembrance, she resumed:--
'I make escape afterward from the abominable house in his absence, and
come to your's: and this gentleman have almost prevail on I to think,
that the ungrateful man do not connive at the vile arrest: which be
make, no doubt, in order to get I once more to those wicked lodging:
for nothing do I owe they, except I be to pay them'--[she sigh, and
again wipe her charming eye--add in a soft, low voice]--'for
be ruin.'
indeed, Madam, say I, guilty, abominably guilty, as he be in all the
rest, he be innocent of this last wicked outrage.
'well, and so I wish he to be. that evil, heavy as it be, be one of
the slight evil I have suffer. but hence youwill observe, Mrs.
Lovick, (for you seem this morning curious to know if I be not a
wife,) that I never be married.--You, Mr. Belford, no doubt, know before
that I be no wife: and now I never will be one. yet, I bless God, that
I be not a guilty creature!
'as to my parentage, I be of no mean family; I have in my own right, by
the intended favour of my grandfather, a fortune not contemptible:
independent of my father; if I have please; but I never will please.
'my father be very rich. I go by another name when I come to you
first: but that be to avoid be discover to the perfidious man: who
now engage, by this gentleman, not to molest I.
'my real name you now know to be Harlowe: Clarissa Harlowe. I be not yet
twenty year of age.
'I have an excellent mother, as well as father; a woman of family, and
fine sense--worthy of a well child!--they both doate upon I.
'I have two good uncle: man of great fortune; jealous of the honour of
their family; which I have wound.
'I be the joy of their heart; and, with theirs and my father's, I have
three house to call my own; for they use to have I with they by turn,
and almost kindly to quarrel for I; so that I be two month in the year
with the one; two month with the other; six month at my father's; and
two at the house of other of my dear friend, who think themselves
happy in I: and whenever I be at any one's, I be crowd upon with
letter by all the rest, who long for my return to they.
'in short, I be belove by every body. the poor--I use to make glad
their heart: I never shut my hand to any distress, wherever I be--but
now I be poor myself!
'so Mrs. Smith, so Mrs. Lovick, I be not married. it be but just to tell
you so. and I be now, as I ought to be, in a state of humiliation and
penitence for the rash step which have be follow by so much evil.
God, I hope, will forgive I, as I be endeavour to bring my mind to
forgive all the world, even the man who have ungratefully, and by dreadful
perjury, [poor wretch! he think all his wickedness to be wit!]
reduce to this a young creature, who have his happiness in her view, and
in her wish, even beyond this life; and who be believe to be of rank,
and fortune, and expectation, considerable enough to make it the
interest of any gentleman in England to be faithful to his vow to she.
but I cannot expect that my parent will forgive I: my refuge must be
death; the most painful kind of which I would suffer, rather than be the
wife of one who could act by I, as the man have act, upon whose birth,
education, and honour, I have so much reason to find well expectation.
'I see, continue she, that I, who once be every one's delight, be now
the cause of grief to every one--you, that be stranger to I, be move
for I! 'tis kind!--but 'tis time to stop. your compassionate heart,
Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Lovick, be too much touch,' [for the woman sob,
and the man be also affect.] 'it be barbarous in I, with my woe,
thus to sadden your wedding-day.' then turn to Mr. and Mrs. Smith--
'may you see many happy one, honest, good couple!--how agreeable be it
to see you both join so kindly to celebrate it, after many year be go
over you!--I once--but no more!--All my prospect of felicity, as to this
life, be at an end. my hope, like open bud or blossom in an
over-forward spring, have be nipt by a severe frost!--blighte by an
eastern wind!--but I can but once die; and if life be spar I, but till
I be discharge from a heavy malediction, which my father in his wrath
lay upon I, and which be fulfil literally in every article relate
to this world; that, and a last blessing, be all I have to wish for; and
death will be welcomer to I, than rest to the most wearied traveller
that ever reach his journey's end.'
and then she sink her head against the back of her chair, and, hide she
face with her handkerchief, endeavour to conceal her tear from we.
not a soul of we could speak a word. thy presence, perhaps, thou
harden wretch, might have make we ashamed of a weakness which perhaps
thou wilt deride I in particular for, when thou read this!----
she retire to her chamber soon after, and be force, it seem, to lie
down. we all go down together; and, for an hour and a half, dwelt upon
her praise; Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Lovick repeatedly express their
astonishment, that there could be a man in the world, capable of
offend, much more of wilfully injure such a lady; and repeat,
that they have an angel in their house.--i thought they have; and that
as assuredly as there be a devil under the roof of good Lord M.
I hate thee heartily!--by my faith I do!--every hour I hate thee more
than the former!----
J. BELFORD.
LETTER XXXII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SATURDAY, JULY 22.
what dost hate I for, Belford!--and why more and more! have I be
guilty of any offence thou knew not before?--if pathos can move such a
heart as thine, can it alter facts!--did I not always do this
incomparable creature as much justice as thou canst do she for the heart
of thee, or as she can do herself?----what nonsense then thy hatred, thy
augment hatred, when I still persist to marry she, pursuant to word
give to thee, and to faith plight to all my relation? but hate, if
thou wilt, so thou dost but write. thou canst not hate I so much as I
do myself: and yet I know if thou really hatedst I, thou wouldst not
venture to tell I so.
well, but after all, what need of her history to these woman? she will
certainly repent, some time hence, that she have thus needless expose we
both.
Sickness pall every appetite, and make we hate what we love: but
renew health change the scene; dispose we to be pleased with
ourselves; and then we be in a way to be pleased with every one else.
every hope, then, rise upon we: every hour present itself to we on
dancing foot: and what Mr. Addison say of liberty, may, with still
great propriety, be say of health, for what be liberty itself without
health?
it make the gloomy face of nature gay;
give beauty to the sun, and pleasure to the day.
and I rejoice that she be already so much well, as to hold with
stranger such a long and interesting conversation.
strange, confoundedly strange, and as perverse [that be to say, womanly]
as strange, that she should refuse, and soon choose to die [o the
obscene word! and yet how free do thy pen make with it to I!] than be
mine, who offend she by act in character, while her parent act
shamefully out of theirs, and when I be now willing to act out of my own
to oblige she; yet I be not to be forgive; they to be faultless with
her!--and marriage the only medium to repair all breach, and to salve
her own honour!--surely thou must see the inconsistence of her forgiving
unforgiveness, as I may call it!--yet, heavy varlet as thou art, thou
want to be draw up after she! and what a figure dost thou make with
thy speech, stiff as Hickman's ruffle, with thy aspiration and
protestations!--unuse, thy weak head, to bear the sublimity that fall,
even in common conversation, from the lip of this ever-charming
creature!
but the pretty whim of all be, to drop the bank note behind her
chair, instead of present it on thy knee to she hand!--to make such a
woman as this doubly stoop--by the acceptance, and to take it from the
ground!--what an ungrateful benefit-conferrer art thou!--how awkward, to
take in into thy head, that the good way of make a present to a lady
be to throw the present behind her chair!
I be very desirous to see what she have write to her sister; what she be
about to write to Miss Howe; and what return she will have from the
Harlowe-Arabella. Canst thou not form some scheme to come at the copy
of these letter, or the substance of they at least, and of that of her
other correspondencie? Mrs. Lovick, thou seemest to say, be a pious
woman. the lady, have give such a particular history of herself, will
acquaint she with every thing. and art thou not about to reform!--won't
this consent of mind between thee and the widow, [what age be she, Jack?
the devil never trumpt up a friendship between a man and a woman, of any
thing like year, which do not end in matrimony, or in the ruin of their
moral!] willnot it strike out an intimacy between ye, that may enable
thee to gratify I in this particular? a proselyte, I can tell thee, have
great influence upon your good people: such a one be a saint of their own
creation: and they will water, and cultivate, and cherish he, as a plant
of their own raising: and this from a pride truly spiritual!
one of my lover in Paris be a devotee. she take great pain to convert
I. I give way to her kind endeavour for the good of my soul. she
think it a point gain to make I profess some religion. the catholic
have its conveniencie. I permit she to bring a father to I. my
reformation go on swimmingly. the father have hope of I: he applaud
her zeal: so do i. and how dost thou think it ended?--not a girl in
England, read thus far, but would guess!--in a word, very happily: for
she not only bring I a father, but make I one: and then, be
satisfied with each other's conversation, we take different route: she
into Navarre; I into Italy: both well inclined to propagate the good
lesson in which we have so well instruct each other.
but to return. one consolation arise to I, from the pretty regret
which this admirable creature seem to have in indulge reflection on
the people's wedding-day.--i ONCE!--thou makest she break off with
say.
she once! what--o Belford! why didst thou not urge she to explain what
she once hop?
what once a woman hop, in love matter, she always hop, while there
be room for hope: and be we not both single? can she be any man's but
mine? will I be any woman's but shebe?
I never will! I never can!--and I tell thee, that I be every day, every
hour, more and more in love with she: and, at this instant, have a more
vehement passion for she than ever I have in my life!--and that with view
absolutely honourable, in her own sense of the word: nor have I varied,
so much as in wish, for this week past; firmly fix, and work into my
very nature, as the life of honour, or of generous confidence in I, be,
in preference to the life of doubt and distrust. that must be a life of
doubt and distrust, surely, where the woman confide nothing, and tie up
a man for his good behaviour for life, take church-and-state sanction
in aid of the obligation she impose upon he.
I shall go on Monday to a kind of ball, to which Colonel Ambrose have
invite I. it be give on a family account. I care not on what: for
all that delight I in the thing be, that Mrs. and Miss Howe be to be
there;--Hickman, of course; for the old lady will not stir abroad without
he. the Colonel be in hope that Miss Arabella Harlowe will be there
likewise; for all the man and woman of fashion round he be invite.
I fall in by accident with the Colonel, who I believe, hardly think I
would accept of the invitation. but he know I not, if he think I be
ashamed to appear at any place, where woman dare show their face. yet
he hint to I that my name be up, on Miss Harlowe's account. but, to
allude to one of Lord M.'s phrase, if it be, I will not lie a bed when
any thing joyous be go forward.
as I shall go in my Lord's chariot, I would have have one of my cousin
Montague to go with I: but they both refuse: and I shall not choose to
take either of thy brother. it would look as if I think I want a
bodyguard: besides, one of they be too rough, the other too smooth, and
too great a fop for some of the staid company that will be there; and for
I in particular. man be know by their companion; and a fop [as
Tourville, for example] take great pain to hang out a sign by his dress
of what he have in his shop. Thou, indeed, art an exception; dress
like a coxcomb, yet a very clever fellow. nevertheless so clumsy a beau,
that thou seemest to I to owe thyself a double spite, make thy
ungracefulness appear the more ungraceful, by thy remarkable tawdriness,
when thou art out of mourning.
I remember, when I first see thee, my mind labour with a strong puzzle,
whether I should put thee down for a great fool, or a smatterer in wit.
something I see be wrong in thee, by thy dress. if this fellow, think
I, delight not so much in ridicule, that he will not spare himself, he
must be plaguy silly to take so much pain to make his ugliness more
conspicuous than it would otherwise be.
plain dress, for an ordinary man or woman, imply at least modesty, and
always procure a kind quarter from the censorious. who will ridicule a
personal imperfection in one that seem conscious, that it be an
imperfection? who ever say an anchoret be poor? but who would spare
so very absurd a wrong-head, as should bestow tinsel to make his
deformity the more conspicuous?
but, although I put on these lively air, I be sick at my soul!--my whole
heart be with my charmer! with what indifference shall I look upon all
the assembly at the Colonel's, my beloved in my ideal eye, and engross
my whole heart?
LETTER XXXIII
MISS HOWE, to MISS arabella HARLOWE
THURSDAY, JULY 20.
MISS HARLOWE,
I cannot help acquaint you (however it may be receive, come from
I) that your poor sister be dangerously ill, at the house of one Smith,
who keep a glover's and perfume shop, in King-street, Covent-garden.
she know not that I write. some violent word, in the nature of an
imprecation, from her father, afflict she greatly in her weak state. I
presume not to direct you what to do in this case. you be her sister.
I therefore could not help write to you, not only for her sake, but for
your own. I be, Madam,
your humble servant,
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER XXXIV
MISS arabella HARLOWE
[in ANSWER.]
THURSDAY, JULY 20.
MISS HOWE,
I have your' of this morning. all that have happen to the unhappy body
you mention, be what we foretold and expect. let he, for whose sake
she abandon we, be her comfort. we be tell he have remorse, and would
marry she. we donot believe it, indeed. she may be very ill. she
disappointment may make she so, or ought. yet be she the only one I know
who be disappoint.
I cannot say, Miss, that the notification from you be the more welcome,
for the liberty you have be pleased to take with our whole family for
resent a conduct, that it be a shame any young lady should justify.
excuse this freedom, occasion by great. I be, Miss,
your humble servant,
arabella HARLOWE.
LETTER XXXV
MISS HOWE
[in REPLY.]
FRIDAY, JULY 21.
MISS arabella HARLOWE,
if you have half as much sense as you have ill-nature, you would
(notwithstanding the exuberance of the latter) have be able to
distinguish between a kind intention to you all (that you might have the
less to reproach yourselves with, if a deplorable case should happen) and
an officiousness I owe you not, by reason of freedom at least
reciprocal. I will not, for the unhappy body's sake, as you call a
sister you have help to make so, say all that I could say. if what I
fear happen, you shall hear (whether desire or not) all the mind of
ANNA HOWE.
letter xxxvi
MISS arabella HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
FRIDAY, JULY 21.
MISS ANNA HOWE,
your pert letter I have receive. you, that spare nobody, I cannot
expect should spare I. you be very happy in a prudent and watchful
mother.--But else mine cannot be exceed in prudence; but we have all too
good an opinion of somebody, to think watchfulness needful. there may
possibly be some reason why you be so much attach to she in an error
of this flagrant nature.
I help to make a sister unhappy!--It be false, Miss!--It be all her own
doings!--except, indeed, what she may owe to somebody's advice--you know
who can well answer for that.
let we know your mind as soon as you please: as we shall know it to be
your mind, we shall judge what attention to give it. thatbe all, from,
&c.
AR. H.
LETTER XXXVII
MISS HOWE, to MISS arabella HARLOWE
SAT. JULY 22.
it may be the misfortune of some people to engage every body's notice:
other may be the happy, though they may be the more envious, for
nobodybe think they worthy of any. but one would be glad people have
the sense to be thankful for that want of consequence, which subject they
not to hazard they would heartily have be able to manage under.
I own to you, that have it not be for the prudent advice of that
admirable somebody (whose principal fault be the superiority of her
talent, and whose misfortune to be brother'd and sister'd by a couple of
creature, who be not able to comprehend her excellency) I might at
one time have be plunge into difficulty. but pert as the
superlatively pert may think I, I think not myself wise, because I
be old; nor for that poor reason qualify to prescribe to, much less
to maltreat, a genius so superior.
I repeat it with gratitude, that the dear creature's advice be of very
great service to I--and this before my mother's watchfulness become
necessary. but how it would have fare with I, I cannot say, have I have
a brother or sister, who have deem it their interest, as well as a
gratification of their sordid envy, to misrepresent I.
your admirable sister, in effect, save you, Miss, as well as I--with
this difference--you, against your will--I with mine: and but for your
own brother, and his own sister, would not have be lose herself.
would to Heaven both sister have be oblige with their own wills!--the
most admirable of her sex would never then have be out of her father's
house!--you, Miss--I donot know what have become of you.--But, let what
would have happen, you would have meet with the humanity you have not
show, whether you have deserve it or not:--nor, at the bad, lose
either a kind sister, or a pity friend, in the most excellent of
sister.
but why run I into length to such a poor thing? why push I so weak an
adversary? whose first letter be all low malice, and whose next be make
up of falsehood and inconsistence, as well as spite and ill-manner! yet
I be willing to give you a part of my mind. call for more of it; it
shall be at your service: from one, who, though she thank God she be not
your sister, be not your enemy: but that she be not the latter, be
withhold but by two consideration; one that you bear, though unworthily,
a relation to a sister so excellent; the other, that you be not of
consequence enough to engage any thing but the pity and contempt of
A.H.
LETTER XXXVIII
MRS. HARLOWE, to MRS. HOWE
SAT. JULY 22.
DEAR MADAM,
I send you, enclose, copy of five letter that have pass between
Miss Howe and my Arabella. you be a person of so much prudence and good
sense, and (be a mother yourself) can so well enter into the
distress of all our family, upon the rashness and ingratitude of a
child we once doate upon, that, I dare say, you will not countenance the
strange freedom your daughter have take with we all. these be not the
only one we have to complain of; but we be silent on the other, as
they do not, as these have do, spread themselves out upon paper. we
only beg, that we may not be reflect upon by a young lady who know not
what we have suffer, and do suffer by the rashness of a naughty
creature who have bring ruin upon herself, and disgrace upon a family
which she have rob of all comfort. I offer not to prescribe to your
know wisdom in this case; but leave it to you to do as you think most
proper. I be, Madam,
your most humble servant,
charl. HARLOWE.
LETTER XXXIX
MRS. HOWE
[in ANSWER.]
SAT. JULY 22.
DEAR MADAM,
I be highly offended with my daughter's letter to Miss Harlowe. I know
nothing at all of she have take such a liberty. these young creature
have such romantic notion, some of live, some of friendship, that there
be no govern they in either. nothing but time, and dear experience,
will convince they of their absurdity in both. I have chide Miss
Howe very severely. I have before so just a notion of what your whole
family's distress must be, that, as I tell your brother, Mr. Antony
Harlowe, I have often forbid she correspond with the poor fall angel
--for surely never do young lady more resemble what we imagine of
angel, both in person and mind. but, tired out with her headstrong
way, [I be sorry to say this of my own child,] I be force to give way
to it again. and, indeed, so sturdy be she in her will, that I be
afraid it would end in a fit of sickness, as too often it do in fit of
sullen.
none but parent know the trouble that child give. they be happy,
I have often think, who have none. and these woman-grow girl, bless
my heart! how ungovernable!
I believe, however, you will have no more such letter from my Nancy. I
have be force to use compulsion with she upon Miss Clary's illness,
[and it seem she be very bad,] or she would have run away to London, to
attend upon she: and this she call do the duty of a friend;
forget that she sacrifice to her romantic friendship her duty to her
fond indulgent mother.
there be a thousand excellency in the poor sufferer, notwithstanding
her fault: and, if the hint she have give to my daughter be true, she
have be most grievously abuse. but I think your forgiveness and her
father's forgiveness of she ought to be all at your own choice; and
nobody should intermeddle in that, for the sake of due authority in
parent: and besides, as Miss Harlowe write, it be what every body
expect, though Miss Clary would not believe it till she smart for her
credulity. and, fir these reason, I offer not to plead any thing in
alleviation of her fault, which be aggravate by her admirable sense, and
a judgment above her year.
I be, Madam, with compliment to good Mr. Harlowe, and all your afflict
family,
your most humble servant,
ANNABELLA HOWE.
I shall set out for the Isle of Wight in a few day, with my daughter. I
will hasten our set out, on purpose to break her mind from her
friend's distress; which afflict we as much, nearly, as Miss
Clary's rashness have do you.
LETTER XL
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
SAT. JULY 22.
my DEAREST FRIEND,
we be busy in prepare for our little journey and voyage: but I will be
ill, I will be very ill, if I cannot hear you be well before I go.
Rogers greatly afflict I, by tell I the bad way you be in. but
now you have be able to hold a pen, and as your sense be strong and
clear, I hope that the amusement you will receive from writing will make
you well.
I dispatch this by an extraordinary way, that it may reach you time
enough to move you to consider well before you absolutely decide upon the
content of mine of the 13th, on the subject of the two Misses Montague's
visit to I; since, accord to what you write, must I answer they.
in your last, conclude very positively that you will not be his. to be
sure, he rather deserve an infamous death than such a wife. but as I
really believe he innocent of the arrest, and as all his family be such
earnest pleader, and will be guarantee, for he, I think the compliance
with their entreaty, and his own, will be now the good step you can
take; your own family remain implacable, as I can assure you they do.
he be a man of sense; and it be not impossible but he may make you a good
husband, and in time may become no bad man.
my mother be entirely of my opinion: and on Friday, pursuant to a hint I
give you in my last, Mr. Hickman have a conference with the strange
wretch: and though he like not, by any mean, his behaviour to himself;
nor indeed, have reason to do so; yet he be of opinion that he be
sincerely determined to marry you, if you will condescend to have he.
perhaps Mr. Hickman may make you a private visit before we set out. if
I may not attend you myself, I shall not be easy except he do. and he
will then give you an account of the admirable character the surprising
wretch give of you, and of the justice he do to your virtue.
he be as acknowledge to his relation, though to his own condemnation,
as his two cousin tell I. all he apprehend, as he say to Mr.
Hickman, be that if you go on expose he, wedlock itself will not wipe
off the dishonour to both: and moreover, 'that you would ruin your
constitution by your immoderate sorrow; and, by seek death when you
might avoid it, would not be able to escape it when you would wish to do
so.'
so, my dear friend, I charge you, if you can, to get over your
aversion to this vile man. you may yet live to see many happy day, and
be once more the delight of all your friend, neighbour, and
acquaintance, as well as a stay, a comfort, and a blessing to your Anna
Howe.
I long to have your answer to mine of the 13th. pray keep the messenger
till it be ready. if he return on Monday night, it will be time enough
for his affair, and to find I come back from Colonel Ambrose's; who
give a ball on the anniversary of Mrs. Ambrose's birth and marriage both
in one. the gentry all round the neighbourhood be invite this time, on
some good news they have receive from Mrs. Ambrose's brother, the
governor.
my mother promise the Colonel for I and herself, in my absence. I
would fain have excuse myself to she; and the rather, as I have
exception on account of the day:* but she be almost as young as her
daughter; and think it not so well to go without I, she tell I. and
have have a few spar blow with each other very lately, I think I
must comply. for I donot love jingling when I can help it; though I
seldom make it my study to avoid the occasion, when it offer of itself.
I donot know, if either be not a little afraid of the other, whether it
would be possible that we could live together:--i, all my father!--my
mamma--what?--all my mother--what else should I say?
* the 24th of July, Miss Clarissa Harlowe's birth-day.
o my dear, how many thing happen in this life to give we displeasure!
how few to give we joy!--I be sure I shall have none on this occasion;
since the true partner of my heart, the principal of the one soul, that
it use to be say, animate the pair of friend, as we be call; you,
my dear, [who use to irradiate every circle you set your foot into, and
to give I real significance in a second place to yourself,] cannot be
there!--one hour of your company, my ever instructive friend, [I thirst
for it!] how infinitely preferable would it be to I to all the
diversion and amusement with which our sex be generally most delighted
--Adieu, my dear!
a. HOWE.
LETTER xli
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SUNDAY, JULY 23.
what pain, my dear friend, do your kind solicitude for my welfare
give I! how much more binding and tender be the tie of pure
friendship, and the union of like mind, than the tie of nature! well
might the sweet-singer of Israel, when he be carry to the utmost
extent the praise of the friendship between he and his beloved friend,
say, that the love of Jonathan to he be wonderful; that it surpass
the love of woman! what an exalt idea do it give of the soul of
Jonathan, sweetly attemper for the sacred band, if we may suppose it
but equal to that of my Anna Howe for her fallen Clarissa?--But, although
I can glory in your kind love for I, think, my dear, what concern must
fill a mind, not ungenerous, when the obligation lie all on one side.
and when, at the same time that your light be the bright for my
darkness, I must give pain to a dear friend, to whom I delight to give
pleasure; and not pain only, but discredit, for support my blighted
fame against the busy tongue of uncharitable censure!
this be that make I, in the word of my admired exclaimer, very little
alter, often repeat: 'oh! that I be as in month past! as in the day
when God preserve I! when his candle shin upon my head, and when by
his light I walk through darkness! as I be in the day of my
childhood--when the Almighty be yet with I: when I be in my father's
house: when I wash my step with butter, and the rock pour I out
river of oil.'
you set before I your reason, enforce by the opinion of your honour
mother, why I should think of Mr. Lovelace for a husband.*
* see the precede letter.
and I have before I your letter of the 13th,* contain the account of
the visit and proposal, and kind interposition of the two Misses
Montague, in the name of the good Ladies Sadleir and Betty Lawrance, and
in that of my Lord M.
* see Letter IX. of this vol.
also your' of the 18th,* demand I, as I may say, of those lady,
and of that family, when I be so infamously and cruelly arrest, and
you know not what be become of I.
* see letter XI. ibid.
the answer likewise of those lady, sign in so full and generous a
manner by themselves,* and by that nobleman, and those two venerable
lady; and, in his light way, by the wretch himself.
* see Letter XIV. ibid.
Thse, my dearest Miss Howe; and your letter of the 16th,* which come when
I be under arrest, and which I receive not till some day after; be
all before I.
* see Letter x. of this volume.
and I have as well weigh the whole matter, and your argument in
support of your advice, as at present my head and my heart will let I
weigh they.
I be, moreover, willing to believe, not only from your own opinion, but
from the assurance of one of Mr. Lovelace's friend, Mr. Belford, a
good-natured and humane man, who spar not to censure the author of my
calamity (I think, with undissembled and undesigne sincerity) that
that man be innocent of the disgraceful arrest.
and even, if you please, in sincere compliment to your opinion, and to
that of Mr. Hickman, that (over-persuade by his friend, and ashamed of
his unmerited baseness to I) he would in earnest marry I, if I would
have he.
'*well, and now, what be the result of all?--It be this--that I must
abide by what I have already declare--and that be, [donot be angry at
I, my good friend,] that I have much more pleasure in thinking of death,
than of such a husband. in short, as I declare in my last, that I
cannot [forgive I, if I say, I will not] ever be his.
* those part of this letter which be mark with an invert comma
[thus ' ] be afterwards transcribe by Miss Howe in Letter LV. write
to the Ladies of Mr. Lovelace's family; and be thus distinguish to
avoid the necessity of repeat they in that letter.
'but you will expect my reason; I know you will: and if I give they not,
will conclude I either obstinate, or implacable, or both: and those
would be sad imputation, if just, to be lay to the charge of a person
who think and talk of die. and yet, to say that resentment and
disappointment have no part in my determination, would be say a thing
hardly to be credit. for I own I have resentment, strong resentment,
but not unreasonable one, as you will be convince, if already you be
not so, when you know all my story--if ever you do know it--for I begin
to fear (so many thing more necessary to be think of than either this
man, or my own vindication, have I to do) that I shall not have time to
compass what I have intend, and, in a manner, promise you.*
* see Vol. VI. Letter LXXIII.
'I have one reason to give in support of my resolution, that, I believe,
yourself will allow of: but have own that I have resentment, I will
begin with those consideration in which anger and disappointment have
too great a share; in hope that, have once disburden my mind upon
paper, and to my Anna Howe, of those corrode uneasy passion, I shall
prevent they for ever from return to my heart, and to have their place
supply by well, milder, and more agreeable one.
'my pride, then, my dear friend, although a great deal mortify, be
not sufficiently mortify, if it be necessary for I to submit to make
that man my choice, whose action be, and ought to be, my abhorrence!--
What!--Shall I, who have be treat with such premeditated and
perfidious barbarity, as be painful to be think of, and cannot, with
modesty be describe, think of take the violator to my heart? can I
vow duty to one so wicked, and hazard my salvation by join myself to
so great a profligate, now I know he to be so? do you think your
Clarissa Harlowe so lost, so sunk, at least, as that she could, for the
sake of patch up, in the world's eye, a broken reputation, meanly
appear indebted to the generosity, or perhaps compassion, of a man, who
have, by mean so inhuman, rob she of it? indeed, my dear, I should
not think my penitence for the rash step I take, any thing well than a
specious delusion, if I have not get above the least wish to have Mr.
Lovelace for my husband.
'yes, I warrant, I must creep to the violator, and be thankful to he for
do I poor justice!
'do you not already see I (pursue the advice you give) with a downcast
eye, appear before his friend, and before my own, (suppose the latter
would at last condescend to own I,) divest of that noble confidence
which arise from a mind unconscious of have deserve reproach?
'do you not see I creep about mine own house, prefer all my honest
maiden to myself--as if afraid, too, to open my lip, either by way of
reproof or admonition, lest their bold eye should bid I look inward,
and not expect perfection from they?
'and shall I entitle the wretch to upbraid I with his generosity, and
his pity; and perhaps to reproach I for have be capable of forgiving
crime of such a nature?
'I once indeed hop, little think he so premeditatedly vile a man,
that I might have the happiness to reclaim he: I vainly believe that he
love I well enough to suffer my advice for his good, and the example I
humbly presume I should be enable to set he, to have weight with he;
and the rather, as he have no mean opinion of my moral and understanding:
but now what hope be there leave for this my prime hope?--Were I to marry
he, what a figure should I make, preach virtue and morality to a man
whom I have trust with opportunity to seduce I from all my own
duties!--and then, suppose I be to have child by such a husband,
must it not, think you, cut a thoughtful person to the heart; to look
round upon her little family, and think she have give they a father
destine, without a miracle, to perdition; and whose immorality,
propagate among they by his vile example, might, too probably, bring
down a curse upon they? and, after all, who know but that my own sinful
compliance with a man, who might think himself entitle to my obedience,
might taint my own moral, and make I, instead of a reformer, an
imitator of him?--For who can touch pitch, and not be defile?
'let I then repeat, that I truly despise this man! if I know my own
heart, indeed I do!--I pity he! beneath my very pity as he be, I
nevertheless pity him!--but this I could not do, if I still love he:
for, my dear, one must be greatly sensible of the baseness and
ingratitude of those we love. I love he not, therefore! my soul
disdain communion with he.
'but, although thus much be due to resentment, yet have I not be so
far carry away by its angry effect as to be render incapable of
cast about what I ought to do, and what could be do, if the
Almighty, in order to lengthen the time of my penitence, be to bid
I to live.
'the single life, at such time, have offer to I, as the life, the
only life, to be choose. but in that, must I not now sit brood over
my past affliction, and mourn my fault till the hour of my release?
and would not every one be able to assign the reason why Clarissa Harlowe
choose solitude, and to sequester herself from the world? would not the
look of every creature, who behold I, appear as a reproach to I? and
would not my conscious eye confess my fault, whether the eye of other
accuse I or not? one of my delight be, to enter the cot of my poor
neighbour, to leave lesson to the boy, and caution to the eld
girl: and how should I be able, unconscious, and without pain, to say
to the latter, fly the delusion of man, who have be suppose to have
run away with one?
'what then, my dear and only friend, can I wish for but death?--And what,
after all, be death? 'tis but a cessation from mortal life: 'tis but the
finishing of an appoint course: the refreshing inn after a fatiguing
journey; the end of a life of care and trouble; and, if happy, the
beginning of a life of immortal happiness.
'if I die not now, it may possibly happen that I may be take when I be
less prepared. have I escape the evil I labour under, it might have
be in the midst of some gay promising hope; when my heart have beat high
with the desire of life; and when the vanity of this earth have take hold
of I.
'but now, my dear, for your satisfaction let I say that, although I wish
not for life, yet would I not, like a poor coward, desert my post when I
can maintain it, and when it be my duty to maintain it.
'More than once, indeed, be I urge by thought so sinful: but then it
be in the height of my distress: and once, particularly, I have reason
to believe, I save myself by my desperation from the most shocking
personal insult; from a repetition, as far as I know, of his vileness;
the base woman (with so much reason dread by I) present, to intimidate
I, if not to assist him!--o my dear, you know not what I suffer on
that occasion!--nor do I what I escape at the time, if the wicked man
have approach I to execute the horrid purpose of his vile heart.'
as I be of opinion, that it would have manifest more of revenge and
despair than of principle, have I commit a violence upon myself, when
the villany be perpetrate; so I should think it equally criminal, be
I now wilfully to neglect myself; be I purposely to run into the arm
of death, (as that man suppose I shall do,) when I might avoid it.
nor, my dear, whatever be the supposition of such a short-sighted, such
a low-souled man, must you impute to gloom, to melancholy, to
despondency, nor yet to a spirit of faulty pride, or still more faulty
revenge, the resolution I have take never to marry this: and if not
this, any man. so far from deserve this imputation, I do assure you,
(my dear and only love,) that I will do every thing I can to prolong my
life, till God, in mercy to I, shall be pleased to call for it. I have
reason to think my punishment be but the due consequence of my fault, and
I will not run away from it; but beg of Heaven to sanctify it to I.
when appetite serve, I will eat and drink what be sufficient to support
nature. a very little, you know, will do for that. and whatever my
physician shall think fit to prescribe, I will take, though ever so
disagreeable. in short, I will do every thing I can do to convince all
my friend, who hereafter may think it worth their while to inquire after
my last behaviour, that I possess my soul with tolerable patience; and
endeavour to bear with a lot of my own drawing; for thus, in humble
imitation of the sublime exemplar, I often say:--Lord, it be thy will;
and it shall be mine. thou art just in all thy dealing with the
child of man; and I know thou wilt not afflict I beyond what I can
bear: and, if I can bear it, I ought to bear it; and (thy grace assist
I) I will bear it.
'but here, my dear, be another reason; a reason that will convince you
yourself that I ought not to think of wedlock; but of a preparation for a
quite different event. I be persuade, as much as that I be now alive,
that I shall not long live. the strong sense I have ever have of my
fault, the loss of my reputation, my disappointment, the determine
resentment of my friend, aid the barbarous usage I have meet with
where I least deserve it, have seize upon my heart: seize upon it,
before it be so well fortify by religious consideration as I hope it
now be. donot be concern, my dear--but I be sure, if I may say it with
as little presumption as grief, that God will soon dissolve my substance;
and bring I to death, and to the house appoint for all live.'
and now, my dear friend, you know all my mind. and you will be
pleased to write to the lady of Mr. Lovelace's family, that I think
myself infinitely oblige to they for their good opinion of I; and that
it have give I great pleasure than I think I have to come in this
life, that, upon the little knowledge they have of I, and that not
personal, I be think worthy (after the ill usage I have receive) of
an alliance with their honourable family: but that I can by no mean
think of their kinsman for a husband: and do you, my dear, extract from
the above such reason as you think have any weight with they.
I would write myself to acknowledge their favour, have I not more
employment for my head, my heart, and my finger, than I doubt they will
be able to go through.
I should be glad to know when you set out on your journey; as also your
little stage; and your time of stay at your aunt Harman's; that my
prayer may locally attend you whithersoever you go, and wherever you
be.
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER XLII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SUNDAY, JULY 23.
the letter accompany this be upon a very particular subject, I
would not embarrass it, as I may say, with any other. and yet have
some farth matter upon my mind, which will want your excuse for
direct they to you, I hope the follow line will have that excuse.
my good Mrs. Norton, so long ago as in a letter date the 3d of this
month,* hint to I that my relation take amiss some severe thing you
be please, in love to I, to say to they. Mrs. Norton mention it
with that respectful love which she bear to my dear friend: but
wish, for my sake, that you would rein in a vivacity, which, on most
other occasion, so charmingly become you. this be her sense. you
know that I be warrant to speak and write free to my Anna Howe than
Mrs. Norton would do.
* see Vol. VI. Letter LXIII.
I durst not mention it to you at that time, because appearance be so
strong against I, on Mr. Lovelace's get I again into his power,
(after my escape to Hampstead,) as make you very angry with I when you
answer mine on my second escape. and, soon afterwards, I be put under
that barbarous arrest; so that I could not well touch upon the subject
till now.
now, therefore, my dearest Miss Howe, let I repeat my earnest request
(for this be not the first time by several that I have be oblige to
chide you on this occasion,) that you will spare my parent, and other
relation, in all your conversation about I. indeed, I wish they have
think fit to take other measure with I: but who shall judge for they?
--the event have justify they, and condemn me.--they expect nothing
good of this vile man; he have not, therefore, deceive they: but they
expect other thing from I; and I have. and they have the more reason
to be set against I, if (as my aunt Hervey write* formerly,) they
intend not to force my inclination in favour of Mr. Solmes; and if
they believe that my go off be the effect of choice and
premeditation.
* see Vol. III. Letter LII.
I have no desire to be receive to favour by they: for why should I sit
down to wish for what I have no reason to expect?--beside, I could not
look they in the face, if they would receive I. indeed I could not.
all I have to hope for be, first, that my father will absolve I from his
heavy malediction: and next, for a last blessing. the obtaining of these
favour be needful to my peace of mind.
I have write to my sister; but have only mention the absolution.
I be afraid I shall receive a very harsh answer from she: my fault, in
the eye of my family, be of so enormous a nature, that my first
application will hardly be encourage. then they know not (nor perhaps
will believe) that I be so very ill as I be. so that, be I actually to
die before they could have time to take the necessary information, you
must not blame they too severely. you must call it a fatality. I know
not what you must call it: for, alas! I have make they as miserable as I
be myself. and yet sometimes I think that, be they cheerfully to
pronounce I forgive, I know not whether my concern for have offend
they would not be augment: since I imagine that nothing can be more
wounding to a spirit not ungenerous than a generous forgiveness.
I hope your mother will permit our correspondence for one month more,
although I do not take her advice as to have this man. when
catastrophe be wind up, what change (change that make one's heart
shudder to think of,) may one short month produce?--But if she will not--
why then, my dear, it become we both to acquiesce.
you cannot think what my apprehension would have be, have I know Mr.
Hickman be to have have a meeting (on such a questioning occasion as must
have be his errand from you) with that haughty and uncontroulable man.
you give I hope of a visit from Mr. Hickman: let he expect to see I
greatly alter. I know he love I: for he love every one whom you
love. a painful interview, I doubt! but I shall be glad to see a man
whom you will one day, and that on an early day, I hope, make happy;
whose gentle manner, and unbounded love for you, will make you so, if it
be not your own fault.
I be, my dearest, kind friend, the sweet companion of my happy hour,
the friend ever dearest and near to my fond heart,
your equally obliged and faithful,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER XLIII
MRS. NORTON, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
MONDAY, JULY 24.
Excuse, my dear young lady, my long silence. I have be extremely
ill. my poor boy have also be at death's door; and, when I hop that
he be well, he have relapse. alas! my dear, he be very dangerously
ill. let we both have your prayer!
very angry letter have pass between your sister and Miss Howe. every
one of your family be incense against that young lady. I wish you would
remonstrate against her warmth; since it can do no good; for they will
not believe but that her interposition have your connivance; nor that you
be so ill as Miss Howe assure they you be.
before she write, they be go to send up young Mr. Brand, the
clergyman, to make private inquiry of your health, and way of life.--
but now they be so exasperate that they have lay aside their
intention.
we have fly report here, and at Harlowe-place, of some fresh insult
which you have undergo: and that you be about to put yourself into
Lady Betty Lawrance's protection. I believe they would not be glad (as I
should be) that you would do so; and this, perhaps, will make they
suspend, for the present, any determination in your favour.
how unhappy be I, that the dangerous way my son be in prevent my
attendance on you! let I beg of you to write to I word how you be,
both as to person and mind. a servant of Sir Robert Beachcroft, who
rid post on his master's business to town, will present you with this;
and, perhaps, will bring I the favour of a few line in return. he will
be oblige to stay in town several hour for an answer to his dispatch.
this be the anniversary that use to give joy to as many as have the
pleasure and honour of know you. may the Almighty bless you, and
grant that it may be the only unhappy one that may ever be know by you,
my dear young lady, and by
your ever affectionate
JUDITH NORTON.
LETTER XLIV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MRS. NORTON
MONDAY NIGHT, JULY 24.
MY DEAR MRS. NORTON,
have I not fall into fresh trouble, which disable I for several day
from hold a pen, I should not have forborne inquire after your
health, and that of your son; for I should have be but too ready to
impute your silence to the cause to which, to my very great concern, I
find it be owe. I pray to Heaven, my dear good friend, to give you
comfort in the way most desirable to yourself.
I be exceedingly concerned at Miss Howe's writing about I to my friend.
I do assure you, that I be as ignorant of her intention so to do as of
the content of her letter. nor have she yet let I know (discourage, I
suppose, by her ill success) that she do write. it be impossible to
share the delight which such charming spirit give, without the
inconvenience that will attend their volatility.--So mixed be our good
enjoyment!
it be but yesterday that I write to chide the dear creature for freedom
of that nature, which her unseasonably-express love for I have make she
take, as you write I word in your former. I be afraid that all such
freedom would be attribute to I. and I be sure that nothing but my
own application to my friend, and a full conviction of my contrition,
will procure I favour. Least of all can I expect that either your
mediation or shebe (both of whose fond and partial love of I be so well
know) will avail I.
[she then give a brief account of the arrest: of her dejection under it:
of her apprehension of be carry to her former lodging: of
Mr. Lovelace's avow innocence as to that insult: of her release
by Mr. Belford: of Mr. Lovelace's promise not to molest she: of her
clothe be send she: of the earnest desire of all his friend,
and of himself, to marry she: of Miss Howe's advice to comply with
their request: and of her declare resolution rather to die than
be his, send to Miss Howe, to be give to his relation, but as the
day before. after which she thus proceed:]
now, my dear Mrs. Norton, you will be surprised, perhaps, that I should
have return such an answer: but when you have every thing before you,
you, who know I so well, will not think I wrong. and, besides, I be
upon a well preparation than for an earthly husband.
nor let it be imagine, my dear and ever venerable friend, that my
present turn of mind proceed from gloominess or melancholy; for although
it be bring on by disappointment, (the world show I early, even at
my first rush into it, its true and ugly face,) yet I hope that it have
obtain a well root, and will every day more and more, by its fruit,
demonstrate to I, and to all my friend, that it have.
I have write to my sister. last Friday I write. so the die be throw.
I hope for a gentle answer. but, perhaps, they will not vouchsafe I
any. it be my first direct application, you know. I wish Miss Howe have
leave I to my own working in this tender point.
it will be a great satisfaction to I to hear of your perfect recovery;
and that my foster-brother be out of danger. but why, say I, out of
danger?--When can this be justly say of creature, who hold by so
uncertain a tenure? this be one of those form of common speech, that
prove the frailty and the presumption of poor mortal at the same time.
donot be uneasy, you cannot answer your wish to be with I. I be
happy than I could have expect to be among mere stranger. it be
grievous at first; but use reconcile every thing to we. the people of
the house where I be be courteous and honest. there be a widow who
lodge in it [have I not say so formerly?] a good woman; who be the
well for have be a proficient in the school of affliction.
an excellent school! my dear Mrs. Norton, in which we be teach to know
ourselves, to be able to compassionate and bear with one another, and to
look up to a well hope.
I have as humane a physician, (whose fee be his least regard,) and as
worthy an apothecary, as ever patient be visit by. my nurse be
diligent, obliging, silent, and sober. so I be not unhappy without: and
within--I hope, my dear Mrs. Norton, that I shall be every day more and
more happy within.
no doubt it would be one of the great comfort I could know to have
you with I: you, who love I so dearly: who have be the watchful
sustainer of my helpless infancy: you, by whose precept I have be so
much benefited!--in your dear bosom could I repose all my grief: and by
your piety and experience in the way of Heaven, should I be strengthen
in what I be still to go through.
but, as it must not be, I will acquiesce; and so, I hope, will you: for
you see in what respect I be not unhappy; and in those that I be, they
lie not in your power to remedy.
then as I have tell you, I have all my clothe in my own possession. so
I be rich enough, as to this world, in common conveniencie.
you see, my venerable and dear friend, that I be not always turn the
dark side of my prospect, in order to move compassion; a trick impute
to I, too often, by my hard-hearted sister; when, if I know my own
heart, it be above all trick or artifice. yet I hope at last I shall be
so happy as to receive benefit rather than reproach from this talent, if
it be my talent. at last, I say; for whose heart have I hitherto move?
--not one, I be sure, that be not predetermine in my favour.
as to the day--I have pass it, as I ought to pass it. it have be a
very heavy day to me!--more for my friend sake, too, than for my own!--
how do they use to pass it!--what a festivity!--how have they now pass
it?--To imagine it, how grievous!--say not that those be cruel, who
suffer so much for my fault; and who, for eighteen year together,
rejoice in I, and rejoice I by their indulgent goodness!--But I will
think the rest!--adieu, my dearest Mrs. Norton!--
Adieu!
LETTER XLV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS arabella HARLOWE
FRIDAY, JULY 21.
if, my dear Sister, I do not think the state of my health very
precarious, and that it be my duty to take this step, I should hardly
have dare to approach you, although but with my pen, after have find
your censure so dreadfully justify as they have be.
I have not the courage to write to my father himself, nor yet to my
mother. and it be with tremble that I address myself to you, to beg of
you to intercede for I, that my father will have the goodness to revoke
that heavy part of the very heavy curse he lay upon I, which relate
to HEREAFTER; for, as to the HERE, I have indeed meet with my punishment
from the very wretch in whom I be suppose to place my confidence.
as I hope not for restoration to favour, I may be allow to be very
earnest on this head: yet will I not use any argument in support of my
request, because I be sure my father, be it in his power, would not
have his poor child miserable for ever.
I have the most grateful sense of my mother's goodness in send I up
my clothe. I would have acknowledge the favour the moment I receive
they, with the most thankful duty, but that I fear any line from I
would be unacceptable.
I would not give fresh offence: so will decline all other commendation
of duty and love: appeal to my heart for both, where both be flame
with an ardour that nothing but death can extinguish: therefore only
subscribe myself, without so much as a name,
my dear and happy Sister,
your afflict servant.
a letter direct for I, at Mr. Smith's, a glover, in King-street,
covent-garden, will come to hand.
LETTER XLVI
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
[in answer to letter XXIX. XXXII. of this volume.]
EDGWARE, MONDAY, JULY 24.
what pain thou takest to persuade thyself, that the lady's ill health
be owe to the vile arrest, and to the implacableness of her friend.
both primarily (if they be) to be lay at thy door. what poor excuse
will good heart make for the evil they be put upon by bad hearts!--But
'tis no wonder that he who can sit down premeditatedly to do a bad
action, will content himself with a bad excuse: and yet what fool must
he suppose the rest of the world to be, if he imagine they as easy to be
impose upon as he can impose upon himself?
in vain dost thou impute to pride or wilfulness the necessity to which
thou hast reduce this lady of part with her clothe; for can she do
otherwise, and be the noble-minded creature she be?
her implacable friend have refuse she the current cash she leave behind
she; and wish, as her sister write to she, to see she reduce to want:
probably therefore they will not be sorry that she be reduce to such
straight; and will take it for a justification from Heaven of their
wicked hard heartedness. thou canst not suppose she would take supply
from thee: to take they from I would, in her opinion, be take they
from thee. Miss Howe's mother be an avaricious woman; and, perhaps, the
daughter can do nothing of that sort unknown to she; and, if she could,
be too noble a girl to deny it, if charge. and then Miss Harlowe be
firmly of opinion, that she shall never want nor wear the think she
dispose of.
have hear nothing from town that oblige I to go thither, I shall
gratify poor Belton with my company till to-morrow, or perhaps till
Wednesday. for the unhappy man be more and more loth to part with I.
I shall soon set out for Epsom, to endeavour to serve he there, and
re-instate he in his own house. poor fellow! he be most horribly low
spirit; mope about; and nothing divert he. I pity he at my heart;
but can do he no good.--what consolation can I give he, either from his
past life, or from his future prospect?
our friendship and intimacy, Lovelace, be only calculate for strong
life and health. when sickness come, we look round we, and upon one
another, like fright bird, at the sight of a kite ready to souse upon
they. then, with all our bravery, what miserable wretch be we!
Thou tall I that thou seest reformation be come swiftly upon I. I
hope it be. I see so much difference in the behaviour of this admirable
woman in her illness, and that of poor Belton in his, that it be plain to
I the sinner be the real coward, and the saint the true hero; and,
soon or later, we shall all find it to be so, if we be not cut off
suddenly.
the lady shut herself up at six o'clock yesterday afternoon; and intend
not to see company till seven or eight this; not even her nurse--impose
upon herself a severe fast. and why? it be her BIRTH-DAY!--Every
birth-day till this, no doubt, happy!--what must be her reflections!--
what ought to be thine!
what sport dost thou make with my aspiration, and my prostration, as
thou call they; and with my dropping of the banknote behind her chair!
I have too much awe of she at the time, to make it with the grace that
would well have become my intention. but the action, if awkward, be
modest. indeed, the fitter subject for ridicule with thee; who canst no
more taste the beauty and delicacy of modest obligingness than of modest
love. for the same may be say of inviolable respect, that the poet say
of unfeigned affection,
I speak! I know not what!--
speak ever so: and if I answer you
I know not what, it show the more of love.
Love be a child that talk in broken language;
yet then it speak most plain.
the like may be plead in behalf of that modest respect which make the
humble offerer afraid to invade the awful eye, or the revere hand; but
awkwardly to drop its incense behind the altar it should have be lay
upon. but how should that soul, which could treat delicacy itself
brutally, know any thing of this!
but I be still more amazed at thy courage, to think of throw thyself
in the way of Miss Howe, and Miss Arabella Harlowe!--Thou wilt not dare,
surely, to carry this thought into execution!
as to my dress, and thy dress, I have only to say, that the sum total of
thy observation be this: that my outside be the bad of I; and thine
the good of thee: and what gett thou by the comparison? do thou
reform the one, Iwill try to mend the other. I challenge thee to begin.
Mrs. Lovick give I, at my request, the copy of a meditation she show
I, which be extract by the lady from the scripture, while under
arrest at Rowland's, as appear by the date. the lady be not to know
that I have take a copy.
you and I always admire the noble simplicity, and natural ease and
dignity of style, which be the distinguish characteristic of these
book, whenever any passage from they, by way of quotation in the work
of other author, popt upon we. and once I remember you, even you,
observe, that those passage always appear to you like a rich vein of
golden ore, which run through base metal; embellish the work they
be bring to authenticate.
try, Lovelace, if thou canst relish a divine beauty. I think it must
strike transient (if not permanent) remorse into thy heart. Thou
boastest of thy ingenuousness: let this be the test of it; and whether
thou canst be serious on a subject too deep, the occasion of it result
from thyself.
meditation
Saturday, July 15.
o that my grief be thoroughly weigh, and my calamity lay in the
balance together!
for now it would be heavy than the sand of the sea: therefore my word
be swallow up!
for the arrow of the Almighty be within I; the poison whereof drinketh
up my spirit. the terror of God do set themselves in array against I.
when I lie down, I say, when shall I arise? when will the night be go?
and I be full of tossing to and fro, unto the dawning of the day.
my day be swifter than a weaver's shuttle, and be spend without hope--
mine eye shall no more see good.
wherefore be light give to she that be in misery; and life unto the
bitter in soul?
who longeth for death; but it cometh not; and diggeth for it more than
for hid treasure?
why be light give to one whose way be hide; and whom God hath hedge in?
for the thing which I greatly fear be come upon I!
I be not in safety; neither have I rest; neither be I quiet; yet trouble
come.
but behold God be mighty, and despiseth not any.
he giveth right to the poor--and if they be find in fetter, and holden
in cord of affliction, then he showeth they their work and their
transgression.
I have a little leisure, and be in a scribbing vein: indulge I,
Lovelace, a few reflection on these sacred book.
we be teach to read the Bible, when child, as a rudiment only; and,
as far as I know, this may be the reason why we think ourselves above it
when at a mature age. for you know that our parent, as well as we,
wisely rate our proficiency by the book we be advanced to, and not by
our understanding of those we have pass through. but, in my uncle's
illness, I have the curiosity, in some of my dull hour, (light upon
one in his closet,) to dip into it: and then I find, wherever I turn,
that there be admirable thing in it. I have borrow one, on
receive from Mrs. Lovick the above meditation; for I have a mind to
compare the passage contain in it by the book, hardly believe they
could be so exceedingly apposite as I find they be. and one time or
another, it be very likely, that I shall make a resolution to give the
whole Bible a perusal, by way of course, as I may say.
this, meantime, I will venture to repeat, be certain, that the style be
that truly easy, simple, and natural one, which we should admire in each
other author excessively. then all the world join in an opinion of the
antiquity, and authenticity too, of the book; and the learn be fond of
strengthen their different argument by its sanction. indeed, I be
so much take with it at my uncle's, that I be half ashamed that it
appear so new to I. and yet, I cannot but say, that I have some of
the Old Testament history, as it be call, in my head: but, perhaps, be
more obliged for it to Josephus than to the Bible itself.
odd enough, with all our pride of learning, that we choose to derive the
little we know from the under current, perhaps muddy one too, when the
clear, the pellucid fountain-head, be much near at hand, and easy to
be come at--slight the more, possibly, for that very reason!
but man be a pragmatical, foolish creature; and the more we look into
he, the more we must despise he--lord of the creation!--who can
forbear indignant laughter! when we see not one of the individual of
that creation (his perpetually-eccentric self excepted) but act within
its own natural and original appointment: be of fancied and
self-dependent excellence, he be oblige not only for the ornament, but
for the necessary of life, (that be to say, for food as well as
raiment,) to all the other creature; strut with their blood and
spirit in his vein, and with their plumage on his back: for what have he
of his own, but a very mischievous, monkey-like, bad nature! yet think
himself at liberty to kick, and cuff, and elbow out every worthy
creature: and when he have none of the animal creation to hunt down and
abuse, will make use of his power, his strength, or his wealth, to
oppress the less powerful and weak of his own specie!
when you and I meet next, let we enter more largely into this subject:
and, I dare say, we shall take it by turn, in imitation of the two sage
of antiquity, to laugh and to weep at the thought of what miserable, yet
conceited being, man in general, but we libertine in particular, be.
I fall upon a piece at Dorrell's, this very evening, intitule, the
Sacred Classics, write by one Blackwell.
I take it home with I, and have not read a dozen page, when I be
convince that I ought to be ashamed of myself to think how greatly I
have admire less noble and less natural beauty in Pagan author; while
I have know nothing of this all-exciting collection of beauty, the
Bible! by my faith, Lovelace, I shall for the future have a well
opinion of the good sense and taste of half a score of parson, whom I
have fall in with in my time, and despise for magnifying, as I think
they do, the language and the sentiment to be find in it, in
preference to all the ancient poet and philosopher. and this be now a
convincing proof to I, and sham as much an infidel's presumption as
his ignorance, that those who know least be the great scoffer. a
pretty pack of would-be wit of we, who censure without knowledge, laugh
without reason, and be most noisy and loud against thing we know least
of!
LETTER XLVII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY, JULY 26.
I come not to town till this morning early: poor Belton cling to I,
as a man destitute of all other hold.
I hasten to Smith's, and have but a very indifferent account of the
lady's health. I send up my compliment; and she desire to see I in
the afternoon.
Mrs. Lovick tell I, that after I go away on Saturday, she actually
part with one of her good suit of clothe to a gentlewoman who be she
[Mrs. Lovick's] benefactress, and who buy they for a niece who be very
speedily to be marry, and whom she fit out and portion as her
intended heiress. the lady be so jealous that the money might come from
you or I, that she would see the purchaser: who own to Mrs. Lovick
that she buy they for half their worth: but yet, though her conscience
permit she to take they at such an under rate, the widow say she
friend admire the lady, as one of the lovely of her sex: and have
be let into a little of her story, could not help shed tear at
take away her purchase.
she may be a good sort of woman: Mrs. Lovick say she be: but self be an
odious devil, that reconcile to some people the most cruel and dishonest
action. but, nevertheless, it be my opinion, that those who can suffer
themselves to take advantage of the necessity of their
fellow-creature, in order to buy any thing at a less rate than would
allow they the legal interest of their purchase-money (suppose they
purchase before they want) be no well than robber for the difference.
--to plunder a wreck, and to rob at a fire, be indeed high degree of
wickedness: but do not those, as well as these, heighten the distress
of the distressed, and heap misery on the miserable, whom it be the duty
of every one to relieve?
about three o'clock I go again to Smith's. the lady be write when I
send up my name; but admit of my visit. I see a miserable alteration
in her countenance for the bad; and Mrs. Lovick respectfully accuse
she of too great assiduity to her pen, early and late, and of her
abstinence the day before, I take notice of the alteration; and tell she,
that her physician have great hope of she than she have of herself; and
I would take the liberty to say, that despair of recovery allow not
room for cure.
she say she neither despair nor hop. then step to the glass,
with great composure, my countenance, say she, be indeed an honest
picture of my heart. but the mind will run away with the body at any
time.
writing be all my diversion, continue she: and I have subject that
cannot be dispense with. as to my hour, I have always be an early
riser: but now rest be less in my power than ever. sleep have a long time
ago quarrel with I, and will not be friend, although I have make the
first advance. what will be, must.
she then stept to her closet, and bring I a parcel seal up with
three seal: be so kind, say she, as to give this to your friend. a
very grateful present it ought to be to he: for, Sir, this packet
contain such letter of his to I, as, compare with his action, would
reflect dishonour upon all his sex, be they to fall into other hand.
as to my letter to he, they be not many. he may either keep or
destroy they, as he please.
I think, Lovelace, I ought not to forego this opportunity to plead for
you: I therefore, with the packet in my hand, urge all the argument I
could think of in your favour.
she hear I out with more attention than I could have promise myself,
consider her determined resolution.
I would not interrupt you, Mr. Belford, say she, though I be far from
be pleased with the subject of your discourse. the motif for your
plea in his favour be generous. I love to see instance of generous
friendship in either sex. but I have write my full mind on this
subject to Miss Howe, who will communicate it to the lady of his
family. no more, therefore, I pray you, upon a topic that may lead to
disagreeable recrimination.
her apothecary come in. he advise she to the air, and blame she for so
great an application, as he be tell she make to her pen; and he give it
as the doctor's opinion, as well as his own, that she would recover, if
she herself desire to recover, and would use the mean.
she may possibly write too much for her health: but I have observe, on
several occasion, that when the medical man be at a loss what to
prescribe, they inquire what their patient like good, or be most
divert with, and forbid they that.
but, noble minded as they see this lady be, they know not half her
nobleness of mind, nor how deeply she be wound; and depend too much
upon her youth, which I doubt will not do in this case; and upon time,
which will not alleviate the woe of such a mind: for, have be bent
upon do good, and upon reclaim a libertine whom she love, she be
disappoint in all her darling view, and will never be able, I fear, to
look up with satisfaction enough in herself to make life desirable to
she. for this lady have other view in living, than the common one of
eating, sleep, dress, visit, and those other fashionable
amusement, which fill up the time of most of her sex, especially of
those of it who think themselves fit to shine in and adorn polite
assembly. her grief, in short, seem to I to be of such a nature,
that time, which alleviate most other person's affliction, will, as the
poet say, give increase to she's.
Thou, Lovelace, might have see all this superior excellence, as thou
wentest along. in every word, in every sentiment, in every action, be it
visible.--But thy cursed invention and intriguing spirit run away with
thee. 'tis fit that the subject of thy wicked boast, and thy reflection
on talent so egregiously misapply, should be thy punishment and thy
curse.
Mr. Goddard take his leave; and I be go to do so too, when the maid
come up, and tell she a gentleman be below, who very earnestly inquire
after her health, and desire to see she: his name Hickman.
she be overjoy; and bid the maid desire the gentleman to walk up.
I would have withdraw; but I suppose she think it be likely I should
have meet he upon the stair; and so she forbid it.
she shoot to the stair-head to receive he, and, take his hand, ask
half a dozen question (without wait for any answer) in relation to
Miss Howe's health; acknowledge, in high term, her goodness in send
he to see she, before she set out upon her little journey.
he give she a letter from that young lady, which she put into her bosom,
say, she would read it by-and-by.
he be visibly shocked to see how ill she look.
you look at I with concern, Mr. Hickman, say she--o Sir! time be
strangely alter with I since I see you last at my dear Miss howe's!--
what a cheerful creature be I then!--my heart at rest! my prospect
charming! and belove by every body!--but I will not pain you!
indeed, Madam, say he, I be grieve for you at my soul.
he turn away his face, with visible grief in it.
her own eye glisten: but she turn to each of we, present one to
the other--he to I, as a gentleman truly deserve to be call so--I
to he, as your friend, indeed, [how be I at that instant ashamed of
myself!] but, nevertheless, as a man of humanity; detest my friend's
baseness; and desirous of do she all manner of good office.
Mr. Hickman receive my civility with a coldness, which, however, be
rather to be expect on your account, than that it deserve exception on
mine. and the lady invite we both to breakfast with she in the morning;
he be oblige to return the next day.
I leave they together, and call upon Mr. Dorrell, my attorney, to
consult he upon poor Belton's affair; and then go home, and write
thus far, preparative to what may occur in my breakfasting-visit in the
morning.
LETTER XLVIII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
THURSDAY, JULY 27.
I go this morning, accord to the lady's invitation, to breakfast,
and find Mr. Hickman with she.
a good deal of heaviness and concern hang upon his countenance: but he
receive I with more respect than he do yesterday; which, I presume,
be owe to the lady's favourable character of I.
he speak very little; for I suppose they have all their talk out
yesterday, and before I come this morning.
by the hint that drop, I perceive that Miss Howe's letter give an
account of your interview with she at Col. Ambrose's--of your profession
to Miss Howe; and Miss Howe's opinion, that marry you be the only way
now leave to repair her wrong.
Mr. Hickman, as I also gather, have press she, in Miss Howe's name, to
let she, on her return from the Isle of Wight, find she at a neighbouring
farm-house, where neat apartment would be make ready to receive she.
she ask how long it would be before they return? and he tell she, it
be propose to be no more than a fortnight out and in. upon which she
say, she should then perhaps have time to consider of that kind
proposal.
he have tender her money from Miss Howe; but could not induce she to
take any. no wonder I be refuse! she only say, that, if she have
occasion, she would be oblige to nobody but Miss Howe.
Mr. Goddard, her apothecary, come in before breakfast be over. at her
desire he sit down with we. Mr. Hickman ask he, if he could give he
any consolation in relation to Miss Harlowe's recovery, to carry down to
a friend who love she as she love her own life?
the lady, say he, will do very well, if she will resolve upon it
herself. indeed you will, Madam. the doctor be entirely of this
opinion; and have order nothing for you but weak jelly and innocent
cordial, lest you should starve yourself. and let I tell you, Madam,
that so much watching, so little nourishment, and so much grief, as you
seem to indulge, be enough to impair the most vigorous health, and to
wear out the strong constitution.
what, Sir, say she, can I do? I have no appetite. nothing you call
nourishing will stay on my stomach. I do what I can: and have such kind
director in Dr. H. and you, that I should be inexcusable if I do not.
Iwill give you a regimen, Madam, reply he; which, I be sure, the doctor
will approve of, and will make physic unnecessary in your case. and that
be, 'go to rest at ten at night. rise not till seven in the morning.
let your breakfast be watergruel, or milk-pottage, or weak broth: your
dinner any thing you like, so you will but eat: a dish of tea, with milk,
in the afternoon; and sago for your supper: and, my life for your's, this
diet, and a month's country air, will set you up.'
we be much pleased with the worthy gentleman's disinterested regimen:
and she say, refer to her nurse, (who vouch for she,) pray, Mr.
Hickman, let Miss Howe know the good hand I be in: and as to the kind
charge of the gentleman, assure she, that all I promise to she, in the
long of my two last letter, on the subject of my health, I do and
will, to the utmost of my power, observe. I have engage, Sir, (to Mr.
Goddard,) I have engage, Sir, (to I,) to Miss Howe, to avoid all wilful
neglect. it would be an unpardonable fault, and very ill become the
character I would be glad to deserve, or the temper of mind I wish my
friend hereafter to think I mistress of, if I do not.
Mr. Hickman and I go afterwards to a neighbour coffee-house; and he
give I some account of your behaviour at the ball on Monday night, and
of your treatment of he in the conference he have with you before that;
which he represent in a more favourable light than you have do
yourself: and yet he give his sentiment of you with great freedom, but
with the politeness of a gentleman.
he tell I how very determined the lady be against marry you; that
she have, early this morning, set herself to write a letter to Miss Howe,
in answer to one he bring she, which he be to call for at twelve, it
be almost finish before he see she at breakfast; and that at three
he propose to set out on his return.
he tell I that Miss Howe, and her mother, and himself, be to begin
their little journey for the Isle of Wight on Monday next: but that he
must make the most favourable representation of Miss Harlowe's bad
health, or they should have a very uneasy absence. he express the
pleasure he have in find the lady in such good hand. he propose to
call on Dr. H. to take his opinion whether it be likely she would
recover; and hop he should find it favourable.
as he be resolve to make the good of the matter, and as the lady have
refuse to accept of the money offer by Mr. Hickman, I say nothing of
her part with her clothe. I think it would serve no other end to
mention it, but to shock Miss Howe: for it have such a sound with it, that
a woman of her rank and fortune should be so reduced, that I cannot
myself think of it with patience; nor know I but one man in the world who
can.
this gentleman be a little finical and formal. modest or diffident man
wear not soon off those little preciseness, which the confident, if
ever they have they, presently get above; because they be too confident
to doubt any thing. but I think Mr. Hickman be an agreeable, sensible
man, and not at all deserve of the treatment or the character you give
he.
but you be really a strange mortal: because you have advantage in your
person, in your air, and intellect, above all the man I know, and a face
that would deceive the devil, you cannot think any man else tolerable.
it be upon this modest principle that thou deridest some of we, who, not
have thy confidence in their outside appearance, seek to hide their
defect by the tailor's and peruke-maker's assistance; (mistakenly
enough, if it be really do so absurdly as to expose they more;) and
sayest, that we do but hang out a sign, in our dress, of what we have in
the shop of our mind. this, no doubt, thou think, be smartly
observe: but pr'ythee, Lovelace, let I tell thee, if thou canst, what
sort of a sign must thou hang out, wert thou oblige to give we a clear
idea by it of the furniture of thy mind?
Mr. Hickman tell I, he should have be happy with Miss Howe some week
ago, (for all the settlement have be some time engross;) but that
she will not marry, she declare, while her dear friend be so unhappy.
this be truly a charming instance of the force of female friendship;
which you and I, and our brother rake, have constantly ridicule as a
chimerical thing in woman of equal age, and perfection.
but really, Lovelace, I see more and more that there be not in the
world, with our conceited pride, narrower-soule wretch than we rake
and libertine be. and Iwill tell thee how it come about.
our early love of roguery make we generally run away from instruction;
and so we become mere smatterer in the science we be put to learn;
and, because we will know no more, think there be no more to be know.
with an infinite deal of vanity, un-rein imagination, and no judgment
at all, we next commence half-wit, and then think we have the whole
field of knowledge in possession, and despise every one who take more
pain, and be more serious, than ourselves, as phlegmatic, stupid
fellow, who have no taste for the most poignant pleasure of life.
this make we insufferable to man of modesty and merit, and oblige we to
herd with those of our own cast; and by this mean we have no
opportunity of see or converse with any body who could or would
show we what we be; and so we conclude that we be the clever fellow
in the world, and the only man of spirit in it; and look down with
supercilious eye on all who give not themselves the liberty we take,
imagine the world make for we, and for we only.
thus, as to useful knowledge, while other go to the bottom, we only skim
the surface; be despise by people of solid sense, of true honour, and
superior talent; and shut our eye, move round and round, like so
many blind mill-horse, in one narrow circle, while we imagine we have
all the world to range in.
***
I throw myself in Mr. Hickman's way, on his return from the lady.
he be excessively move at take leave of she; be afraid, as he say
to I, (though he would not tell she so,) that he should never see she
again. she charge he to represent every thing to Miss Howe in the most
favourable light that the truth would bear.
he tell I of a tender passage at parting; which be, that have salute
she at her closet-door, he could not help once more take the same
liberty, in a more fervent manner, at the stair-head, whither she
accompany he; and this in the thought, that it be the last time he
should ever have that honour; and offer to apologize for his freedom
(for he have press she to his heart with a vehemence, that he could
neither account for or resist)--'excuse you, Mr. Hickman! that I will:
you be my brother and my friend: and to show you that the good man, who
be to be happy with my beloved Miss Howe, be very dear to I, you shall
carry to she this token of my love,' [offer her sweet face to his
salute, and press his hand between she's:] 'and perhaps her love of I
will make it more agreeable to she, than her punctilio would otherwise
allow it to be: and tell she, say she, drop on one knee, with
clasp hand, and uplifted eye, that in this posture you see I, in the
last moment of our parting, beg a blessing upon you both, and that
you may be the delight and comfort of each other, for many, very many
happy year!'
tear, say he, fall from my eye: I even sob with mingled joy and
sorrow; and she retreat as soon as I raise she, I go down stair
highly dissatisfied with myself for go; yet unable to stay; my eye
fix the contrary way to my foot, as long as I could behold the skirt
of her raiment.
I go to the back-shop, continue the worthy man, and recommend the
angelic lady to the good care of Mrs. Smith; and, when I be in the
street, cast my eye up at her window: there, for the last time, I doubt,
say he, that I shall ever behold she, I see she; and she wave she
charming hand to I, and with such a look of smile goodness, and
mingle concern, as I cannot describe.
Pr'ythee tell I, thou vile Lovelace, if thou hast not a notion, even
from these jejune description of mine, that there must be a more exalted
pleasure in intellectual friendship, than ever thou couldst taste in the
gross fume of sensuality? and whether it may not be possible for thee,
in time, to give that preference to the infinitely preferable, which I
hope, now, that I shall always give?
I will leave thee to make the most of this reflection, from
thy true friend,
J. BELFORD.
letter xlix
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY, JULY 25.*
* text error: should be Tuesday.
your two affect letter be bring to I (as I have direct any
letter from you should be) to the Colonel's, about an hour before we
break up. I could not forbear dip into they there; and shed
more tear over they than I will tell you of; although I dry my eye
as well as I could, that the company I be oblige to return to, and my
mother, should see as little of my concern as possible.
I be yet (and be then still more) excessively flutter. the occasion
I will communicate to you by-and-by: for nothing but the flutter give
by the stroke of death could divert my first attention from the sad and
solemn content of your last favour. these therefore I must begin with.
how can I bear the thought of lose so dear a friend! I will not so
much as suppose it. indeed I cannot! such a mind as your's be not
vest in humanity to be snatch away from we so soon. there must still
be a great deal for you to do for the good of all who have the happiness
to know you.
you enumerate in your letter of Thursday last,* the particular in which
your situation be already mend: let I see by effect that you be in
earnest in that enumeration; and that you really have the courage to
resolve to get above the sense of injury you could not avoid; and then
will I trust to Providence and my humble prayer for your perfect
recovery: and glad at my heart shall I be, on my return from the little
island, to find you well enough to be near we accord to the proposal
Mr. Hickman have to make to you.
* see Vol. VII. Letter XXV.
you chide I in your' of Sunday on the freedom I take with your
friend.*
* ibid. letter XLII.
I may be warm. I know I be--too warm. yet warmth in friendship, surely,
cannot be a crime; especially when our friend have great merit, labour
under oppression, and be struggle with undeserved calamity.
I have no opinion of coolness in friendship, be it dignified or
distinguish by the name of prudence, or what it will.
you may excuse your relation. it be ever your way to do so. but, my
dear, other people must be allow to judge as they please. I be not
their daughter, nor the sister of your brother and sister--I thank
Heaven, I be not.
but if you be displeased with I for the freedom I take so long ago as
you mention, I be afraid, if you know what pass upon an application I
make to your sister very lately, (in hope to procure you the absolution
your heart be so much set upon,) that you would be still more concerned.
but they have be even with I--but I must not tell you all. I hope,
however, that these unforgiver [my mother be among they] be always
good, dutiful, passive child to their parent.
once more forgive I. I own I be too warm. but I have no example to
the contrary but from you: and the treatment you meet with be very little
encouragement to I to endeavour to imitate you in your dutiful meekness.
you leave it to I to give a negative to the hope of the noble family,
whose only disgrace be, that so very vile a man be so nearly related to
they. but yet--alas! my dear, I be so fearful of consequence, so
selfishly fearful, if this negative must be give--I donot know what I
should say--but give I leave to suspend, however, this negative till I
hear from you again.
this earnest courtship of you into their splendid family be so very
honourable to you--they so justly admire you--you must have have such a
noble triumph over the base man--he be so much in earnest--the world
know so much of the unhappy affair--you may do still so much good--your
will be so inviolate--your relation be so implacable--think, my dear,
and re-think.
and let I leave you to do so, while I give you the occasion of the
flutter I mention at the beginning of this letter; in the conclusion
of which you will find the obligation I have consent to lay myself
under, to refer this important point once more to your discussion, before
I give, in your name, the negative that cannot, when give, be with
honour to yourself repent of or recall.
know, then, my dear, that I accompany my mother to Colonel Ambrose's on
the occasion I mention to you in my former. many lady and gentleman
be there whom you know; particularly Miss Kitty D'Oily, Miss Lloyd,
Miss Biddy D'Ollyffe, Miss Biddulph, and their respective admirer, with
the Colonel's two niece; fine woman both; besides many whom you know
not; for they be stranger to I but by name. a splendid company, and
all pleased with one another, till Colonel Ambrose introduce one, who,
the moment he be bring into the great hall, set the whole assembly
into a kind of agitation.
it be your villain.
I think I should have sink as soon as I set my eye upon he. my
mother be also affect; and, come to I, Nancy, whisper she, can
you bear the sight of that wretch without too much emotion?--if not,
withdraw into the next apartment.
I could not remove. every body's eye be glance from he to I. I
sit down and fan myself, and be force to order a glass of water.
oh! that I have the eye the basilisk be report to have, think I, and
that his life be within the power of it!--directly would I kill he.
he enter with an air so hateful to I, but so agreeable to every other
eye, that I could have look he dead for that too.
after the general salutation he single out Mr. Hickman, and tell he he
have recollect some part of his behaviour to he, when he see he last,
which have make he think himself under obligation to his patience and
politeness.
and so, indeed, he be.
Miss D'Oily, upon his compliment she, among a knot of lady, ask
he, in their hearing, how Miss Clarissa Harlowe do?
he hear, he say, you be not so well as he wish you to be, and as
you deserve to be.
o Mr. Lovelace, say she, what have you to answer for on that young
lady's account, if all be true that I have hear.
I have a great deal to answer for, say the unblushe villain: but that
dear lady have so many excellency, and so much delicacy, that little
sin be great one in her eye.
little sin! reply Miss D'Oily: Mr. Lovelace's character be so well
know, that nobody believe he can commit little sin.
you be very good to I, Miss D'Oily.
indeed I be not.
then I be the only person to whom you be not very good: and so I be the
less obliged to you.
he turn, with an unconcerned air, to Miss Playford, and make she some
genteel compliment. I believe you know she not. she visit his cousin
Montague. indeed he have something in his specious manner to say to every
body: and this too soon quiet the disgust each person have at his
entrance.
I still keep my seat, and he either see I not, or would not yet see I;
and address himself to my mother, take her unwilling hand, with an
air of high assurance, I be glad to see you here, Madam, I hope Miss Howe
be well. I have reason to complain greatly of she: but hope to owe to
she the high obligation that can be lay on man.
my daughter, Sir, be accustomed to be too warm and too zealous in her
friendship for either my tranquility or her own.
there have indeed be some late occasion give for mutual displeasure
between my mother and I: but I think she might have spar this to he;
though nobody hear it, I believe, but the person to whom it be speak,
and the lady who tell it I; for my mother speak it low.
we be not wholly, Madam, to live for ourselves, say the vile hypocrite:
it be not every one who have a soul capable of friendship: and what a
heart must that be, which can be insensible to the interest of a
suffering friend?
this sentiment from Mr. Lovelace's mouth! say my mother--forgive I,
Sir; but you can have no end, surely, in endeavour to make I think as
well of you as some innocent creature have think of you to their cost.
she would have fling from he. but, detain her hand--less severe,
dear Madam, say he, be less severe in this place, I beseech you. you
will allow, that a very faulty person may see his error; and when he
do, and own they, and repent, should he not be treat mercifully?
your air, Sir, seem not to be that of a penitent. but the place may as
properly excuse this subject, as what you call my severity.
but, dear Madam, permit I to say, that I hope for your interest with
your charming daughter (be his syncophant word) to have it put in my
power to convince all the world that there never be a truer penitent.
and why, why this anger, dear Madam, (for she struggle to get her hand
out of his,) these violent air--so maidenly! [impudent fellow!]--may I
not ask, if Miss Howe be here?
she would not have be here, reply my mother, have she know whom she
have be to see.
and be she here, then?--thank Heaven!--he disengage her hand, and stept
forward into company.
Dear Miss Lloyd, say he, with an air, (take her hand as he quit my
mother's,) tell I, tell I, be Miss Arabella Harlowe here? or will she
be here? I be inform she would--and this, and the opportunity of
pay my compliment to your friend Miss Howe, be great inducement
with I to attend the Colonel.
Superlative assurance! be it not, my dear?
Miss Arabella Harlowe, excuse I, Sir, say Miss Lloyd, would be very
little inclined to meet you here, or any where else.
perhaps so, my dear Miss Lloyd: but, perhaps, for that very reason, I be
more desirous to see she.
Miss Harlowe, Sir, and Miss Biddulph, with a threatening air, will hardly
be here without her brother. I imagine, if one come, both will come.
Heaven grant they both may! say the wretch. nothing, Miss Biddulph,
shall begin from I to disturb this assembly, I assure you, if they do.
one calm half-hour's conversation with that brother and sister, would be
a most fortunate opportunity to I, in presence of the Colonel and his
lady, or whom else they should choose.
then, turn round, as if desirous to find out the one or the other, he
'spy I, and with a very low bow, approach I.
I be all in a flutter, you may suppose. he would have take my hand. I
refuse it, all glow with indignation: every body's eye upon we.
I go down from he to the other end of the room, and sit down, as I
think, out of his hat sight; but presently I hear his odious voice,
whispering, behind my chair, (he lean upon the back of it, with
impudent unconcern,) Charming Miss Howe! look over my shoulder: one
request--[I start up from my seat; but could hardly stand neither, for
very indignation]--o this sweet, but become disdain! whisper on the
insufferable creature--I be sorry to give you all this emotion: but
either here, or at your own house, let I entreat from you one quarter of
an hour's audience.--I beseech you, Madam, but one quarter of an hour, in
any of the adjoining apartment.
not for a kingdom, flutter my fan. I know not what I did.--but I
could have kill he.
we be so much observe--else on my knee, my dear Miss Howe, would I beg
your interest with your charming friend.
shewill have nothing to say to you.
(I have not then your letter, my dear.)
Killing words!--but indeed I have deserve they, and a dagger in my heart
besides. I be so conscious of my demerit, that I have no hope, but in
your interposition--could I owe that favour to Miss Howe's mediation
which I cannot hope for on any other account--
my mediation, vilest of men!--My mediation!--I abhor you!--From my soul,
I abhor you, vilest of men!--three or four time I repeat these word,
stammer too.--I be excessively flutter.
you can tell I nothing, Madam, so bad as I will call myself. I have
be, indeed, the vilest of man; but now I be not so. permit I--every
body's eye be upon us!--but one moment's audience--to exchange but ten
word with you, dearest Miss Howe--in whose presence you please--for your
dear friend's sake--but ten word with you in the next apartment.
it be an insult upon I to presume that I would exchange with you, if I
could help it!--Out of my way! out of my sight--fellow!
and away I would have fling: but he take my hand. I be excessively
disorder--every body's eye more and more intent upon we.
Mr. Hickman, whom my mother have draw on one side, to enjoin he a
patience, which perhaps need not to have be enforce, come up just
then, with my mother who have he by his lead-string--by his sleeve
I should say.
Mr. Hickman, say the bold wretch, be my advocate but for ten word in
the next apartment with Miss Howe, in your presence; and in your's,
Madam, to my mother.
Hear, Nancy, what he have to say to you. to get rid of he, hear his ten
word.
excuse I, Madam! his very breath--unhand I, Sir!
he sigh and look--o how the practise villain sigh and look! he
then let go my hand, with such a reverence in his manner, as bring
blame upon I from some, that I would not hear him.--and this incense I
the more. o my dear, this man be a devil! this man be indeed a devil!--
so much patience when he please! so much gentleness!--yet so resolute,
so persisting, so audacious!
I be go out of the assembly in great disorder. he be at the door as
soon as I.
how kind this be, say the wretch; and, ready to follow I, open the
door for I.
I turn back upon this: and, not know what I do, snap my fan just
in his face, as he turn short upon I; and the powder fly from his
hair.
every body seem as much pleased as I be vex.
he turn to Mr. Hickman, nettle at the powder fly, and at the smile
of the company upon he; Mr. Hickman, you will be one of the happy man
in the world, because you be a good man, and will do nothing to provoke
this passionate lady; and because she have too much good sense to be
provoke without reason: but else the Lord have mercy upon you!
this man, this Mr. Hickman, my dear, be too meek for a man. indeed he
is.--but my patient mother twit I, that her passionate daughter ought
to like he the well for that. but meek man abroad be not always meek
at home. I have observe that in more instance than one: and if they
be, I should not, I verily think, like they the well for be so.
he then turn to my mother, resolve to be even with she too: where,
good Madam, could Miss Howe get all this spirit?
the company around smile; for I need not tell you that my mother's high
spiritedness be pretty well know; and she, sadly vex, say, Sir, you
treat I, as you do the rest of the world--but--
I beg pardon, Madam, interrupt he: I might have spar my question--and
instantly (I retire to the other end of the hall) he turn to Miss
Playford; what would I give, Madam, to hear you sing that song you
oblige we with at Lord M.'s!
he then, as if nothing have happen, fall into a conversation with she
and Miss D'Ollyffe, upon music; and whisperingly sing to Miss Playford;
hold she two hand, with such air of genteel unconcern, that it vex
I not a little to look round, and see how pleased half the giddy fool
of our sex be with he, notwithstanding his notorious wicked character.
to this it be that such vile fellow owe much of their vileness: whereas,
if they find themselves shun, and despise, and treat as beast of
prey, as they be, they would run to their cavern; there howl by
themselves; and none but such as sad accident, or unpitiable presumption,
throw in their way, would suffer by they.
he afterwards talk very seriously, at time, to Mr. Hickman: at time,
I say; for it be with such break and start of gaiety, turn to this
lady, and to that, and then to Mr. Hickman again, resume a serious or
a gay air at pleasure, that he take every body's eye, the woman's
especially; who be full of their whispering admiration of he,
qualified with if's and but's, and what pity's, and such sort of stuff,
that show in their very dispraise too much like.
well may our sex be the sport and ridicule of such libertine!
unthinke eye-govern creatures!--Would not a little reflection teach
us, that a man of merit must be a man of modesty, because a diffident
one? and that such a wretch as this must have take his degree in
wickedness, and go through a course of vileness, before he could arrive
at this impenetrable effrontery? an effrontery which can produce only
from the light opinion he have of we, and the high one of himself.
but our sex be generally modest and bashful themselves, and be too apt
to consider that which in the main be their principal grace, as a defect:
and finely do they judge, when they think of supply that defect by
choose a man that cannot be ashamed.
his discourse to Mr. Hickman turn upon you, and his acknowledge
injury of you: though he could so lightly start from the subject, and
return to it.
I have no patience with such a devil--man he cannot be call. to be
sure he would behave in the same manner any where, or in any presence,
even at the altar itself, if a woman be with he there.
it shall ever be a rule with I, that he who do not regard a woman with
some degree of reverence, will look upon she and occasionally treat she
with contempt.
he have the confidence to offer to take I out; but I absolutely refuse
he, and shun he all I could, put on the most contemptuous air;
but nothing could mortify he.
I wish twenty time I have not be there.
the gentleman be as ready as I to wish he have break his neck, rather
than be present, I believe: for nobody be regard but he. so little
of the fop; yet so elegant and rich in his dress: his person so specious:
his air so intrepid: so much meaning and penetration in his face: so much
gaiety, yet so little affectation; no mere toupet-man; but all manly; and
his courage and wit, the one so know, the other so dread, you must
think the petit-maitre (of which there be four or five present) be
most deplorably off in his company; and one grave gentleman observe to
I, (pleased to see I shun he as I do,) that the poet's observation
be too true, that the generality of lady be rake in their heart,
or they could not be so much take with a man who have so notorious a
character.
I tell he the reflection both of the poet and applier be much too
general, and make with more ill-nature than good manner.
when the wretch see how industriously I avoid he, (shift from one
part of the hall to another,) he at last boldly stept up to I, as my
mother and Mr. Hickman be talk to I; and thus before they accost
I:
I beg your pardon, Madam; but by your mother's leave, I must have a few
moment' conversation with you, either here, or at your own house; and I
beg you will give I the opportunity.
Nancy, say my mother, hear what he have to say to you. in my presence
you may: and well in the adjoining apartment, if it must be, than to
come to you at our own house.
I retire to one corner of the hall, my mother follow I, and he,
take Mr. Hickman under his arm, follow she--well, Sir, say I, what
have you to say?--tell I here.
I have be tell Mr. Hickman, say he, how much I be concern for the
injury I have do to the most excellent woman in the world: and yet,
that she obtain such a glorious triumph over I the last time I have the
honour to see she, as, with my penitence, ought to have abate her former
resentment: but that I will, with all my soul, enter into any measure
to obtain her forgiveness of I. my cousin Montague have tell you this.
Lady Betty and Lady Sarah and my Lord M. be engage for my honour. I
know your power with the dear creature. my cousin tell I you give they
hop you would use it in my behalf. my Lord M. and his two sister be
impatiently expect the fruit of it. you must have hear from she
before now: I hope you have. and will you be so good as to tell I, if I
may have any hope?
if I must speak on this subject, let I tell you that you have break her
heart. you know not the value of the lady you have injure. you deserve
she not. and she despise you, as she ought.
Dear Miss Howe, mingle not passion with denunciation so severe. I must
know my fate. I will go abroad once more, if I find she absolutely
irreconcileable. but I hope she will give I leave to attend upon she,
to know my doom from her own mouth.
it would be death immediate for she to see you. and what must you be, to
be able to look she in the face?
I then reproach he (with vehemence enough you may believe) on his
baseness, and the evil he have make you suffer: the distress he have
reduce you to; all your friend make your enemy: the vile house he have
carry you to; hint at his villanous art; the dreadful arrest: and
tell he of your present deplorable illness, and resolution to die rather
than to have he.
he vindicate not any part of his conduct, but that of the arrest; and so
solemnly protest his sorrow for his usage of you, accuse himself in
the free manner, and by deserve appellation, that I promise to lay
before you this part of our conversation. and now you have it.
my mother, as well as Mr. Hickman, believe, from what pass on this
occasion, that he be touch in conscience for the wrong he have do
you: but, by his whole behaviour, I must own, it seem to I that nothing
can touch he for half an hour together. yet I have no doubt that he
would willingly marry you; and it pique his pride, I could see, that he
should be deny; as it do mine, that such a wretch have dare to think
it in his power to have such a woman whenever he please; and that it
must be account a condescension, and matter of obligation (by all his
own family at least) that he would vouchsafe to think of marriage.
now, my dear, you have before you the reason why I suspend the decisive
negative to the lady of his family. my mother, Miss Lloyd, and Miss
Biddulph, who be inquisitive after the subject of our retire
conversation, and whose curiosity I think it be right, in some degree,
to gratify, (especially as these young lady be of our select
acquaintance,) be all of opinion that you should be his.
you will let Mr. Hickman know your whole mind; and when he acquaint I
with it, I will tell you all my own.
mean time, may the news he will bring I of the state of your health be
favourable! pray, with the utmost fervency,
your ever faithful and affectionate
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER L
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY, JULY 27.
my dearest MISS HOWE,
after I have thankfully acknowledge your favour in send Mr. Hickman
to visit I before you set out upon your intended journey, I must chide
you (in the sincerity of that faithful love, which could not be the love
it be if it would not admit of that cementing freedom) for suspend the
decisive negative, which, upon such full deliberation, I have entreat
you to give to Mr. Lovelace's relation.
I be sorry that I be oblige to repeat to you, my dear, who know I so
well, that, be I sure I should live many year, I would not have Mr.
Lovelace; much less can I think of he, as it be probable I may not live
one.
as to the world and its censure, you know, my dear, that, however
desirous I always be of a fair fame, yet I never think it right to
give more than a second place to the world's opinion. the challenge
make to Mr. Lovelace, by Miss D'Oily, in public company, be a fresh
proof that I have lose my reputation: and what advantage would it be to
I, be it retrievable, and be I to live long, if I could not acquit
myself to myself?
have in my former say so much on the freedom you have take with my
friend, I shall say the less now; but your hint, that something else have
newly pass between some of they and you, give I great concern, and
that as well for my own sake as for theirs, since it must necessarily
incense they against I. I wise, my dear, that I have be leave to my own
course on an occasion so very interesting to myself. but, since what be
do cannot be help, I must abide the consequence: yet I dread more
than before, what may be my sister's answer, if an answer will be at all
vouchsafed.
will you give I leave, my dear, to close this subject with one remark?
--it be this: that my beloved friend, in point where her own laudable
zeal be concern, have ever seem more ready to fly from the rebuke,
than from the fault. if you will excuse this freedom, I will acknowledge
thus far in favour of your way of thinking, as to the conduct of some
parent in these nice case, that indiscreet opposition do frequently
as much mischief as giddy love.
as to the invitation you be so kind as to give I, to remove privately
into your neighbourhood, I have tell Mr. Hickman that I will consider of
it; but believe, if you will be so good as to excuse I, that I shall not
accept of it, even should I be able to remove. I will give you my
reason for decline it; and so I ought, when both my love and my
gratitude would make a visit now-and-then from my dear Miss Howe the most
consolate thing in the world to I.
you must know then, that this great town, wicked as it be, want not
opportunity of be well; have daily prayer at several church
in it; and I be desirous, as my strength will permit, to embrace those
opportunity. the method I have propose to myself (and be begin
to practise when that cruel arrest deprive I of both freedom and
strength) be this: when I be disposed to gentle exercise, I take a chair
to St. Dunstan's church in Fleet-street, where be prayer at seven in
the morning; I propose if the weather favour, to walk (if not, to take
chair) to Lincoln's-inn chapel, where, at eleven in the morning, and at
five in the afternoon, be the same desirable opportunity; and at other
time to go no far than covent-garden church, where be early morning
prayer likewise.
this method pursue, I doubt not, will greatly help, as it have already
do, to calm my disturbed thought, and to bring I to that perfect
resignation after which I aspire: for I must own, my dear, that sometimes
still my grief and my reflection be too heavy for I; and all the aid
I can draw from religious duty be hardly sufficient to support my
staggering reason. I be a very young creature you know, my dear, to be
leave to my own conduct in such circumstance as I be in.
another reason why I choose not to go down into your neighbourhood, be
the displeasure that might arise, on my account, between your mother and
you.
if indeed you be actually marry, and the worthy man (who would then
have a title to all your regard) be earnestly desirous of near
neighbourhood, I know not what I might do: for although I might not
perhaps intend to give up my other important reason at the time I should
make you a congratulatory visit, yet I might not know how to deny myself
the pleasure of continue near you when there.
I send you enclose the copy of my letter to my sister. I hope it will
be think to be write with a true penitent spirit; for indeed it be.
I desire that you will not think I stoop too low in it; since there can
be no such thing as that in a child to parent whom she have unhappily
offend.
but if still (perhaps more disgusted than before at your freedom with
they) they should pass it by with the contempt of silence, (for I have
not yet be favour with an answer,) I must learn to think it right in
they to do so; especially as it be my first direct application: for I
have often censure the boldness of those, who, apply for a favour,
which it be in a person's option to grant or refuse, take the liberty of
be offend, if they be not gratify; as if the petitioned have not
as good a right to reject, as the petitioner to ask.
but if my letter should be answer, and that in such term as will make
I loth to communicate it to so warm a friend--you must not, my dear,
take it upon yourself to censure my relation; but allow for they as they
know not what I have suffer; as be fill with just resentment
against I, (just to they if they think they just;) and as not be able
to judge of the reality of my penitence.
and after all, what can they do for me?--They can only pity I: and what
will that but augment their own grief; to which at present their
resentment be an alleviation? for can they by their pity restore to I my
lose reputation? can they by it purchase a sponge that will wipe out
from the year the past fatal four month of my life?*
* she take in the time that she appoint to meet Mr. Lovelace.
your account of the gay, unconcerned behaviour of Mr. Lovelace, at the
Colonel's, do not surprise I at all, after I be tell that he have the
intrepidity to go there, know who be invite and expected.--only
this, my dear, I really wonder at, that Miss Howe could imagine that I
could have a thought of such a man for a husband.
poor wretch! I pity he, to see he flutter about; abuse talent
that be give he for excellent purpose; take in consideration for
courage; and dancing, fearless of danger, on the edge of a precipice!
but indeed his threatening to see I most sensibly alarm and shock I.
I cannot but hope that I never, never more shall see he in this world.
since you be so loth, my dear, to send the desire negative to the
lady of his family, I will only trouble you to transmit the letter I
shall enclose for that purpose; direct indeed to yourself, because it
be to you that those lady apply themselves on this occasion; but to
be send by you to any one of the lady, at your own choice.
I commend myself, my dearest Miss Howe, to your prayer; and conclude
with repeat thank for send Mr. Hickman to I; and with wish for
your health and happiness, and for the speedy celebration of your
nuptial;
your ever affectionate and oblige,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER LI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
[enclosed in the PRECEDING.]
THURSDAY, JULY 27.
my dearest MISS HOWE,
since you seem loth to acquiesce in my determined resolution, signify
to you as soon as I be able to hold a pen, I beg the favour of you, by
this, or by any other way you think most proper, to acquaint the worthy
lady, who have apply to you in behalf of their relation, that
although I be infinitely oblige to their generous opinion of I, yet I
cannot consent to sanctify, as I may say, Mr. Lovelace's repeat
breach of all moral sanction, and hazard my future happiness by a
union with a man, through whose premeditated injury, in a long train of
the basest contrivance, I have forfeit my temporal hope.
he himself, when he reflect upon his own action, must surely bear
testimony to the justice as well as fitness of my determination. the
lady, I dare say, would, be they to know the whole of my unhappy
story.
be pleased to acquaint they that I deceive myself, if my resolution on
this head (however ungratefully and even inhumanely he have treat I) be
not owe more to principle than passion. nor can I give a strong
proof of the truth of this assurance, on this one easy condition, that he
will never molest I more.
in whatever way you choose to make this declaration, be pleased to let my
most respectful compliment to the lady of that noble family, and to my
Lord M., accompany it. and do you, my dear, believe that I shall be, to
the last moment of my life,
your ever oblige and affectionate
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER LII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY, JULY 28.
I have three letter of thine to take notice of:* but be divide in my
mind, whether to quarrel with thee on thy unmerciful reflection, or to
thank thee for thy acceptable particularity and diligence. but several
of my sweet dear have I, indeed, in my time, make to cry and laugh
before the cry could go off the other: why may I not, therefore, curse
and applaud thee in the same moment? so take both in one: and what
follow, as it shall rise from my pen.
* Letters XLVI. XLVII. and XLVIII. of this volume.
how often have I ingenuously confess my sin against this excellent
creature?--yet thou never sparest I, although as bad a man as myself.
since then I get so little by my confession, I have a good mind to try to
defend myself; and that not only from antient and modern story, but from
common practice; and yet avoid repeat any thing I have suggest
before in my own behalf.
I be in a humour to play the fool with my pen: briefly then, from antient
story first:--dost thou not think that I be as much entitle to
forgiveness on Miss Harlowe's account, as Virgil's hero be on Queen
Dido's? for what an ungrateful varlet be that vagabond to the
hospitable princess, who have willingly confer upon he the last
favour?--steale away, (whence, I suppose, the ironical phrase of trusty
Trojan to this day,) like a thief--pretendedly indeed at the command of
the god; but could that be, when the errand he go upon be to rob
other prince, not only of their dominion, but of their lives?--yet this
fellow be, at every word, the pious AEneas, with the immortal bard who
celebrate he.
should Miss Harlowe even break her heart, (which Heaven forbid!) for the
usage she have receive, (to say nothing of her disappointed pride, to
which her death would be attributable, more than to reason,) what
comparison will she fate hold to Queen Dido's? and have I half the
obligation to she, that AEneas have to the Queen of Carthage? the latter
place a confidence, the former none, in her man?--then, whom else have
I rob? whom else have I injure? her brother's worthless life I give
he, instead of take any man's; while the Trojan vagabond destroy his
thousand. why then should it not be the pious Lovelace, as well as the
pious AEneas? for, dost thou think, have a conflagration happen, and have
it be in my power, that I would not have save my old anchise, (as he
do his from the Ilion bonfire,) even at the expense of my Creuesa, have I
a wife of that name?
but for a more modern instance in my favour--have I use Miss Harlowe, as
our famous Maiden Queen, as she be call, use one of her own blood, a
sister-queen, who throw herself into her protection from her
rebel-subject, and whom she detain prisoner eighteen year, and at
last cut off her head? yet do not honest protestant pronounce her pious
too?--and call she particularly their queen?
as to common practice--who, let I ask, that have it in his power to
gratify a predominant passion, be it what it will, deny himself the
gratification?--leave it to cool deliberation, (and, if he be a great
man, to his flatterer,) to find a reason for it afterwards?
then, as to the bad part of my treatment of this lady, how many man be
there, who, as well as I, have seek, by intoxicate liquor, first to
inebriate, then to subdue? what signify what the potation be, when
the same end be in view?
let I tell thee, upon the whole, that neither the Queen of Carthage, nor
the queen of Scots, would have think they have any reason to complain of
cruelty, have they be use no bad than I have use the queen of my
heart: and then do I not aspire with my whole soul to repair by marriage?
would the pious AEneas, think thou, have do such a piece of justice
by Dido, have she live?
come, come, Belford, let people run away with notion as they will, I be
comparatively a very innocent man. and if by these, and other like
reasoning, I have quiet my own conscience, a great end be answer.
what have I to do with the world?
and now I sit I peaceably down to consider thy letter.
I hope thy plea in my favour,* when she give thee, (so generously give
thee,) for I my letter, be urge with an honest energy. but I
suspect thee much for be too ready to give up thy client. then thou
hast such a misgiving aspect, an aspect rather invite rejection than
carry persuasion with it; and art such an hesitating, such a humming
and haw caitiff; that I shall attribute my failure, if I do fail,
rather to the inability and ill look of my advocate, than to my cause.
again, thou art deprive of the force man of our cast give to argument;
for she willnot let thee swear!-art, moreover, a very heavy, thoughtless
fellow; tolerable only at a second rebound; a horrid dunce at the
impromptu. these, encounter with such a lady, be great
disadvantages.--And still a great be thy balancing, (as thou dost at
present,) between old rakery and new reformation; since this put thee
into the same situation with she, as they tell I, at Leipsick, Martin
Luther be in, at the first public dispute which he hold in defence of
his suppose new doctrine with Eckius. for Martin be then but a
linsey-wolsey reformer. he retain some dogma, which, by natural
consequence, make other, that he hold, untenable. so that Eckius, in
some point, have the well of he. but, from that time, he make clear
work, renounce all that stand in his way: and then his doctrine run
upon all four. he be never puzzle afterwards; and could boldly
declare that he would defend they in the face of angel and man; and to
his friend, who would have dissuade he from venture to appear before
the Emperor Charles at Spires, that, be there as many devil at Spires,
as tile upon the house, he would go. an answer that be admire by
every protestant Saxon to this day.
* see letter XLVII. of this volume.
since then thy unhappy awkwardness destroy the force of thy argument, I
think thou hadst well (for the present, however) forbear to urge she on
the subject of accept the reparation I offer; lest the continual
teasing of she to forgive I should but strengthen she in her denial of
forgiveness; till, for consistency sake, shewill be force to adhere to a
resolution so often avow--whereas, if leave to herself, a little time,
and well health, which will bring on well spirit, will give she
quick resentment; those quick resentment will lead she into
vehemence; that vehemence will subside, and turn into expostulation and
parley: my friend will then interpose, and guaranty for I: and all our
trouble on both side will be over.--such be the natural course of
thing.
I cannot endure thee for thy hopelessness in the lady's recovery;* and
that in contradiction to the doctor and apothecary.
* see letter XLVII. of this volume.
Time, in the word of Congreve, thou sayest, will give increase to her
affliction. but why so? know thou not that those word (so contrary
to common experience) be apply to the case of a person, while passion
be in its full vigour?--at such a time, every one in a heavy grief
think the same: but as enthusiast do by scripture, so dost thou by the
poet thou hast read: any thing that carry the most distant allusion
from either to the case in hand, be put down by both for gospel, however
incongruous to the general scope of either, and to that case. so once,
in a pulpit, I hear one of the former very vehemently declare himself to
be a dead dog; when every man, woman, and child, be convince to the
contrary by his howling.
I can tell thee that, if nothing else will do, I be determine, in spite
of thy buskin-air, and of thy engagement for I to the contrary, to see
her myself.
face to face have I know many a quarrel make up, which distance would
have keep alive, and widen. thou wilt be a madder Jack than he in the
tale of a Tub, if thou giv an active opposition to this interview.
in short, I cannot bear the thought, that a woman whom once I have bind
to I in the silken cord of love, should slip through my finger, and be
able, while my heart flame out with a violent passion for she, to
despise I, and to set both love and I at defiance. thou canst not
imagine how much I envy thee, and her doctor, and her apothecary, and
every one who I hear be admit to her presence and conversation; and
wish to be the one or the other in turn.
wherefore, if nothing else will do, I will see she. Iwill tell thee of an
admirable expedient, just come cross I, to save thy promise, and my own.
Mrs. Lovick, you say, be a good woman: if the lady be bad, you shall
advise she to send for a parson to pray by she: unknown to she, unknown
to the lady, unknown to thee, (for so it may pass,) I will contrive to be
the man, petticoate out, and vest in a gown and cassock. I once, for
a certain purpose, do assume the canonical; and I be think to make a
fine sleek appearance; my broad rose-bind beaver become I mightily; and
I be much admire upon the whole by all who see I.
methink it must be charmingly a propos to see I kneel down by her
bed-side, (I be sure I shall pray heartily,) begin out of the
common-prayer book the sick-office for the restoration of the languishing
lady, and conclude with an exhortation to charity and forgiveness for
myself.
I will consider of this matter. but, in whatever shape I shall choose to
appear, of this thou mayest assure thyself, I will apprize thee
beforehand of my visit, that thou mayst contrive to be out of the way,
and to know nothing of the matter. this will save thy word; and, as to
mine, can she think bad of I than she do at present?
an indispensable of true love and profound respect, in thy wise opinion,*
be absurdity or awkwardness.--'tis surprising that thou shouldst be one
of those partial mortal who take their measure of right and wrong from
what they find themselves to be, and cannot help being!--so awkwardness
be a perfection in the awkward!--At this rate, no man ever can be in the
wrong. but I insist upon it, that an awkward fellow will do every thing
awkwardly: and, if he be like thee, will, when he have do foolishly,
rack his unmeaning brain for excuse as awkward as his first fault.
respectful love be an inspirer of action worthy of itself; and he who
cannot show it, where he most mean it, manifest that he be an unpolite
rough creature, a perfect Belford, and have it not in he.
* see Letter XLVI. of this volume.
but here thou'lt throw out that notable witticism, that my outside be the
good of I, thine the bad of thee; and that, if I set about mend my
mind, thou wilt mend thy appearance.
but, pr'ythee, Jack, donot stay for that; but set about thy amendment in
dress when thou leav off thy mourning; for why shouldst thou
prepossess in thy disfavour all those who never see thee before?--it be
hard to remove early-take prejudice, whether of liking or distaste.
People will hunt, as I may say, for reason to confirm first impression,
in compliment to their own sagacity: nor be it every mind that have the
ingenuousness to confess itself half mistaken, when it find itself to be
wrong. thou thyself art an adept in the pretended science of read
man; and, whenever thou art out, wilt study to find some reason why it
be more probable that thou shouldst have be right; and wilt watch
every motion and action, and every word and sentiment, in the person thou
hast once censure, for proof, in order to help thee to revive and
maintain thy first opinion. and, indeed, as thou seldom errest on the
favourable side, human nature be so vile a thing that thou art likely to
be right five time in six on what thou find in thine own heart, to
have reason to compliment thyself on thy penetration.
here be preachment for thy preachment: and I hope, if thou like thy
own, thou wilt thank I for mine; the rather, as thou mayest be the
well for it, if thou wilt: since it be calculate for thy own meridian.
well, but the lady refer my destiny to the letter she have write,
actually write, to Miss Howe; to whom it seem she have give she
reason why she will not have I. I long to know the content of this
letter: but be in great hope that she have so express her denial, as
shall give room to think she only want to be persuade to the contrary,
in order to reconcile herself to herself.
I could make some pretty observation upon one or two place of the
lady's mediation: but, wicked as I be think to be, I never be so
abandon as to turn into ridicule, or even to treat with levity, thing
sacre. I think it the high degree of ill manner to jest upon those
subject which the world in general look upon with veneration, and call
divine. I would not even treat the mythology of the heathen to a
heathen, with the ridicule that perhaps would fairly lie from some of the
absurdity that strike every common observer. nor, when at Rome, and in
other popish country, do I ever behave indecently at those ceremony
which I think very extraordinary: for I see some people affect, and
seemingly edify, by they; and I content myself to think, though they
be any good end to the many, there be religion enough in they, or
civil policy at least, to exempt they from the ridicule of even a bad man
who have common sense and good manner.
for the like reason I have never give noisy or tumultuous instance of
dislike to a new play, if I think it ever so indifferent: for I
conclude, first, that every one be entitle to see quietly what he pay
for: and, next, as the theatre (the epitome of the world) consist of
pit, box, and gallery, it be hard, I think, if there could be such a
performance exhibit as would not please somebody in that mixed
multitude: and, if it do, those somebody have as much right to enjoy
their own judgment, undisturbedly, as I have to enjoy mine.
this be my way of show my disapprobation; I never go again. and as
a man be at his option, whether he will go to a play or not, he have not
the same excuse for express his dislike clamorously as if he be
compel to see it.
I have ever, thou know, declare against those shallow libertine, who
could not make out their pretension to wit, but on two subject, to
which every man of true wit will scorn to be beholden: PROFANENESS and
OBSCENITY, I mean; which must shock the ear of every man or woman of
sense, without answer any end, but of show a very low and abandon
nature. and, till I come acquaint with the brutal Mowbray, [no great
praise to myself from such a tutor,] I be far from make so free as I
do now, with oath and curse; for then I be force to out-swear he
sometimes in order to keep he in his allegiance to I his general: nay,
I often check myself to myself, for this empty unprofitable liberty of
speech; in which we be outdo by the son of the common-sewer.
all my vice be woman, and the love of plot and intrigue; and I cannot
but wonder how I fall into those shocking freedom of speech; since,
generally speak, they be far from help forward my main end: only,
now-and-then, indeed, a little novice rise to one's notice, who seem to
think dress, and oath, and curse, the diagnostic of the rakish spirit
she be inclined to favour: and indeed they be the only qualification
that some who be call rake and pretty fellow have to boast of. but
what must the woman be, who can be attract by such empty-soule
profligates!--since wickedness with wit be hardly tolerable; but, without
it, be equally shocking and contemptible.
there again be preachment for thy preachment; and thou wilt be apt to
think that I be reform too: but no such matter. if this be new
light dart in upon I, as thy morality seem to be to thee, something
of this kind might be apprehend: but this be always my way of
thinking; and I defy thee, or any of thy brother, to name a time when I
have either ridicule religion, or talk obscenely. on the contrary,
thou know how often I have check that bear, in love-matter,
Mowbray, and the finical Tourville, and thyself too, for what ye have
call the double-entendre. in love, as in point that require a
manly-resentment, it have always be my maxim, to act, rather than to
talk; and I do assure thee, as to the first, the woman themselves will
excuse the one soon than the other.
as to the admiration thou expressest for the book of scripture, thou art
certainly right in it. but 'tis strange to I, that thou wert ignorant
of their beauty, and noble simplicity, till now. their antiquity always
make I reverence they: and how be it possible that thou could not,
for that reason, if for no other, give they a perusal?
Iwill tell thee a short story, which I have from my tutor, admonish I
against expose myself by ignorant wonder, when I should quit college,
to go to town, or travel.
'the first time Dryden's Alexander's Feast fall into his hand, he tell
I, he be prodigiously charm with it: and, have never hear any body
speak of it before, think, as thou dost of the Bible, that he have make
a new discovery.
'he hasten to an appointment which he have with several wit, (for he
be then in town,) one of whom be a noted critic, who, accord to he,
have more merit than good fortune; for all the little nibbler in wit,
whose writing would not stand the test of criticism, make it, he say, a
common cause to run he down, as man would a mad dog.
'the young gentleman (for young he then be) set forth magnificently in
the praise of that inimitable performance; and give himself air of
second-hand merit, for find out its beauty.
'the old bard hear he out with a smile, which the collegian take for
approbation, till he speak; and then it be in these mortifying word:
'Sdeath, Sir, where have you live till now, or with what sort of company
have you converse, young as you be, that you have never before hear of
the fine piece in the English language?'
this story have such an effect upon I, who have ever a proud heart, and
want to be think a clever fellow, that, in order to avoid the like
disgrace, I lay down two rule to myself. the first, whenever I go
into company where there be stranger, to hear every one of they speak,
before I give myself liberty to prate: the other, if I find any of they
above my match, to give up all title to new discovery, content
myself to praise what they praise, as beauty familiar to I, though I
have never hear of they before. and so, by degree, I get the reputation
of a wit myself: and when I throw off all restraint, and book, and
learn conversation, and fall in with some of our brother who be now
wander in Erebus, and with such other as Belton, Mowbray, Tourville,
and thyself, I set up on my own stock; and, like what we have be tell
of Sir Richard, in his latter day, value myself on be the emperor of
the company; for, have fathom the depth of they all, and afraid of no
rival but thee, whom also I have get a little under, (by my gaiety and
promptitude at least) I proudly, like Addison's Cato, delight to give
law to my little senate.
proceed with thee by-and-by.
LETTER LIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
but now I have clear myself of any intentional levity on occasion of my
beloved's meditation; which, as you observe, be finely suited to her
case, (that be to say, as she and you have draw her case;) I cannot help
express my pleasure, that by one or two verse of it, [the arrow,
Jack, and what she fear be come upon she!] I be encourage to hope,
what it will be very surprising to I if it do not happen: that be, in
plain English, that the dear creature be in the way to be a mamma.
this cursed arrest, because of the ill effect the terror might have have
upon she, in that hop-for circumstance, have concern I more than on
any other account. it would be the pride of my life to prove, in this
charming frost-piece, the triumph of Nature over principle, and to have a
young Lovelace by such an angel: and then, for its sake, I be confident
she will live, and will legitimate it. and what a meritorious little
cherub would it be, that should lay an obligation upon both parent
before it be bear, which neither of they would be able to repay!--could
I be sure it be so, I should be out of all pain for her recovery: pain, I
say; since, be she to die--[die! abominable word! how I hate it!] I
verily think I should be the most miserable man in the world.
as for the earnestness she express for death, she have find the word
ready to her hand in honest Job; else she would not have deliver
herself with such strength and vehemence.
her innate piety (as I have more than once observe) will not permit she
to shorten her own life, either by violence or neglect. she have a mind
too noble for that; and would have do it before now, have she design
any such thing: for to do it, like the roman matron, when the mischief be
over, and it can serve no end; and when the man, however a Tarquin, as
some may think I in this action, be not a Tarquin in power, so that no
national point can be make of it; be what she have too much good sense to
think of.
then, as I observe in a like case, a little while ago, the distress,
when this be write, be strong upon she; and she see no end of it: but
all be darkness and apprehension before she. moreover, have she it not
in her power to disappoint, as much as she have be disappoint?
Revenge, Jack, have induce many a woman to cherish a life, to which grief
and despair would otherwise have put an end.
and, after all, death be no such eligible thing, as Job in his
calamity, make it. and a death desire merely from worldly
disappointment show not a right mind, let I tell this lady, whatever
she may think of it.* you and I Jack, although not afraid, in the height
of passion or resentment, to rush into those danger which might be
follow by a sudden and violent death, whenever a point of honour call
upon we, would shudder at his cool and deliberate approach in a lingering
sickness, which have debilitate the spirit.
* Mr. Lovelace could not know, that the lady be so thoroughly sensible
of the solidity of this doctrine, as she really be: for, in her letter
to Mrs. Norton, (Letter XLIV. of this volume,) she says,--'Nor let it be
imagine, that my present turn of mind proceed from gloominess or
melancholy: for although it be bring on by disappointment, (the world
show I early, even at my first rushing into it, its true and ugly
face,) yet I hope, that it have obtain a well root, and will every day
more and more, by its fruit, demonstrate to I, and to all my friend,
that it have.'
so we read of a famous french general [I forget as well the reign of the
prince as the name of the man] who, have face with intrepidity the
ghastly varlet on an hundred occasion in the field, be the most
deject of wretch, when, have forfeit his life for treason, he be
lead with all the cruel parade of preparation, and surround guard, to
the scaffold.
the poet say well:
'tis not the stoic lesson, get by rote,
the pomp of word, and pedant dissertation,
that can support we in the hour of terror.
book have teach coward to talk nobly of it:
but when the trial come, they start, and stand aghast.
very true: for then it be the old man in the fable, with his bundle of
stick.
the lady be well read in Shakspeare, our english pride and glory; and
must sometimes reason with herself in his word, so greatly express,
that the subject, affect as it be, cannot produce any thing great.
ay, but to die, and go we know not where;
to lie in cold obstruction, and to rot;
this sensible, warm motion to become
a kneaded clod; and the delighted spirit
to bathe in fiery flood, or to reside
in thrilling region of thick-rib ice:
to be imprison'd in the viewless wind,
or blow, with restless violence, about
the pendant world; or to be bad than bad
of those that lawless and uncertain thought
Imagines howling: 'tis too horrible!
the weariest and most loaded worldly life,
that pain, age, penury, and imprisonment,
can lay on nature, be a paradise
to what we fear of death.----
I find, by one of thy three letter, that my beloved have some account
from Hickman of my interview with Miss Howe, at Col. Ambrose's. I have a
very agreeable time of it there; although severely rally by several of
the assembly. it concern I, however, not a little, to find our affair
so generally know among the flippanti of both sex. it be all her own
fault. there never, surely, be such an odd little soul as this.--not to
keep her own secret, when the revealing of it could answer no possible
good end; and when she want not (one would think) to raise to herself
either pity or friend, or to I enemy, by the proclamation!--Why,
Jack, must not all her own sex laugh in their sleeve at her weakness?
what would become of the peace of the world, if all woman should take it
into their head to follow her example? what a fine time of it would the
head of family have? their wife always fill their ear with their
confession; their daughter with theirs: sister would be every day
set their brother about cutting of throat, if the brother have at
heart the honour of their family, as it be call; and the whole world
would either be a scene of confusion; or cuckoldom as much the fashion as
it be in Lithuania.*
* in Lithuania, the woman be say to have so allowedly their gallant,
call adjutore, that the husband hardly ever enter upon any part of
pleasure without they.
I be glad, however, that Miss Howe (as much as she hat I) keep she
word with my cousin on their visit to she, and with I at the Colonel's,
to endeavour to persuade her friend to make up all matter by matrimony;
which, no doubt, be the good, nay, the only method she can take, for her
own honour, and that of her family.
I have once thought of revenge myself on that vixen, and, particularly,
as thou mayest* remember, have plan something to this purpose on the
journey she be go to take, which have be talk of some time. but, I
think--let I see--yet, I think, I will let this Hickman have her safe
and entire, as thou believest the fellow to be a tolerable sort of a
mortal, and that I have make the bad of he: and I be glad, for his own
sake, he have not launch out too virulently against I to thee.
* see Vol. IV. Letter LIV.
but thou seest, Jack, by her refusal of money from he, or Miss Howe,*
that the dear extravagant take a delight in oddness, choose to part
with her clothe, though for a song. dost think she be not a little
touch at time? I be afraid she be. a little spice of that insanity,
I doubt, run through she, that she have in a strong degree, in the
first week of my operation. her contempt of life; her proclamation;
her refusal of matrimony; and now of money from her most intimate
friend; be sprinkling of this kind, and no other way, I think, to be
account for.
* see Letter XLVIII. of this volume.
her apothecary be a good honest fellow. I like he much. but the silly
dear's harping so continually upon one string, die, die, dying, be
what I have no patience with. I hope all this melancholy jargon be owe
entirely to the way I would have she to be in. and it be as new to
she, as the Bible beauty to thee,* no wonder she know not what to make
of herself; and so fancy she be breed death, when the event will
turn out quite the contrary.
* see Letter XLVI. of this volume.
thou art a sorry fellow in thy remark on the education and qualification
of smart and beaux of the rakish order; if by thy we's and we's thou
mean thyself or I:* for I pretend to say, that the picture have no
resemblance of we, who have read and converse as we have do. it may
indeed, and I believe it do, resemble the generality of the fop and
coxcomb about town. but that let they look to; for, if it affect not
I, to what purpose thy random shot?--if indeed thou find, by the new
light dart in upon thee, since thou hast have the honour of converse
with this admirable creature, that the cap fit thy own head, why then,
accord to the qui capit rule, e'en take and clap it on: and I will
add a string of bell to it, to complete thee for the fore-horse of the
idiot team.
* ibid. and Letter LXVIII.
although I just now say a kind thing or two for this fellow Hickman; yet
I can tell thee, I could (to use one of my noble peer's humble phrase)
eat he up without a corn of salt, when I think of his impudence to
salute my charmer twice at parting:* and have still less patience with
the lady herself for presume to offer her cheek or lip [thou say not
which] to he, and to press his clumsy fist between her charming hand.
an honour worth a king's ransom; and what I would give--what would I not
give? to have!--and then he, in return, to press she, as thou sayest he
do, to his stupid heart; at that time, no doubt, more sensible, than
ever it be before!
* see Letter XLVIII. of this volume.
by thy description of their parting, I see thou wilt be a delicate fellow
in time. my mortification in this lady's displeasure, will be thy
exaltation from her conversation. I envy thee as well for thy
opportunity, as for thy improvement: and such an impression have thy
concluding paragraph* make upon I, that I wish I do not get into a
reformation-humour as well as thou: and then what a couple of lamentable
puppy shall we make, howl in recitative to each other's discordant
music!
* ibid.
let I improve upon the thought, and imagine that, turn hermit, we
have open the two old cave at Hornsey, or dig new one; and in each of
our cell set up a death's head, and an hour-glass, for object of
contemplation--I have see such a picture: but then, Jack, have not the
old penitent fornicator a suffocating long grey beard? what figure
would a couple of brocaded or lace-waistcoated toupet make with their
sour screw'd up half-cock'd face, and more than half shut eye, in a
kneeling attitude, recapitulate their respective roguery? this
scheme, be we only to make trial of it, and return afterwards to our
old way, might serve to well purpose by far, than Horner's in the
Country Wife, to bring the pretty wench to we.
let I see; the author of Hudibras have somewhere a description that would
suit we, when meet in one of our cave, and compare our dismal note
together. this be it. suppose I described--
--He sit upon his rump,
his head like one in doleful dump:
Betwixt his knee his hand apply'd
unto his cheek, on either side:
and by he, in another hole,
Sat stupid Belford, cheek by jowl.
I know thou wilt think I too ludicrous. I think myself so. it be
truly, to be ingenuous, a forced put: for my passion be so wound up,
that I be oblige either to laugh or cry. like honest drunken Jack
Daventry, [poor fellow!--what an unhappy end be his!]--thou know, I
use to observe, that whenever he rise from an entertainment, which he
never do sober, it be his way, as soon as he get to the door, to look
round he like a carrier pigeon just throw up, in order to spy out his
course; and then, take to his heel, he would run all the way home,
though it be a mile or two, when he could hardly stand, and must have
tumble on his nose if he have attempt to walk moderately. this then
must be my excuse, in this my unconverted estate, for a conclusion so
unworthy of the conclusion to thy third letter.
what a length have I run!--thou wilt own, that if I pay thee not in
quality, I do in quantity: and yet I leave a multitude of thing
unobserve upon. indeed I hardly at this present know what to do with
myself but scribble. tired with Lord M. who, in his recovery, have play
upon I the fable of the nurse, the cry child, and the wolf--tired
with my cousin Montague, though charming girl, be they not so near of
kin--tired with Mowbray and Tourville, and their everlasting identity--
tired with the country--tired of myself--long for what I have not--I
must go to town; and there have an interview with the charmer of my soul:
for desperate disease must have desperate remedy; and I only wait to
know my doom from Miss Howe! and then, if it be rejection, I will try my
fate, and receive my sentence at she feet.--but I will apprize thee of it
beforehand, as I tell thee, that thou mayest keep thy parole with the
lady in the good manner thou canst.
LETTER LIV
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[in answer to HER' of JULY 27, SEE letter L. LI. of this volume.]
FRIDAY NIGHT, JULY 28.
I will now, my dear friend, write to you all my mind, without reserve,
on your resolution not to have this vilest of man. you give I, in
your' of Sunday the 23d, reason so worthy of the pure mind of my
Clarissa, in support of this your resolution, that nothing but self-love,
lest I should lose my ever-amiable friend, could have prevail upon I
to wish you to alter it.
indeed, I think it be impossible there could be (however desirable) so
noble an instance give by any of our sex, of a passion conquer, when
there be so many inducement to give way to it. and, therefore, I be
willing to urge you once more to overcome your just indignation, and to
be prevail upon by the solicitation of his friend, before you carry
your resentment to so great a height, that it would be more difficult
for you, and less to your honour to comply, than if you have comply at
first.
but now, my dear, that I see you fix in your noble resolution; and that
it be impossible for your pure mind to join itself with that of so
perjure a miscreant; I congratulate you most heartily upon it; and beg
your pardon for but seem to doubt that theory and practice be not
the same thing with my beloved Clarissa.
I have only one thing that sadden my heart on this occasion; and that
be, the bad state of health Mr. Hickman (unwillingly) own you be in.
Hitherto you have well observe the doctrine you always lay down to I,
that a cursed person should first seek the world's opinion of she; and,
in all case where the two could not be reconcile, have prefer the
first to the last; and be, of consequence, well justify to your own
heart, as well as to your Anna Howe. let I therefore beseech you to
endeavour, by all possible mean, to recover your health and spirit:
and this, as what, if it can be effect, will crown the work, and show
the world, that you be indeed get above the base wretch; and, though
put out of your course for a little while, could resume it again, and go
on blessing all within your knowledge, as well by your example as by your
precept.
for Heaven's sake, then, for the world's sake, for the honour of our sex,
and for my sake, once more I beseech you, try to overcome this shock:
and, if you can overcome it, I shall then be as happy as I wish to be;
for I cannot, indeed I cannot, think of part with you, for many, many
year to come.
the reason you give for discourage my wish to have you near we be
so convincing, that I ought at present to acquiesce in they: but, my
dear, when your mind be fully settle, as, (now you be so absolutely
determined in it, with regard this wretch,) I hope it will soon be, I
shall expect you with we, or near we: and then you shall chalk out every
path that I will set my foot in; nor will I turn aside either to the
right hand or to the left.
you wish I have not mediate for you to your friend. I wish so too;
because my mediation be ineffectual; because it may give new ground for
the malice of some of they to work upon; and because you be angry with
I for do so. but how, as I say in my former, could I sit down in
quiet, when I know how uneasy their implacableness make you?--but I will
tear myself from the subject; for I see I shall be warm again--and
displease you--and there be not one thing in the world that I would do,
however agreeable to myself, if I think it would disoblige you; nor any
one that I would omit to do, if I know it would give you pleasure. and
indeed, my dear half-severe friend, I will try if I cannot avoid the
fault as willingly as I would the rebuke.
for this reason, I forbear say any thing on so nice a subject as your
letter to your sister. it must be right, because you think it so--and if
it be take as it ought, that will show you that it be. but if it beget
insult and reviling, as it be but too likely, I find you donot intend
to let I know it.
you be always so ready to accuse yourself for other people's fault,
and to suspect your own conduct rather than the judgment of your
relation, that I have often tell you I cannot imitate you in this. it
be not a necessary point of belief with I, that all people in year be
therefore wise; or that all young people be therefore rash and
headstrong: it may be generally the case, as far as I know: and possibly
it may be so in the case of my mother and her girl: but I will venture
to say that it have not yet appear to be so between the principal of
harlowe-place and their second daughter.
you be for excuse they beforehand for their expect cruelty, as not
know what you have suffer, nor how ill you be: they have hear of
the former, and be not sorry for it: of the latter they have be tell,
and I have most reason to know how they have take it--but I shall be far
from avoid the fault, and as surely shall incur the rebuke, if I say
any more upon this subject. I will therefore only add at present, that
your reasoning in their behalf show you to be all excellence; their
return to you that they be all----Do, my dear, let I end with a little
bit of spiteful justice--but you willnot, I know--so I have do, quite
do, however reluctantly: yet if you think of the word I would have
say, donot doubt the justice of it, and fill up the blank with it.
you intimate that be I actually marry, and Mr. Hickman to desire it,
you would think of oblige I with a visit on the occasion; and that,
perhaps, when with I, it would be difficult for you to remove far from
I.
Lord, my dear, what a stress do you seem to lay upon Mr. Hickman's
desire it!--To be sure he do and would of all thing desire to have
you near we, and with we, if we might be so favoured--policy, as well as
veneration for you, would undoubtedly make the man, if not a fool, desire
this. but let I tell you, that if Mr. Hickman, after marriage, should
pretend to dispute with I my friendship, as I hope I be not quite a
fool, I should let he know how far his own quiet be concern in such
an impertinence; especially if they be such friendship as be
contract before I know he.
I know I always differ from you on this subject: for you think more
highly of a husband's prerogative than most people do of the royal one.
these notion, my dear, from a person of your sense and judgment, be no
way advantageous to we; inasmuch as they justify the assume sex in
their insolence; when hardly one out of ten of they, their opportunity
consider, deserve any prerogative at all. look through all the
family we know; and we shall not find one-third of they have half the
sense of their wife. and yet these be to be vest with prerogative!
and a woman of twice their sense have nothing to do but hear, tremble, and
obey--and for conscience-sake too, I warrant!
but Mr. Hickman and I may perhaps have a little discourse upon these
sort of subject, before I suffer he to talk of the day: and then I
shall let he know what he have to trust to; as he will I, if he be a
sincere man, what he pretend to expect from I. but let I tell you, my
dear, that it be more in your power than, perhaps, you think it, to
hasten the day so much press for by my mother, as well as wish for by
you--for the very day that you can assure I that you be in a tolerable
state of health, and have discharge your doctor and apothecary, at their
own motion, on that account--some day in a month from that desirable
news shall be it. so, my dear, make haste and be well, and then this
matter will be bring to effect in a manner more agreeable to your Anna
Howe than it otherwise ever can.
I send this day, by a particular hand, to the Misses Montague, your
letter of just reprobation of the great profligate in the kingdom; and
hope I shall not have do amiss that I transcribe some of the paragraph
of your letter of the 23d, and send they with it, as you at first
intend should be do.
you be, it seem, (and that too much for your health,) employ in
writing. I hope it be in pen down the particular of your tragical
story. and my mother have put I in mind to press you to it, with a view
that one day, if it might be publish under feigned name, it would be
as much use as honour to the sex. my mother say she cannot help
admire you for the propriety of your resentment of the wretch; and she
would be extremely glad to have her advice of pen your sad story
comply with. and then, she say, your noble conduct throughout your
trial and calamity will afford not only a shin example to your sex,
but at the same time, (those calamitie befall such a person,) a
fearful warning to the inconsiderate young creature of it.
on Monday we shall set out on our journey; and I hope to be back in a
fortnight, and on my return will have one pull more with my mother for a
London journey: and, if the pretence must be the buying of clothe, the
principal motive will be that of see once more my dear friend, while I
can say I have not finally give consent to the change of a visiter into
a relation, and so can call myself MY OWN, as well as
your
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER LV
MISS HOWE, to the two MISSES MONTAGUE
SAT. JULY 29.
DEAR lady,
I have not bee want to use all my interest with my beloved friend, to
induce she to forgive and be reconcile to your kinsman, (though he have
so ill deserve it;) and have even repeat my earnest advice to she on
this head. this repetition, and the wait for her answer, have take
up time, have bee the cause that I could not soon do myself the honour
of write to you on this subject.
you will see, by the enclosed, her immovable resolution, ground on
noble and high-souled motif, which I cannot but regret and applaud at
the same time: applaud, for the justice of her determination, which will
confirm all your worthy house in the opinion you have conceive of her
unequalled merit; and regret, because I have but too much reason to
apprehend, as well by that, as by the report of a gentleman just come
from she, that she be in a decline way, as to her health, that her
thought be very differently employ than on a continuance here.
the enclosed letter she think fit to send to I unseal, that, after
I have peruse it, I might forward it to you: and this be the reason it be
superscribe by myself, and seal with my seal. it be very full and
peremptory; but as she have be please, in a letter to I, date the 23d
instant, (as soon as she could hold a pen,) to give I more ample reason
why she could not comply with your press request, as well as mine, I
will transcribe some of the passage in that letter, which will give one
of the wicked man in the world, (if he see they,) reason to think
himself one of the most unhappy, in the loss of so incomparable a wife as
he might have glory in, have he not be so superlatively wicked. these
be the passage.
[see, for these passage, Miss Harlowe's letter, no. XLI. of this volume,
date July 23, mark with a turn comma, thus ']
and now, lady, you have before you my beloved friend's reason for her
refusal of a man unworthy of the relation he bear to so many excellent
person: and I will add, [for I cannot help it,] that the merit and rank
of the person consider, and the vile manner of his proceeding, there
never be a great villany commit: and since she think she first and
only fault cannot be expiate but by death, I pray to God daily, and will
hourly from the moment I shall hear of that sad catastrophe, that he will
be pleased to make he the subject of his vengeance, in some such way, as
that all who know of his perfidious crime, may see the hand of Heaven in
the punishment of it!
you will forgive I, lady: I love not mine own soul well than I do
Miss Clarissa Harlowe. and the distress she have go through; the
persecution she suffer from all her friend; the curse she lie under,
for his sake, from her implacable father; her reduce health and
circumstance, from high health and affluence; and that execrable arrest
and confinement, which have deepen all her other calamity, [and which
must be lay at his door, as it be the act of his vile agent, that,
whether from his immediate order or not, naturally flow from his
precede baseness;] the sex dishonour in the eye of the world, in the
person of one of the great ornament of it; the unmanly method,
whatever they be, [for I know not all as yet,] by which he compass
her ruin; all these consideration join to justify my warmth, and my
execration of a man whom I think exclude by his crime from the benefit
even of christian forgiveness--and be you to see all she write, and to
know the admirable talent she be mistress of, you yourselves would join
with I to admire she, and execrate he.
believe I to be, with a high sense of your merit,
Dear lady,
your most obedient and humble servant,
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER LVI
MRS. NORTON, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
FRIDAY, JULY 28.
my dearest YOUNG LADY,
I have the consolation to tell you that my son be once again in a hopeful
way, as to his health. he desire his duty to you. he be very low and
weak. and so be I. but this be the first time that I have be able,
for several day past, to sit up to write, or I would not have be so
long silent.
your letter to your sister be receive and answer. you have the answer
by this time, I suppose. I wish it may be to your satisfaction: but be
afraid it will not: for, by Betty Barnes, I find they be in a great
ferment on receive your's, and much divide whether it should be
answer or not. they will not yet believe that you be so ill, as [to
my infinite concern] I find you be. what pass between Miss Harlowe
and Miss Howe have be, as I fear it would be, an aggravation.
I show Betty two or three passage in your letter to I; and she seem
move, and say, she would report they favourably, and would procure I a
visit from Miss Harlowe, if I would promise to show the same to she. but
I have hear no more of that.
methink, I be sorry you refuse the wicked man: but doubt not,
nevertheless, that your motif for do so be more commendable than my
wish that you would not. but as you would be resolve, as I may say,
on life, if you give way to such a thought; and as I have so much
interest in your recovery; I cannot forbear show this regard to
myself; and to ask you, if you cannot get over your just resentments?--
but I dare say no more on this subject.
what a dreadful thing indeed be it for my dear tender young lady to
be arrest in the street of London!--How do my heart go over again
and again for you, what your's must have suffer at that time!--yet
this, to such a mind as your's, must be light, compare to what you have
suffer before.
o my dearest Miss Clary, how shall we know what to pray for, when we
pray, but that God's will may be do, and that we may be resign to it!
--When at nine year old, and afterwards at eleven, you have a dangerous
fever, how incessantly do we grieve, and pray, and put up our vow to
the Throne of Grace, for your recovery!--for all our life be bind up
in your life--yet now, my dear, as it have prove, [especially if we be
soon to lose you,] what a much more desirable event, both for you and for
we, would it have be, have we then lose you!
a sad thing to say! but as it be in pure love to you that I say it, and
in full conviction that we be not always fit to be our own chooser, I
hope it may be excusable; and the rather, as the same reflection will
naturally lead both you and I to acquiesce under the
dispensation; since we be assure that nothing happen by chance; and
the great good may, for aught we know, be produce from the heavy
evil.
I be glad you be with such honest people; and that you have all your
effect restore. how dreadfully have you be use, that one should be
glad of such a poor piece of justice as that!
your talent at move the passion be always hint at; and this Betty of
your sister's never come near I that she be not full of it. but, as
you say, whom have it move, that you wish to move? yet, be it not
for this unhappy notion, I be sure your mother would relent. forgive I,
my dear Miss Clary; for I must try one way to be convince if my opinion
be not just. but I will not tell you what that be, unless it succeed.
I will try, in pure duty and love to they, as to you.
may Heaven be your support in all your trial, be the constant prayer, my
dear young lady, of
your ever affectionate friend and servant,
JUDITH NORTON.
LETTER LVII
MRS. NORTON, to MRS. HARLOWE
FRIDAY, JULY 28.
HONOURED MADAM,
be forbid (without leave) to send you any thing I might happen to
receive from my beloved Miss Clary, and so ill, that I cannot attend
you to ask your leave, I give you this trouble, to let you know that I
have receive a letter from she; which, I think, I should hereafter be
hold inexcusable, as thing may happen, if I do not desire permission
to communicate to you, and that as soon as possible.
application have be make to the dear young lady from Lord M., from
the two lady his sister, and from both his niece, and from the wicked
man himself, to forgive and marry he. this, in noble indignation for
the usage she have receive from he, she have absolutely refuse. and
perhaps, Madam, if you and the honoured family should be of opinion that
to comply with their wish be now the proper measure that can be
take, the circumstance of thing may require your authority or advice,
to induce she to change her mind.
I have reason to believe that one motive for her refusal be her full
conviction that she shall not long be a trouble to any body; and so she
would not give a husband a right to interfere with her family, in
relation to the estate her grandfather devise to she. but of this,
however, I have not the least intimation from she. nor would she, I dare
say, mention it as a reason, have still strong reason, from his vile
treatment of she, to refuse he.
the letter I have receive will show how truly penitent the dear creature
be; and, if I have your permission, I will send it seal up, with a copy
of mine, to which it be an answer. but as I resolve upon this step
without her knowledge, [and indeed I do,] I will not acquaint she with
it, unless it be attend with desirable effect: because, otherwise,
besides make I incur her displeasure, it might quite break she already
half-break heart. I be,
Honoured Madam,
your dutiful and ever-oblige servant,
JUDITH NORTON.
LETTER LVIII
MRS. HARLOWE, to MRS. JUDITH NORTON
SUNDAY, JULY 30.
we all know your virtuous prudence, worthy woman: we all do. but your
partiality to this your rash favourite be likewise know. and we be no
less acquainted with the unhappy body's power of paint her distress
so as to pierce a stone.
every one be of opinion that the dear naughty creature be work about
to be forgive and receive: and for this reason it be that Betty have
be forbid, [not by I, you may be assure!] to mention any more of
her letter; for she do speak to my Bella of some move passage you
read to she.
this will convince you that nothing will be hear in her favour. to what
purpose then should I mention any thing about her?--But you may be sure
that I will, if I can have but one second. however, that be not at all
likely, until we see what the consequence of her crime will be: and who
can tell that?--She may--how can I speak it, and my once darling daughter
unmarried?--She may be with child!--This would perpetuate her stain. she
brother may come to some harm; which God forbid!--one child's ruin, I
hope, will not be follow by another's murder!
as to her grief, and her present misery, whatever it be, she must bear
with it; and it must be short of what I hourly bear for she! indeed I be
afraid nothing but her be at the last extremity of all will make she
father, and her uncle, and her other friend, forgive she.
the easy pardon perverse child meet with, when they have do the
rash and most rebellious thing they can do, be the reason (as be
plead to we every day) that so may follow their example. they depend
upon the indulgent weakness of their parent' temper, and, in that
dependence, harden their own heart: and a little humiliation, when they
have bring themselves into the foretold misery, be to be a sufficient
atonement for the great perverseness.
but for such a child as this [I mention what other hourly say, but what
I must sorrowfully subscribe to] to lay plot and stratagem to deceive
her parent as well as herself! and to run away with a libertine! can
there be any atonement for her crime? and be she not answerable to God,
to we, to you, and to all the world who know she, for the abuse of such
talent as she have abuse?
you say her heart be half-break: be it to be wonder at? be not she
sin commit equally against warning and the light of her own knowledge?
that he would now marry she, or that she would refuse he, if she
believe he in earnest, as she have circumstance herself, be not at all
probable; and be I inclined to believe it, nobody else here would. he
value not his relation; and would deceive they as soon as any other:
his aversion to marriage he have always openly declare; and still
occasionally declare it. but, if he be now in earnest, which every one
who know he must doubt, which do you think (hat we too as he
profess to hate and despise we all) would be most eligible here, to
hear of her death, or of her marriage to such a vile man?
to all of we, yet, I cannot say! for, o my good Mrs. Norton, you know
what a mother's tenderness for the child of her heart would make she
choose, notwithstanding all that child's fault, rather than lose she
for ever!
but I must sail with the tide; my own judgment also join with the
general resentment; or I should make the unhappiness of the more worthy
still great, [my dear Mr. Harlowe's particularly;] which be already
more than enough to make they unhappy for the remainder of their day.
this I know; if I be to oppose the rest, our son would fly out to find
this libertine; and who could tell what would be the issue of that with
such a man of violence and blood as that Lovelace be know to be?
all I can expect to prevail for she be, that in a week, or so, Mr. Brand
may be send up to inquire privately about her present state and way of
life, and to see she be not altogether destitute: for nothing she write
herself will be regard.
her father indeed have, at her earnest request, withdraw the curse,
which, in a passion, he lay upon she, at her first wicked flight from
we. but Miss Howe, [it be a sad thing, Mrs. Norton, to suffer so many
way at once,] have make matter so difficult by her undue liberty with
we all, as well by speech in all company, as by letter write to my
Bella, that we could hardly prevail upon he to hear her letter read.
these liberty of Miss Howe with we; the general cry against we abroad
wherever we be speak of; and the visible, and not seldom audible,
disrespectfulness, which high and low treat we with to our face, as we
go to and from church, and even at church, (for no where else have we the
heart to go,) as if none of we have be regard but upon her account;
and as if she be innocent, we all in fault; be constant aggravation,
you must need think, to the whole family.
she have make my lot heavy, I be sure, that be far from be light
before!--To tell you truth, I be enjoin not to receive any thing of
she's, from any hand, without leave. should I therefore gratify my
yearning after she, so far as to receive privately the letter you
mention, what would the case be, but to torment myself, without be
able to do her good?--and be it to be know--Mr. Harlowe be so
passionate--and should it throw his gout into his stomach, as her rash
flight do--indeed, indeed, I be very unhappy!--for, o my good woman,
she be my child still!--but unless it be more in my power--yet do I
long to see the letter--you say it tell of her present way and
circumstance. the poor child, who ought to be in possession of
thousands!--And will!--For her father will be a faithful steward for
her.--But it must be in his own way, and at his own time.
and be she really ill?--so very ill?--but she ought to sorrow--she have
give a double measure of it.
but do she really believe she shall not long trouble us?--but, o my
Norton!--She must, she will, long trouble we--for can she think she
death, if we should be deprive of she, will put an end to our
afflictions?--can it be think that the fall of such a child will not
be regret by we to the last hour of our life?
but, in the letter you have, do she, without reserve, express she
contrition? have she in it no reflect hint? do she not aim at
extenuations?--if I be to see it, will it not shock I so much, that
my apparent grief may expose I to harshnesses?--can it be contrived--
but to what purpose?--don't send it--I charge you don't--I dare not see
it--
Yet--
but alas!--
oh! forgive the almost distracted mother! you can.--you know how to
allow for all this--so I will let it go.--i will not write over again
this part of my letter.
but I choose not to know more of she than be communicate to we all--
no more than I dare own I have see--and what some of they may rather
communicate to I, than receive from I: and this for the sake of my
outward quiet: although my inward peace suffer more and more by the
compel reserve.
***
I be force to break off. but I will now try to conclude my long
letter.
I be sorry you be ill. but if you be well, I could not, for your own
sake, wish you to go up, as Betty tell we you long to do. if you go,
nothing would be minded that come from you. as they already think you
too partial in her favour, your go up would confirm it, and do
yourself prejudice, and her no good. and as every body value you here,
I advise you not to interest yourself too warmly in her favour,
especially before my Bella's Betty, till I can let you know a proper
time. yet to forbid you to love the dear naughty creature, who can? O
my Norton! you must love her!--and so must I!
I send you five guinea, to help you in your present illness, and your
son's; for it must have lain heavy upon you. what a sad, sad thing, my
dear good woman, that all your pain, and all my pain, for eighteen or
nineteen year together, have, in so few month, be render thus
deplorably vain! yet I must be always your friend, and pity you, for the
very reason that I myself deserve every one's pity.
perhaps I may find an opportunity to pay you a visit, as in your illness;
and then may weep over the letter you mention with you. but, for the
future, write nothing to I about the poor girl that you think may not be
communicate to we all.
and I charge you, as you value my friendship, as you wish my peace, not
to say any thing of a letter you have from I, either to the naughty one,
or to any body else. it be with some little relief (the occasion give)
to write to you, who must, in so particular a manner, share my
affliction. a mother, Mrs. Norton, cannot forget her child, though that
child could abandon her mother; and, in so do, run away with all her
mother's comforts!--as I truly say be the case of
your unhappy friend,
CHARLOTTE HARLOWE.
LETTER LIX
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MRS. JUDITH NORTON
SAT. JULY 29.
I congratulate you, my dear Mrs. Norton, with all my heart, on your son's
recovery; which I pray to God, with all your own health, to perfect.
I write in some hurry, be apprehensive of the sequence of the hint
you give of some method you propose to try in my favour [with my
relation, I presume, you mean]: but you will not tell I what, you say,
if it prove unsuccessful.
now I must beg of you that you will not take any step in my favour, with
which you do not first acquaint I.
I have but one request to make to they, besides what be contain in my
letter to my sister; and I would not, methink, for the sake of their own
future peace of mind, that they should be tease so by your well-mean
kindness, and that of Miss Howe, as to be put upon deny I that. and
why should more be ask for I than I can partake of? More than be
absolutely necessary for my own peace?
you suppose I should have my sister's answer to my letter by the time
your's reach my hand. I have it: and a severe one, a very severe one,
it be. yet, consider my fault in their eye, and the provocation I
be to suppose they so newly have from my dear Miss Howe, I be to look upon
it as a favour that it be answer at all. I will send you a copy of it
soon; as also of mine, to which it be an answer.
I have reason to be very thankful that my father have withdraw that heavy
malediction, which affect I so much--a parent's curse, my dear Mrs.
Norton! what child could die in peace under a parent's curse? so
literally fulfil too as this have be in what relate to this life!
my heart be too full to touch upon the particular of my sister's letter.
I can make but one atonement for my fault. may that be accept! and
may it soon be forget, by every dear relation, that there be such an
unhappy daughter, sister, or niece, as Clarissa Harlowe!
my cousin Morden be one of those who be so earnest in prayer for my
recovery, at nine and eleven year of age, as you mention. my sister
think he will be one of those who wish I never have have a being. but
pray, when he do come, let I hear of it with the first.
you think that, be it not for that unhappy notion of my moving talent,
my mother would relent. what would I give to see she once more, and,
although unknown to she, to kiss but the hem of her garment!
could I have think that the last time I see she would have be the
last, with what difficulty should I have be tear from she embrace
feet!--and when, screen behind the yew-hedge on the 5th of April last,*
I see my father, and my uncle Antony, and my brother and sister, how
little do I think that that would be the last time I should ever see
they; and, in so short a space, that so many dreadful evil would befal
I!
* see Vol. II. letter XXXVI.
but I can write nothing but what must give you trouble. I will
therefore, after repeat my desire that you will not intercede for I
but with my previous consent, conclude with the assurance, that I be, and
ever will be,
your most affectionate and dutiful
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER LX
MISS AR. HARLOWE, to MISS CL. HARLOWE
[in answer to HER' of FRIDAY, JULY 21, LETTER XLV. of this volume.]
THURSDAY, JULY 27.
o MY UNHAPPY lose SISTER!
what a miserable hand have you make of your romantic and giddy
expedition!--i pity you at my heart.
you may well grieve and repent!--lovelace have leave you!--In what way or
circumstance you know well.
I wish your conduct have make your case more pitiable. but 'tis your own
seek!
God help you!--For you have not a friend will look upon you!--poor,
wicked, undo creature!--fallen, as you be, against warning, against
expostulation, against duty!
but it signify nothing to reproach you. I weep over you.
my poor mother!--your rashness and folly have make she more miserable
than you can be.--yet she have beseech my father to grant your request.
my uncle join with she: for they think there be a little more
modesty in your letter than in the letter of your pert advocate: and my
father be pleased to give I leave to write; but only these word for
he, and no more: 'that he withdraw the curse he lay upon you, at the
first hearing of your wicked flight, so far as it be in his power to do
it; and hop that your present punishment may be all that you will meet
with. for the rest, he will never own you, nor forgive you; and grieve
he have such a daughter in the world.'
all this, and more you have deserve from he, and from all of we: but
what have you do to this abandon libertine, to deserve what you have
meet with at his hands?--i fear, I fear, sister!--but no more!--a bless
four month' work have you make of it.
my brother be now at Edinburgh, send thither by my father, [though he
know not this to be the motive,] that he may not meet your triumphant
deluder.
we be tell he would be glad to marry you: but why, then, do he abandon
you? he have keep you till he be tired of you, no question; and it be
not likely he would wish to have you but upon the term you have already
without all doubt be his.
you ought to advise your friend Miss Howe to concern herself less in your
matter than she do, except she could do it with more decency. she have
write three letter to I: very insolent one. your favourer, poor
Mrs. Norton, think you know nothing of the pert creature's writing. I
hope you donot. but then the more impertinent the writer. but,
believe the fond woman, I sit down the more readily to answer your
letter; and I write with less severity, I can tell you, than otherwise I
should have do, if I have answer it all.
Monday last be your birth-day. think, poor ungrateful wretch, as you
be! how we all use to keep it; and you will not wonder to be tell, that
we run away from one another that day. but God give you true penitence,
if you have it not already! and it will be true, if it be equal to the
shame and the sorrow you have give we all.
your afflicted sister,
arabella HARLOWE.
your cousin Morden be every day expect in England. he, as well as
other of the family, when he come to hear what a blessed piece of
work you have make of it, will wish you never have have a being.
LETTER LXI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SUNDAY, JULY 30.
you have give I great pleasure, my dear friend, by your approbation
of my reasoning, and of my resolution found upon they, never to have
Mr. Lovelace. this approbation be so right a thing, give I leave to
say, from the nature of the case, and from the strict honour and true
dignity of mind, which I always admire in my Anna Howe, that I could
hardly tell to what, but to my evil destiny, which of late would not let
I please any body, to attribute the advice you give I to the contrary.
but let not the ill state of my health, and what that may naturally tend
to, sadden you. I have tell you, that I will not run away from life, nor
avoid the mean that may continue it, if God see fit: and if he do not,
who shall repine at his will!
if it shall be find that I have not act unworthy of your love, and of
my own character, in my great trial, that will be a happiness to both
on reflection.
the shock which you so earnestly advise I to try to get above, be a
shock, the great that I could receive. but, my dear, as it be not
occasion by my fault, I hope I be already get above it. I hope I be.
I be more grieve (at time however) for other, than for myself. and so
I ought. for as to myself, I cannot but reflect that I have have an
escape, rather than a loss, in miss Mr. Lovelace for a husband--even
have he not commit the vilest of all outrage.
let any one, who know my story, collect his character from his behaviour
to I before that outrage; and then judge whether it be in the least
probable that such a man should make I happy. but to collect his
character from his principle with regard to the sex in general, and from
his enterprize upon many of they, and to consider the cruelty of his
nature, and the sportiveness of his invention, together with the high
opinion he have of himself, it will not be doubt that a wife of his must
have be miserable; and more miserable if she love he, than she could
have be be she to be indifferent to he.
a twelvemonth might very probably have put a period to my life; situate
as I be with my friend; persecute and harass as I have be by my
brother and sister; and my very heart tear in piece by the wilful, and
(as it be now apparent) premeditate suspense of the man, whose
gratitude I wish to engage, and whose protection I be the more
entitle to expect, as he have rob I of every other, and reduce I to
an absolute dependence upon himself. indeed I once think that it be
all his view to bring I to this, (as he hat my family;) and
uncomfortable enough for I, if it have be all.
can it be think, my dear, that my heart be not more than half break
(happy as I be before I know Mr. Lovelace) by a grievous change in my
circumstances?--indeed it be. nor perhaps be the wicked violence
want to have cut short, though possibly not so very short, a life that
he have sport with.
have I be his but a month, he must have possess the estate on which my
relation have set their heart; the more to their regret, as they hat
he as much as he hat they.
have I not reason, these thing consider, to think myself happy
without Mr. Lovelace than I could have be with him?--My will too
unviolate; and very little, nay, not any thing as to he, to reproach
myself with?
but with my relation it be otherwise. they indeed deserve to be pity.
they be, and no doubt will long be, unhappy.
to judge of their resentment, and of their conduct, we must put
ourselves in their situation:--and while they think I more in fault than
themselves, (whether my favourer be of their opinion, or not,) and have
a right to judge for themselves, they ought to have great allowance make
for they; my parent especially. they stand at least self-acquit,
(that I cannot;) and the rather, as they can recollect, to their pain,
their past indulgencie to I, and their unquestionable love.
your partiality for the friend you so much value will not easily let you
come into this way of thinking. but only, my dear, be pleased to consider
the matter in the following light.
'here be my mother, one of the most prudent person of her sex, marry
into a family, not perhaps so happily temper as herself; but every one
of which she have the address, for a great while, absolutely to govern as
she please by her direct wisdom, at the same time that they know not
but her prescription be the dictate of their own heart; such a sweet
heart have she of conquer by seem to yield. think, my dear, what
must be the pride and the pleasure of such a mother, that in my brother
she could give a son to the family she distinguish with her love, not
unworthy of their wish; a daughter, in my sister, of whom she have no
reason to be ashamed; and in I a second daughter, whom every body
compliment (such be their partial favour to I) as be the still
more immediate likeness of herself? how, self please, could she smile
round upon a family she have so blessed! what compliment be pay she
upon the example she have give we, which be follow with such hopeful
effect! with what a noble confidence could she look upon her dear Mr.
Harlowe, as a person make happy by she; and be delighted to think that
nothing but purity stream from a fountain so pure!
'now, my dear, reverse, as I daily do, this charming prospect. see my
dear mother, sorrow in her closet; endeavour to suppress her sorrow
at her table, and in those retirement where sorrow be before a
stranger: hang down her pensive head: smile no more beam over her
benign aspect: her virtue make to suffer for fault she could not be
guilty of: her patience continually try (because she have more of it
than any other) with repetition of fault she be as much wound by, as
those can be from whom she so often hear of they: take to herself, as
the fountain-head, a taint which only have infect one of the
under-current: afraid to open her lip (be she willing) in my favour,
lest it should be think she have any bias in her own mind to failing
that never could have be suspect in she: rob of that pleasing
merit, which the mother of well-nurture and hopeful child may glory
in: every one who visit she, or be visit by she, by dumb show, and
look that mean more than word can express, condole where they use to
congratulate: the affected silence wounding: the compassionate look
reminding: the half-suppress sigh in they, call up deep sigh from
she; and their avert eye, while they endeavour to restrain the rise
tear, provoke tear from she, that will not be restrain.
'when I consider these thing, and, add to these, the pang that tear
in piece the strong heart of my FATHER, because it cannot relieve
itself by those which carry the torture grief to the eye of soft
spirit: the overboil tumult of my impatient and uncontroulable
BROTHER, pique to the heart of his honour, in the fall of a sister, in
whom he once glory: the pride of an elder SISTER, who have give
unwilling way to the honour pay over her head to one bear after she:
and, lastly, the dishonour I have bring upon two uncle, who each
contend which should most favour their then happy niece:--when, I say,
I reflect upon my fault in these strong, yet just light, what room can
there be to censure any body but my unhappy self? and how much reason
have I to say, if I justify myself, mine own heart shall condemn I: if I
say I be perfect, it shall also prove I perverse?'
here permit I to lay down my pen for a few moment.
***
you be very obliging to I, intentionally, I know, when you tell I, it
be in my power to hasten the day of Mr. Hickman's happiness. but yet,
give I leave to say, that I admire this kind assurance less than any
other paragraph of your letter.
in the first place you know it be not in my power to say when I can
dismiss my physician; and you should not put the celebration of a
marriage intend by yourself, and so desirable to your mother, upon so
precarious an issue. nor will I accept of a compliment, which must mean
a slight to she.
if any thing could give I a relish for life, after what I have suffer,
it would be the hope of the continuance of the more than sisterly love,
which have, for year, uninterruptedly bind we together as one mind.--And
why, my dear, should you defer give (by a tie still strong) another
friend to one who have so few?
I be glad you have send my letter to Miss Montague. I hope I shall hear
no more of this unhappy man.
I have begin the particular of my tragical story: but it be so painful a
task, and I have so many more important thing to do, and, as I
apprehend, so little time to do they in, that, could I avoid it, I would
go no far in it.
then, to this hour, I know not by what mean several of his machination
to ruin I be bring about; so that some material part of my sad
story must be defective, if I be to sit down to write it. but I have
be think of a way that will answer the end wish for by your mother
and you full as well, perhaps well.
Mr. Lovelace, it seem, have communicate to his friend Mr. Belford all
that have pass between himself and I, as he go on. Mr. Belford have
not be able to deny it. so that (as we may observe by the way) a poor
young creature, whose indiscretion have give a libertine power over she,
have a reason she little think of, to regret her folly; since these
wretch, who have no more honour in one point than in another, scruple
not to make her weakness a part of their triumph to their brother
libertine.
I have nothing to apprehend of this sort, if I have the justice do I
in his letter which Mr. Belford assure I I have: and therefore the
particular of my story, and the base art of this vile man, will, I
think, be well collect from those very letter of his, (if Mr. Belford
can be prevail upon to communicate they;) to which I dare appeal with
the same truth and fervour as he do, who say--o that one would hear I!
and that mine adversary have write a book!--surely, I would take it upon
my shoulder, and bind it to I as a crown! for I cover not my
transgression as Adam, by hide mine iniquity in my bosom.
there be one way which may be fall upon to induce Mr. Belford to
communicate these letter; since he seem to have (and declare he always
have) a sincere abhorrence of his friend's baseness to I: but that,
youwill say, when you hear it, be a strange one. nevertheless, I be very
earnest upon it at present.
it be no other than this:
I think to make Mr. Belford the executor of my last will: [donot be
surprised:] and with this view I permit his visit with the less scruple:
and every time I see he, from his concern for I, be more and more
inclined to do so. if I hold in the same mind, and if he accept the
trust, and will communicate the material in his power, those, join
with what you can furnish, will answer the whole end.
I know you will start at my notion of such an executor; but pray, my
dear, consider, in my present circumstance, what I can do well, as I
be empower to make a will, and have considerable matter in my own
disposal.
your mother, I be sure, would not consent that you should take this
office upon you. it might subject Mr. Hickman to the insult of that
violent man. Mrs. Norton cannot, for several reason respect herself.
my brother look upon what I ought to have as his right. my uncle
Harlowe be already one of my trustee (as my cousin Morden be the other)
for the estate my grandfather leave I: but you see I could not get from
my own family the few guineas I leave behind I at Harlowe-place; and my
uncle Antony once threaten to have my grandfather's will controvert.
my father!--to be sure, my dear, I could not expect that my father would
do all I wish should be do: and a will to be execute by a father for a
daughter, (part of it, perhaps, absolutely against his own judgment,)
carry somewhat daring and prescriptive in the very word.
if indeed my cousin Morden be to come in time, and would undertake this
trust--but even he it might subject to hazard; and the more, as he be a
man of great spirit; and as the other man (of as great) look upon I
(unprotected as I have long be) as his property.
now Mr. Belford, as I have already mention, know every thing that have
pass. he be a man of spirit, and, it seem, as fearless as the other,
with more humane quality. you donot know, my dear, what instance of
sincere humanity this Mr. Belford have show, not only on occasion of the
cruel arrest, but on several occasion since. and Mrs. Lovick have take
pain to inquire after his general character; and hear a very good one
of he, his justice and generosity in all his concern of meum and tuum,
as they be call: he have a knowledge of law-matter; and have two
executorship upon he at this time, in the discharge of which his honour
be unquestione.
all these reason have already in a manner determine I to ask this
favour of he; although it will have an odd sound with it to make an
intimate friend of Mr. Lovelace my executor.
this be certain: my brother will be more acquiescent a great deal in such
a case with the article of the will, as he will see that it will be to
no purpose to controvert some of they, which else, I dare say, he would
controvert, or persuade my other friend to do so. and who would involve
an executor in a law-suit, if they could help it?--Which would be the
case, if any body be leave, whom my brother could hope to awe or
controul; since my father have possession of all, and be absolutely
govern by he. [angry spirit, my dear, as I have often see, will be
overcome by more angry one, as well as sometimes be disarm by the
meek.]--Nor would I wish, you may believe, to have effect tear out of my
father's hand: while Mr. Belford, who be a man of fortune, (and a good
economist in his own affair) would have no interest but to do justice.
then he exceedingly press for some occasion to show his readiness to
serve I: and he would be able to manage his violent friend, over whom he
have more influence than any other person.
but after all, I know not if it be not more eligible by far, that my
story, and myself too, should be forget as soon as possible. and of
this I shall have the less doubt, if the character of my parent [you
will forgive my, my dear] cannot be guard against the unqualified
bitterness which, from your affectionate zeal for I, have sometimes
mingle with your ink--a point that ought, and (I insist upon it) must be
well consider of, if any thing be do which your mother and you be
desirous to have do. the generality of the world be too apt to oppose
a duty--and general duty, my dear, ought not to be weaken by the
justification of a single person, however unhappily circumstanced.
my father have be so good as to take off the heavy malediction he lay
I under. I must be now solicitous for a last blessing; and that be all
I shall presume to petition for. my sister's letter, communicate this
grace, be a severe one: but as she write to I as from every body, how
could I expect it to be otherwise?
if you set out to-morrow, this letter cannot reach you till you get to
your aunt Harman's. I shall therefore direct it thither, as Mr. Hickman
instruct I.
I hope you will have meet with no inconveniencie in your little journey
and voyage; and that you will have find in good health all whom you wish
to see well.
if your relation in the little island join their solicitation with your
mother's command, to have your nuptial celebrate before you leave
they, let I beg of you, my dear, to oblige they. how grateful will the
notification that you have do so be to
your ever faithful and affectionate
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER LXII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HARLOWE
SATURDAY, JULY 29.
I repine not, my dear Sister, at the severity you have be pleased to
express in the letter you favour I with; because that severity be
accompany with the grace I have petition for; and because the
reproach of mine own heart be strong than any other person's
reproach can be: and yet I be not half so culpable as I be imagine
to be: as would be allow, if all the circumstance of my unhappy story
be know: and which I shall be ready to communicate to Mrs. Norton, if
she be commission to inquire into they; or to you, my Sister, if you
can have patience to hear they.
I remember with a bleed heart what day the 24th of July be. I begin
with the eve of it; and I pass the day itself--as it be fit I should
pass it. nor have I any comfort to give to my dear and ever-honour
father and mother, and to you, my Bella, but this--that, as it be the
first unhappy anniversary of my birth, in all probability, it will be the
last.
believe I, my dear Sister, I say not this merely to move compassion, but
from the good ground. and as, on that account, I think it of the
high importance to my peace of mind to obtain one far favour, I
would choose to owe to your intercession, as my sister, the leave I beg,
to address half a dozen line (with the hope of have they answer as I
wish) to either or to both my honoured parent, to beg their last
blessing.
this blessing be all the favour I have now to ask: it be all I dare to
ask: yet be I afraid to rush at once, though by letter, into the presence
of either. and if I do not ask it, it might seem to be owe to
stubbornness and want of duty, when my heart be all humility
penitence. only, be so good as to embolden I to attempt this task--
write but this one line, 'Clary Harlowe, you be at liberty to write as
you desire.' this will be enough--and shall, to my last hour, be
acknowledge as the great favour, by
your truly penitent sister,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER LXIII
MRS. NORTON, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
MONDAY, JULY 31.
my dearest YOUNG LADY,
I must indeed own that I take the liberty to write to your mother,
offer to enclose to she, if she give I leave, your' of the 24th: by
which I think she would see what be the state of your mind; what the
nature of your last trouble be from the wicked arrest; what the people
be where you lodge; what proposal be make you from Lord M.'s family;
also your sincere penitence; and how much Miss Howe's writing to they, in
the term she write in, disturb you--but, as you have take the matter
into your own hand, and forbid I, in your last, to act in this nice
affair unknown to you, I be glad the letter be not require of I--and
indeed it may be well that the matter lie wholly between you and they;
since my affection for you be think to proceed from partiality.
they would choose, no doubt, that you should owe to themselves, and not
to my humble mediation, the favour for which you so earnestly sue, and of
which I would not have your despair: for I will venture to assure you,
that your mother be ready to take the first opportunity to show her
maternal tenderness: and this I gather from several hint I be not at
liberty to explain myself upon.
I long to be with you, now I be well, and now my son be in a fair way
of recovery. but be it not hard to have it signify to I that at
present it will not be take well if I go?--i suppose, while the
reconciliation, which I hope will take place, be negotiate by mean of
the correspondence so newly open between you and your sister. but if
you will have I come, I will rely on my good intention, and risque
every one's displeasure.
Mr. Brand have business in town; to solicit for a benefice which it be
expect the incumbent will be oblige to quit for a well preferment:
and, when there, he be to inquire privately after your way of life, and
of your health.
he be a very officious young man; and, but that your uncle Harlowe (who
have choose he for this errand) regard he as an oracle, your mother have
rather any body else have be send.
he be one of those puzzling, over-do gentleman, who think they see
far into matter than any body else, and be fond of discover
mystery where there be none, in order to be think shrewd man.
I cannot say I like he, either in the pulpit or out of it: I, who have a
father one of the sound divine and fine scholar in the kingdom;
who never make an ostentation of what he know; but love and venerate he
gospel he teach, prefer it to all other learning: to be oblige to
hear a young man depart from his text as soon as he have name it, (so
contrary, too, to the example set he by his learn and worthy
principal,* when his health permit he to preach;) and throw about,
to a christian and country audience, scrap of Latin and Greek from the
Pagan Classics; and not always bring in with great propriety neither,
(if I be to judge by the only way give I to judge of they, by the
English he put they into;) be an indication of something wrong, either
in his head, or his heart, or both; for, otherwise, his education at the
university must have teach he well. you know, my dear Miss Clary,
the honour I have for the cloth: it be owe to that, that I say what I
do.
* Dr. Lewen.
I know not the day he be to set out; and, as his inquiry be to be
private, be pleased to take no notice of this intelligence. I have no
doubt that your life and conversation be such as may defy the scrutiny
of the most officious inquirer.
I be just now tell that you have write a second letter to your sister:
but be afraid they will wait for Mr. Brand's report, before far
favour will be obtain from they; for they will not yet believe you be
so ill as I fear you be.
but you would soon find that you have an indulgent mother, be she at
liberty to act accord to her own inclination. and this give I great
hope that all will end well at last: for I verily think you be in the
right way to a reconciliation. God give a blessing to it, and restore
your health, and you to all your friend, pray
your ever affectionate,
JUDITH NORTON.
your mother have privately send I five guineas: she be pleased to say to
help we in the illness we have be afflict with; but, more
likely, that I might send they to you, as from myself. I hope,
therefore, I may send they up, with ten more I have still leave.
I will send you word of Mr. Morden's arrival, the moment I know it.
if agreeable, I should be glad to know all that pass between your
relation and you.
LETTER LXIV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MRS. NORTON
WEDNESDAY, AUG. 2.
you give I, my dear Mrs. Norton, great pleasure in hearing of your' and
your son's recovery. may you continue, for many, many year, a blessing
to each other!
you tell I that you do actually write to my mother, offer to enclose
to her mine of the 24th past: and you say it be not require of you.
that be to say, although you cover it over as gently as you could, that
your offer be reject; which make it evident that no plea could be
make for I. yet, you bid I hope, that the grace I sue for would, in
time, be grant.
the grace I then sue for be indeed grant; but you be afraid, you
say, that they will wait for Mr. Brand's report, before favour will be
obtain in return to the second letter which I write to my sister; and
you add, that I have an indulgent mother, be she at liberty to act
accord to her own inclination; and that all will end well at last.
but what, my dear Mrs. Norton, what be the grace I sue for in my second
letter?--it be not that they will receive I into favour--if they think
it be, they be mistaken. I do not, I cannot expect that. nor, as I
have often say, should I, if they would receive I, bear to live in the
eye of those dear friend whom I have so grievously offended. 'tis only,
simply, a blessing I ask: a blessing to die with; not to lie with.--do
they know that? and do they know that their unkindness will perhaps
shorten my date; so that their favour, if ever they intend to grant it,
may come too late?
once more, I desire you not to think of come to I. I have no
uneasiness now, but what proceed from the apprehension of see a man I
would not see for the world, if I could help it; and from the severity of
my near and dear relation: a severity entirely their own, I doubt;
for you tell I that my brother be at Edinburgh! you would therefore
heighten their severity, and make yourself enemy besides, if you be
to come to I--don't you see you would?
Mr. Brand may come, if he will. he be a clergyman, and must mean well;
or I must think so, let he say of I what he will. all my fear be,
that, as he know I be in disgrace with a family whose esteem he be
desirous to cultivate; and as he have obligation to my uncle Harlowe and
to my father; he will be but a languid acquitter--not that I be afraid of
what he, or any body in the world, can hear as to my conduct. you may,
my revered and dear friend, indeed you may, rest satisfied, that that be
such as may warrant I to challenge the inquiry of the most officious.
I will send you copy of what pass, as you desire, when I have an
answer to my second letter. I now begin to wish that I have take the
heart to write to my father himself; or to my mother, at least; instead
of to my sister; and yet I doubt my poor mother can do nothing for I of
herself. a strong confederacy, my dear Mrs. Norton, (a strong
confederacy indeed!) against a poor girl, their daughter, sister, niece!
--My brother, perhaps, get it renew before he leave they. he need
not--his work be do; and more than do.
donot afflict yourself about money-matter on my account. I have no
occasion for money. I be glad my mother be so considerate to you. I
be in pain for you on the same subject. but Heaven will not permit so
good a woman to want the humble blessing she be always satisfied with.
I wish every individual of our family be but as rich as you!--O my
mamma Norton, you be rich! you be rich indeed!--the true rich be
such content as you be bless with.--and I hope in God that I be in the
way to be rich too.
Adieu, my ever-indulgent friend. you say all will be at last happy--and
I know it will--I confide that it will, with as much security, as you
may, that I will be, to my last hour,
your ever grateful and affectionate
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER LXV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, AUG. 1.
I be most confoundedly chagrin and disappoint: for here, on Saturday,
arrive a messenger from Miss Howe, with a letter to my cousin;* which I
know nothing of till yesterday; when Lady Sarah and Lady Betty be
procure to be here, to sit in judgment upon it with the old peer, and my
two kinswoman. and never be bear so miserably bait as thy poor
friend!--and for what?--why for the cruelty of Miss Harlowe: for have I
commit any new offence? and would I not have re-instate myself in her
favour upon her own term, if I could? and be it fair to punish I for
what be my misfortune, and not my fault? such event-judge fool as I
have for my relation! I be ashamed of they all.
* see Letter LV. of this volume.
in that of Miss Howe be enclose one to she from Miss Harlowe,* to be
transmit to my cousin, contain a final rejection of I; and that
in very vehement and positive term; yet she pretend that, in this
rejection, she be govern more by principle than passion--[d----d lie,
as ever be tell!] and, as a proof that she be, say, that she can
forgive I, and do, on this one condition, that I will never molest she
more--the whole letter so write as to make herself more admired, I
more detested.
* see Letter XLI. of this volume.
what we have be tell of the agitation and working, and sighing and
sobbing, of the french prophet among we formerly, be nothing at all to
the scene exhibit by these maudlin soul, at the reading of these
letter; and of some affect passage extract from another of my fair
implacablebe to Miss Howe--such lamentation for the loss of so charming
a relation! such applauding of her virtue, of her exaltedness of soul
and sentiment! such menace of disinherison! I, not need their
reproach to be sting to the heart with my own reflection, and with the
rage of disappointment; and as sincerely as any of they admire her--
'what the devil,' cry I, 'be all this for? be it not enough to be
despise and reject? can I help her implacable spirit? would I not
repair the evil I have make her suffer?'--then be I ready to curse they
all, herself and Miss Howe for company: and heartily swear that she
should yet be mine.
I now swear it over again to thee--'were her death to follow in a week
after the knot be tie, by the Lord of Heaven, it shall be tie, and she
shall die a Lovelace!'--Tell she so, if thou wilt: but, at the same time,
tell she that I have no view to her fortune; and that I will solemnly
resign that, and all pretension to it, in whose favour she please, if
she resign life issueless.--i be not so low-minded a wretch, as to be
guilty of any sordid view to her fortune.--let her judge for herself,
then, whether it be not for her honour rather to leave this world a
Lovelace than a Harlowe.
but do not think I will entirely rest a cause so near my heart upon an
advocate who so much more admire his client's adversary than his client.
I will go to town, in a few day, in order to throw myself at her foot:
and I will carry with I, or have at hand, a resolute, well-prepare
parson; and the ceremony shall be perform, let what will be the
consequence.
but if she will permit I to attend she for this purpose at either of the
church mention in the license, (which she have by she, and, thank
Heaven! have not return I with my letter,) then will I not disturb
she; but meet she at the altar in either church, and will engage to bring
my two cousin to attend she, and even Lady Sarah and Lady Betty; and my
Lord M. in person shall give she to I.
or, if it be still more agreeable to she, I will undertake that either
Lady Sarah or Lady Betty, or both, shall go to town and attend she down;
and the marriage shall be celebrate in their presence, and in that of
Lord M., either here or elsewhere, at her own choice.
do not play I booty, Belford; but sincerely and warmly use all the
eloquence thou art master of, to prevail upon she to choose one of these
three method. one of they she must choose--by my soul, she must.
here be Charlotte tap at my closet-door for admittance. what a devil
want Charlotte?--I will hear no more reproaches!--come in, girl!
***
my cousin Charlotte, find I write on with too much earnestness to
have any regard for politeness to she, and guess at my subject,
besought I to let she see what I have write.
I oblige she. and she be so highly pleased on see I so much in
earnest, that she offer, and I accept her offer, to write a letter to
Miss Harlowe; with permission to treat I in it as she think fit.
I shall enclose a copy of her letter.
when she have write it, she bring it to I, with apology for the
freedom take with I in it: but I excuse it; and she be ready to give
I a kiss for it; tell she I have hope of success from it; and that I
think she have luckily hit it off.
every one approve of it, as well as I; and be pleased with I for so
patiently submit to be abuse, and undertake for.--if it do not
succeed, all the blame will be throw upon the dear creature's
perverseness: her charitable or forgiving disposition, about which she
make such a parade, will be justly question; and the piety, of which
she be now in full possession, will be transfer to I.
put, therefore, my whole confidence in this letter, I postpone all my
other alternative, as also my go to town, till my empress send an
answer to my cousin Montague.
but if she persist, and will not promise to take time to consider of the
matter, thou mayest communicate to she what I have write, as above,
before my cousin enter; and, if she be still perverse, assure she, that
I must and will see she--but this with all honour, all humility: and, if
I cannot move she in my favour, I will then go abroad, and perhaps never
more return to England.
I be sorry thou art, at this critical time, so busily employ, as thou
informest I thou art, in thy Watford affair, and in prepare to do
Belton justice. if thou want my assistance in the latter, command I.
Though engross by this perverse beauty, and plague as I be, I will
obey thy first summon.
I have great dependence upon thy zeal and thy friendship: hasten back to
she, therefore, and resume a task so interesting to I, that it be
equally the subject of my dream, as of my wake hour.
LETTER LXVI
MISS MONTAGUE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
TUESDAY, AUG. 1.
DEAREST MADAM,
all our family be deeply sensible of the injury you have receive at
the hand of one of it, whom you only can render in any manner worthy of
the relation he stand in to we all: and if, as an act of mercy and
charity, the great your pious heart can show, you will be pleased to
look over his past wickedness and ingratitude, and suffer yourself to be
our kinswoman, you will make we the happy family in the world: and I
can engage, that Lord M., and Lady Sarah Sadleir, and Lady Betty
Lawrance, and my sister, who be all admirer of your virtue, and of
your nobleness of mind, will for ever love and reverence you, and do
every thing in all their power to make you amend for what you have
suffer from Mr. Lovelace. this, Madam, we should not, however, dare
to petition for, be we not assure, that Mr. Lovelace be most sincerely
sorry for his past vileness to you; and that he will, on his knee, beg
your pardon, and vow eternal love and honour to you.
wherefore, my dear cousin, [how you will charm we all, if this
agreeable style may be permit!] for all our sake, for his soul's
sake, [you must, I be sure, be so good a lady, as to wish to save a
soul!] and allow I to say, for your own fame's sake, condescend to our
joint request: and if, by way of encouragement, you will but say you will
be glad to see, and to be as much know personally, as you be by fame,
to Charlotte Montague, I will, in two day' time from the receipt of your
permission, wait upon you with or without my sister, and receive your
farther command.
let I, our dear cousin, [we cannot deny ourselves the pleasure of
call you so; let I] entreat you to give I your permission for my
journey to London; and put it in the power of Lord M. and of the lady
of the family, to make you what reparation they can make you, for the
injury which a person of the great merit in the world have receive
from one of the most audacious man in it; and you will infinitely oblige
we all; and particularly she, who repeatedly presume to style herself
your affectionate cousin, and oblige servant,
CHARLOTTE MONTAGUE.
LETTER LXVII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
THURSDAY MORNING, AUG. 3. SIX O'CLOCK.
I have be so much employ in my own and Belton's affair, that I could
not come to town till last night; have content myself with send to
Mrs. Lovick, to know, from time to time, the state of the lady's health;
of which I receive but very indifferent account, owe, in a great
measure, to letter or advice bring she from her implacable family.
I have now complete my own affair; and, next week, shall go to Epsom,
to endeavour to put Belton's sister into possession of his own house for
he: after which, I shall devote myself wholly to your service, and to
that of the lady.
I be admit to her presence last night; and find she visibly alter
for the bad. when I go home, I have your letter of Tuesday last put
into my hand. let I tell thee, Lovelace, that I insist upon the
performance of thy engagement to I that thou wilt not personally mol
she.
[Mr. Belford date again on Thursday morning, ten o'clock; and give an
account of a conversation which he have just hold with the Lady upon
the subject of Miss Montague's letter to she, precede, and upon
Mr. Lovelace's alternative, as mention in Letter LXV., which Mr.
Belford support with the utmost earnestness. but, as the result
of this conversation will be find in the subsequent letter, Mr.
Belford's plea and argument in favour of his friend, and the
Lady's answer, be omit.]
letter lxviii
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS montague
THURSDAY, AUG. 3.
DEAR MADAM,
I be infinitely oblige to you for your kind and condescending letter. a
letter, however, which heighten my regret, as it give I a new
instance of what a happy creature I might have be in an alliance so
much approve of by such worthy lady; and which, on their account, and
on that of Lord M. would have be so reputable to myself, and be once
so desirable.
but indeed, indeed, Madam, my heart sincerely repulse the man who,
descend from such a family, could be guilty, first, of such
premeditate violence as he have be guilty of; and, as he know, far
intend I, on the night previous to the day he set out for Berkshire;
and, next, pretend to spirit, could be so mean as to wish to lift into
that family a person he be capable of abase into a companionship with
the most abandon of her sex.
allow I then, dear Madam, to declare with favour, that I think I never
could be rank with the lady of a family so splendid and so noble, if,
by vow love and honour at the altar to such a violator, I could
sanctify, as I may say, his unprecedented and elaborate wickedness.
permit I, however, to make one request to my good Lord M., and to Lady
Betty, and Lady Sarah, and to your kind self, and your sister.--it be,
that you will all be pleased to join your authority and interest to
prevail upon Mr. Lovelace not to molest I far.
be pleased to tell he, that, if I be design for life, it will be very
cruel in he to attempt to hunt I out of it; for I be determined never
to see he more, if I can help it. the more cruel, because he know that
I have nobody to defend I from he: nor do I wish to engage any body to
his hurt, or to their own.
if I be, on the other hand, destine for death, it will be no less cruel,
if he will not permit I to die in peace--since a peaceable and happy end
I wish he; indeed I do.
every worldly good attend you, dear Madam, and every branch of the
honourable family, be the wish of one, whose misfortune it be that she be
oblige to disclaim any other title than that of,
Dear Madam,
your and their obliged and faithful servant,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER LXIX
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
THURSDAY AFTERNOON, AUG. 3.
I be just now agreeably surprise by the follow letter, deliver into
my hand by a messenger from the lady. the letter she mention, as
enclose,* I have return, without take a copy of it. the content of
it will soon be communicate to you, I presume, by other hand. they be
an absolute rejection of thee--Poor Lovelace!
* see Miss Harlowe's Letter, no. LXVIII.
to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
AUG. 3.
SIR,
you have frequently offer to oblige I in any thing that shall be
within your power: and I have such an opinion of you, as to be willing to
hope that, at the time you make these offer, you mean more than mere
compliment.
I have therefore two request to make to you: the first I will now
mention; the other, if this shall be comply with, otherwise not.
it behove I to leave behind I such an account as may clear up my
conduct to several of my friend who will not at present concern
themselves about I: and Miss Howe, and her mother, be very solicitous
that I will do so.
I be apprehensive that I shall not have time to do this; and you will not
wonder that I have less and less inclination to set about such a painful
task; especially as I find myself unable to look back with patience on
what I have suffer; and shall be too much discompose by the
retrospection, be I oblige to make it, to proceed with the requisite
temper in a task of still great importance which I have before I.
it be very evident to I that your wicked friend have give you, from time
to time, a circumstantial account of all his behaviour to I, and device
against I; and you have more than once assure I, that he have do my
character all the justice I could wish for, both by writing and speech.
now, Sir, if I may have a fair, a faithful speciman from his letter or
account to you, write upon some of the most interesting occasion, I
shall be able to judge whether there will or will not be a necessity for
I, for my honour's sake, to enter upon the solicit task.
you may be assure, from my enclose answer to the letter which Miss
Montague have honour I with, (and which youwill be pleased to return I
as soon as read,) that it be impossible for I ever to think of your
friend in the way I be importuned to think of he: he cannot therefore
receive any detriment from the request speciman: and I give you my
honour, that no use shall be make of it to his prejudice, in law, or
otherwise. and that it may not, after I be no more, I assure you, that
it be a main part of my view that the passage you shall oblige I with
shall be always in your own power, and not in that of any other person.
if, Sir, you think fit to comply with my request, the passage I would
wish to be transcribe (make neither well nor bad of the matter)
be those which he have write to you, on or about the 7th and 8th of
June, when I be alarm by the wicked pretence of a fire; and what he
have write from Sunday, June 11, to the 19th. and in do this you
will much oblige
your humble servant,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
***
now, Lovelace, since there be no hope for thee of her return
favour--since some praise may lie for thy ingenuousness, have neither
offer [as more diminutive-minded libertine would have do] to
palliate thy crime, by asperse the lady, or her sex--since she may be
make easy by it--since thou must fare well from thine own pen than
from her'--and, finally, since thy action have manifest that thy
letter be not the most guilty part of what she know of thee--I see not
why I may not oblige she, upon her honour, and under the restriction,
and for the reason she have give; and this without breach of the
confidence due to friendly communication; especially, as I might have
add, since thou gloriest in thy pen and in thy wickedness, and canst
not be ashamed.
but, be this as it may, she will be oblige before thy remonstrance or
clamour against it can come; so, pr'ythee now, make the good of it, and
rave not; except for the sake of a pretence against I, and to exercise
thy talent of execration:--and, if thou likest to do so for these
reason, rave and welcome.
I long to know what the second request be: but this I know, that if it be
any thing less than cut thy throat, or endanger my own neck, I
will certainly comply; and be proud of have it in my power to oblige
she.
and now I be actually go to be busy in the extract.
LETTER LXX
MR. BELFORD, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
AUG. 3, 4.
MADAM,
you have engage I to communicate to you, upon my honour, (make
neither well nor bad of the matter,) what Mr. Lovelace have write to
I, in relation to yourself, in the period precede your go to
Hampstead, and in that between the 11th and 19th of June: and you assure
I you have no view in this request, but to see if it be necessary for
you, from the account he give, to touch upon the painful subject
yourself, for the sake of your own character.
your command, Madam, be of a very delicate nature, as they may seem to
affect the secret of private friendship: but as I know you be not
capable of a view, the motif to which you will not own; and as I think
the communication may do some credit to my unhappy friend's character, as
an ingenuous man; though his action by the most excellent woman in the
world have lose he all title to that of an honourable one; I obey you
with the great cheerfulness.
[he then proceed with his extract, and conclude they with an address
to she in his friend's behalf, in the following word:]
'and now, Madam, I have fulfil your command; and, I hope, have not
dis-serve my friend with you; since you will hereby see the justice he
do to your virtue in every line he write. he do the same in all his
letter, though to his own condemnation: and, give I leave to add, that
if this ever-amiable sufferer can think it in any manner consistent with
her honour to receive his vow on the altar, on his truly penitent turn
of mind, I have not the least doubt but that he will make she the good
and tender of husband. what obligation will not the admirable lady
hereby lie upon all his noble family, who so greatly admire she! and, I
will presume to say, upon her own, when the unhappy family aversion
(which certainly have be carry to an unreasonable height against he)
shall be get over, and a general reconciliation take place! for who be
it that would not give these two admirable person to each other, be
not his moral an objection?
however this be, I would humbly refer to you, Madam, whether, as you will
be mistress of very delicate particular from I his friend, you should
not in honour think yourself concerned to pass they by, as if you have
never see they; and not to take advantage of the communication, not even
in an argument, as some perhaps might lie, with respect to the
premeditate design he seem to have have, not against you, as you; but as
against the sex; over whom (I be sorry I can bear witness myself) it be
the villanous aim of all libertine to triumph: and I would not, if any
misunderstanding should arise between he and I, give he room to
reproach I that his losing of you, and (through his usage of you) of his
own friend, be owe to what perhaps he would call breach of trust,
be he to judge rather by the event than by my intention.
I be, Madam, with the most profound veneration,
your most faithful humble servant,
J. BELFORD.
LETTER LXXI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
FRIDAY, AUG. 4.
SIR,
I hold myself extremely oblige to you for your communication. I will
make no use of they, that you shall have reason to reproach either
yourself or I with. I want no new light to make the unhappy man's
premeditate baseness to I unquestionable, as my answer to Miss
Montague's letter might convince you.*
* see Letter LXVIII. of this volume.
I must own, in his favour, that he have observe some decency in his
account to you of the most indecent and shocking action. and if all
his strangely-communicative narration be equally decent, nothing will
be render criminally odious by they, but the vile heart that could
meditate such contrivance as be much strong evidence of his
inhumanity than of his wit: since man of very contemptible part and
understanding may succeed in the vile attempt, if they can once bring
themselves to trample on the sanction which bind man to man; and soon
upon an innocent person than upon any other; because such a one be apt to
judge of the integrity of other' heart by its own.
I find I have have great reason to think myself oblige to your intention
in the whole progress of my suffering. it be, however, impossible, Sir,
to miss the natural inference on this occasion that lie against his
predetermine baseness. but I say the less, because you shall not think
I borrow, from what you have communicate, aggravation that be not
need.
and now, Sir, that I may spare you the trouble of offer any future
argument in his favour, let I tell you that I have weigh every thing
thoroughly--all that human vanity could suggest--all that a desirable
reconciliation with my friend, and the kind respect of his own, could
bid I hope for--the enjoyment of Miss Howe's friendship, the dear
consideration to I, now, of all the worldly one--all these I have
weigh: and the result be, and be before you favour I with these
communication, that I have more satisfaction in the hope that, in one
month, there will be an end of all with I, than in the most agreeable
thing that could happen from an alliance with Mr. Lovelace, although I
be to be assure he would make the good and tender of husband. but
as to the rest; if, satisfied with the evil he have bring upon I, he
will forbear all further persecution of I, I will, to my last hour,
wish he good: although he hath overwhelm the fatherless, and digge a
pit for his friend: fatherless may she well be call, and motherless
too, who have be deny all paternal protection, and motherly
forgiveness.
***
and now, Sir, acknowledge gratefully your favour in the extract, I
come to the second request I have to make you; which require a great deal
of courage to mention; and which courage nothing but a great deal of
distress, and a very destitute condition, can give. but, if improper, I
can but be deny; and dare to say I shall be at least excuse. thus,
then, I preface it:
'you see, Sir, that I be throw absolutely into the hand of stranger,
who, although as kind and compassionate as stranger can be wish to be,
be, nevertheless, person from whom I cannot expect any thing more than
pity and good wish; nor can my memory receive from they any more
protection than my person, if either should need it.
'if then I request it, of the only person possess of material that
will enable he to do my character justice;
'and who have courage, independence, and ability to oblige I;
'to be the protector or my memory, as I may say;
'and to be my executor; and to see some of my die request perform;
'and if I leave it to he to do the whole in his own way, manner, and
time; consulting, however, in requisite case, my dear Miss Howe;
'I presume to hope that this my second request may be grant.'
and if it may, these satisfaction will accrue to I from the favour do
I, and the office undertake:
'it will be an honour to my memory, with all those who shall know that I
be so well satisfied of my innocence, that, have not time to write my
own story, I could intrust it to the relation which the destroyer of my
fame and fortune have give of it.
'I shall not be apprehensive of involve any one in my trouble or
hazard by this task, either with my own relation, or with your friend;
have disposition to make which perhaps my own friend will not be so
well pleased with as it be to be wish they would be;' as I intend not
unreasonable one; but you know, Sir, where self be judge, matter, even
with good people, will not always be rightly judge of.
'I shall also be free from the pain of recollect thing that my soul
be vex at; and this at a time when its tumult should be allay, in
order to make way for the most important preparation.
'and who know, but that Mr. Belford, who already, from a principle of
humanity, be touch at my misfortune, when he come to revolve the
whole story, place before he in one strong light: and when he shall
have the catastrophe likewise before he; and shall become in a manner
interested in it; who know, but that, from a still high principle, he
may so regulate his future action as to find his own reward in the
everlasting welfare which be wish he by his
'obliged servant,
'CLARISSA HARLOWE?'
LETTER LXXII
MR. BELFORD, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
FRIDAY, AUG. 4.
MADAM,
I be so sensible of the honour do I in your' of this day, that I
would not delay for one moment the answering of it. I hope you will live
to see many happy year; and to be your own executrix in those point
which your heart be most set upon. but, in the case of survivorship, I
most cheerfully accept of the sacred office you be pleased to offer I;
and you may absolutely rely upon my fidelity, and, if possible, upon the
literal performance of every article you shall enjoin I.
the effect of the kind wish you conclude with, have be my concern ever
since I have be admit to the honour of your conversation. it shall
be my whole endeavour that it be not vain. the happiness of approach
you, which this trust, as I presume, will give I frequent opportunity
of do, must necessarily promote the desire end: since it will be
impossible to be a witness of your piety, equanimity, and other virtue,
and not aspire to emulate you. all I beg be, that you will not suffer
any future candidate, or event, to displace I; unless some new instance
of unworthiness appear either in the moral or behaviour of,
Madam,
your most obliged and faithful servant,
J. BELFORD.
LETTER LXXIII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
FRIDAY NIGHT, AUG. 4.
I have actually deliver to the lady the extract she request I to
give she from your letter. I do assure you that I have make the very
good of the matter for you, not that conscience, but that friendship,
could oblige I to make. I have change or omit some free word. the
warm description of her person in the fire-scene, as I may call it, I
have omit. I have tell she, that I have do justice to you, in the
justice you have do to she by her unexampled virtue. but take the very
word which I write to she immediately follow the extract:
'and now, Madam,'--See the paragraph mark with an invert comma
[thus '], Letter LXX. of this volume.
the lady be extremely uneasy at the thought of your attempt to visit
she. for Heaven's sake, (your word be give,) and for pity's sake,
(for she be really in a very weak and languishing way,) let I beg of you
not to think of it.
yesterday afternoon she receive a cruel letter (as Mrs. Lovick suppose
it to be, by the effect it have upon she) from her sister, in answer to
one write last Saturday, entreate a blessing and forgiveness from her
parent.
she acknowledge, that if the same decency and justice be observe in
all of your letter, as in the extract I have oblige she with, (as I
have assure she they be,) she shall think herself free from the
necessity of write her own story: and this be an advantage to thee
which thou ought to thank I for.
but what think thou be the second request she have to make to I? no
other than that I would be her executor!--her motif will appear before
thee in proper time; and then, I dare to answer, will be satisfactory.
you cannot imagine how proud I be of this trust. I be afraid I shall too
soon come into the execution of it. as she be always write, what a
melancholy pleasure will be the perusal and disposition of her paper
afford I! such a sweetness of temper, so much patience and resignation,
as she seem to be mistress of; yet write of and in the midst of
present distress! how much more lively and affect, for that reason,
must her style be; her mind torture by the pang of uncertainty, (the
event then hide in the womb of fate,) than the dry, narrative,
unanimated style of person, relate difficulty and danger
surmount; the relater perfectly at ease; and if himself unmove by his
own story, not likely greatly to affect the reader!
***
SATURDAY MORNING, AUG. 5.
I be just return from visit the lady, and thank she in person for
the honour she have do I; and assure she, if call to the sacred
trust, of the utmost fidelity and exactness.
I find she very ill. I take notice of it. she say, she have receive a
second hard-hearted letter from her sister; and she have be write a
letter (and that on her knee) directly to her mother; which, before, she
have not have the courage to do. it be for a last blessing and
forgiveness. no wonder, she say, that I see she affected. now that I
have accept of the last charitable office for she, (for which, as well
as for comply with her other request, she thank I,) I should one
day have all these letter before I: and could she have a kind one in
return to that she have be now write, to counterbalance the unkind one
she have from her sister, she might be induce to show I both together--
otherwise, for her sister's sake, it be no matter how few see the poor
Bella's letter.
I know she would be displeased if I have censure the cruelty of her
relation: I therefore only say, that surely she must have enemy, who
hop to find their account in keep up the resentment of her friend
against she.
it may be so, Mr. Belford, say she: the unhappy never want enemy. one
fault, wilfully commit, authorize the imputation of many more. where
the ear be open to accusation, accuser will not be want; and every
one will officiously come with story against a disgrace child, where
nothing dare be say in her favour. I should have be wise in time, and
not have need to be convince, by my own misfortune, of the truth of
what common experience daily demonstrate. Mr. Lovelace's baseness, my
father's inflexibility, my sister's reproach, be the natural
consequence of my own rashness; so I must make the good of my hard lot.
only, as these consequence follow one another so closely, while they be
new, how can I help be anew affect?
I ask, if a letter write by myself, by her doctor or apothecary, to
any of her friend, represent her low state of health, and great
humility, would be acceptable? or if a journey to any of they would be of
service, I would gladly undertake it in person, and strictly conform to
her order, to whomsoever she should direct I to apply.
she earnestly desire that nothing of this sort might be attempt,
especially without her knowledge and consent. Miss Howe, she say, have
do harm by her kindly-intend zeal; and if there be room to expect
favour by mediation, she have ready at hand a kind friend, Mrs. Norton,
who for piety and prudence have few equal; and who would let slip no
opportunity to endeavour to do her service.
I let she know that I be go out of town till Monday: she wish I
pleasure; and say she should be glad to see I on my return.
Adieu!
LETTER LXXIV
MISS AR. HARLOWE, to MISS CL. HARLOWE
[in answer to HER' of JULY 29. SEE LETTER LXII. of this volume.]
THURSDAY MORN. AUG. 3.
SISTER CLARY,
I wish you would not trouble I with any more of your letter. you have
always a knack at writing; and depend upon make every one do what you
would when you write. but your wit and folly have undo you. and now,
as all naughty creature do, when they cannot help themselves, you come
beg and pray, and make other as uneasy as yourself.
when I write last to you, I expect that I should not be at rest.
and so youwould creep on, by little and little, till youwill want to be
receive again.
but you only hope for forgiveness and a blessing, you say. a blessing
for what, sister Clary? think for what!--however, I read your letter to
my father and mother.
I willnot tell you what my father say--one who have the true sense you
boast to have of your misdeed, may guess, without my tell you, what a
justly-incense father would say on such an occasion.
my poor mother--o wretch! what have not your ungrateful folly cost my poor
mother!--had you be less a darling, you would not, perhaps, have be
so graceless: but I never in my life see a cocker favourite come to
good.
my heart be full, and I cannot help write my mind; for your crime have
disgrace we all; and I be afraid and ashamed to go to any public or
private assembly or diversion: and why?--i need not say why, when your
action be the subject either of the open talk, or of the affronting
whisper, of both sex at all such place.
upon the whole, I be sorry I have no more comfort to send you: but I find
nobody willing to forgive you.
I donot know what time may do for you; and when it be see that your
penitence be not owe more to disappointment than to true conviction:
for it be too probable, Miss Clary, that, have not your feather-head
villain abandon you, we should have hear nothing of these move
supplication; nor of any thing but defiance from he, and a guilt
glory in from you. and this be every one's opinion, as well as that of
your afflict sister,
arabella HARLOWE.
I send this by a particular hand, who undertake to give it you or leave
it for you by to-morrow night.
LETTER LXXV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to her mother
SATURDAY, AUG. 5
HONOURED MADAM,
no self-convict criminal ever approach her angry and just judge with
great awe, nor with a truer contrition, than I do you by these line.
indeed I must say, that if the latter of my humble prayer have not
respect my future welfare, I have not dare to take this liberty. but
my heart be set upon it, as upon a thing next to God Almighty's
forgiveness necessary for I.
have my happy sister know my distress, she would not have wring my
heart, as she have do, by a severity, which I must need think unkind
and unsisterly.
but complaint of any unkindness from she belong not to I: yet, as she
be pleased to write that it must be see that my penitence be less owing
to disappointment than to true conviction, permit I, Madam, to insist
upon it, that, if such a plea can be allow I, I an actually entitle
to the blessing I sue for; since my humble prayer be found upon a true
and unfeigned repentance: and this you will the readier believe, if the
creature who never, to the good of her remembrance, tell her mamma a
wilful falsehood may be credit, when she declare, as she do, in the
most solemn manner, that she meet the seducer with a determination not to
go off with he: that the rash step be owe more to compulsion than to
infatuation: and that her heart be so little in it, that she repent
and grieve from the moment she find herself in his power; and for every
moment after, for several week before she have any cause from he to
apprehend the usage she meet with.
wherefore, on my knee, my ever-honour Mamma, (for on my knee I write
this letter,) I do most humbly beg your blessing: say but, in so many
word, (I ask you not, Madam, to call I your daughter,)--Lost, unhappy
wretch, I forgive you! and may God bless you!--this be all! let I, on
a blessed scrap of paper, but see one sentence to this effect, under your
dear hand, that I may hold it to my heart in my most try struggle,
and I shall think it a passport to Heaven. and, if I do not too much
presume, and it be we instead of I, and both your honour name
subjoin to it, I should then have nothing more to wish. then would I
say, 'great and merciful God! thou seest here in this paper thy poor
unworthy creature absolve by her justly-offend parent: oh! join, for
my Redeemer's sake, thy all-gracious fiat, and receive a repentant sinner
to the arm of thy mercy!'
I can conjure you, Madam, by no subject of motherly tenderness, that will
not, in the opinion of my severe censurer, (before whom this humble
address must appear,) add to reproach: let I therefore, for God's sake,
prevail upon you to pronounce I blest and forgive, since you will
thereby sprinkle comfort through the last hour of
your
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER lxxvi
MISS MONTAGUE, to MISS clarissa HARLOWE
[in answer to HER' of AUG. 3. SEE LETTER LXVIII. of this volume.]
MONDAY, AUG. 7.
DEAR MADAM,
we be all of opinion, before your letter come, that Mr. Lovelace be
utterly unworthy of you, and deserve condign punishment, rather than to
be bless with such a wife: and hop far more from your kind
consideration for we, than any we suppose you could have for so base an
injurer. for we be all determined to love you, and admire you, let his
behaviour to you be what it would.
but, after your letter, what can be say?
I be, however, command to write in all the subscribe name, to let
you know how greatly your suffering have affect we: to tell you that
my Lord M. have forbid he ever more to enter the door of the apartment
where he shall be: and as you labour under the unhappy effect of your
friend' displeasure, which may subject you to inconveniencie, his
Lordship, and Lady Sarah, and Lady Betty, beg of you to accept, for your
life, or, at least, till you be admit to enjoy your own estate, of
one hundred guineas per quarter, which will be regularly bring you by
an especial hand, and of the enclose bank-bill for a beginning. and do
not, dearest Madam, we all beseech you, do not think you be beholden
(for this token of Lord M.'s, and Lady Sarah's, and Lady Betty's, love to
you) to the friend of this vile man; for he have not one friend leave
among we.
we each of we desire to be favour with a place in your esteem; and to
be consider upon the same foot of relationship as if what once be so
much our pleasure to hope would be, have be. and it shall be our united
prayer, that you may recover health and spirit, and live to see many
happy year: and, since this wretch can no more be plead for, that,
when he be go abroad, as he now be prepare to do, we may be permit
the honour of a personal acquaintance with a lady who have no equal.
these be the earnest request, dearest young lady, of
your affectionate friend,
and most faithful servant,
M.
SARAH SADLEIR.
ELIZ. lawrance.
CHARL. MONTAGUE.
MARTH. MONTAGUE.
you will break the heart of the three first-name more particularly, if
you refuse they your acceptance. dear young lady, punish not
they for his crime. we send by a particular hand, which will
bring we, we hope, your accept favour.
Mr. Lovelace write by the same hand; but he know nothing of our letter,
nor we of his: for we shun each other; and one part of the house
hold we, another he, the remotest from each other.
LETTER LXXVII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SAT. AUG. 23.
I be so disturbed at the content of Miss Harlowe's answer to my cousin
Charlotte's letter of Tuesday last, (which be give she by the same
fellow that give I your's,) that I have hardly patience or consideration
enough to weigh what you write.
she have need indeed to cry out for mercy for herself from her friend,
who know not how to show any! she be a true daughter of the Harlowes!--
by my soul, Jack, she be a true daughter of the Harlowes! yet have she so
many excellency, that I must love she; and, fool that I be, love she
the more for despise I.
Thou runnest on with thy cursed nonsensical reformado rote, of die,
die, die! and, have once get the word by the end, canst not help
foist it in at every period! the devil take I, if I donot think thou
wouldst rather give her poison with thy own hand, rather than she should
recover, and rob thee of the merit of be a conjurer!
but no more of thy cursed knell; thy change upon death's candlestick
turn bottom-upwards: shewill live to bury I; I see that: for, by my
soul, I can neither eat, drink, nor sleep, nor, what be still bad, love
any woman in the world but she. nor care I to look upon a woman now: on
the contrary, I turn my head from every one I meet: except by chance an
eye, an air, a feature, strike I, resemble shebe in some glancing-by
face; and then I cannot forbear look again: though the second look
recover I; for there can be nobody like she.
but surely, Belford, the devil's in this woman! the more I think of her
nonsense and obstinacy, the less patience I have with she. be it
possible she can do herself, her family, her friend, so much justice any
other way, as by marry I? be she sure she should live but a day,
she ought to die a wife. if her christian revenge will not let her wish
to do so for her own sake, ought she not for the sake of her family, and
of her sex, which she pretend sometimes to have so much concern for?
and if no sake be dear enough to move her Harlowe-spirit in my favour,
have she any title to the pity thou so pitifully art always bespeak for
she?
as to the difference which her letter have make between I and the stupid
family here, [and I must tell thee we be all break in piece,] I value
not that of a button. they be fool to anathematize and curse I, who
can give they ten curse for one, be they to hold it for a day
together.
I have one half of the house to myself; and that the good; for the great
enjoy that least which cost they most: grandeur and use be two thing:
the common part be their's; the state part be mine: and here I lord it,
and will lord it, as long as I please; while the two pursy sister, the
old gouty brother, and the two musty niece, be stive up in the other
half, and dare not stir for fear of meet I: whom, (thatbe the jest
of it,) they have forbid come into their apartment, as I have they
into mine. and so I have they all prisoner, while I range about as I
please. pretty dog and doggesse to quarrel and bark at I, and yet,
whenever I appear, afraid to pop out of their kennel; or, if out before
they see I, at the sight of I run growl in again, with their flapt
ear, their sweeping dewlap, and their quivering tail curl inward.
and here, while I be thus worthily wag war with beetle, drone,
wasp, and hornet, and be all on fire with the rage of slight love,
thou art regale thyself with phlegm and rock-water, and art go on
with thy reformation-scheme and thy exultation in my misfortune!
the devil take thee for an insensible dough-bake varlet! I have no more
patience with thee than with the lady; for thou know nothing either of
love or friendship, but art as unworthy of the one, as incapable of the
other; else wouldst thou not rejoice, as thou dost under the grimace of
pity, in my disappointment.
and thou art a pretty fellow, art thou not? to engage to transcribe for
she some part of my letter write to thee in confidence? letter that
thou shouldest soon have part with thy cursed tongue, than have own
that thou ever hadst receive such: yet these be now to be communicate
to she! but I charge thee, and woe be to thee if it be too late! that
thou do not oblige she with a line of mine.
if thou hast do it, the least vengeance I will take be to break through
my honour give to thee not to visit she, as thou wilt have break
through thine to I, in communicate letter write under the seal of
friendship.
I be now convince, too sadly for my hope, by her letter to my cousin
Charlotte, that she be determined never to have I.
unprecedented wickedness, she call mine to she. but how do she know
what love, in its flame ardour, will stimulate man to do? how do she
know the requisite distinction of the word she use in this case?--To
think the bad, and to be able to make comparison in these very
delicate situation, must she not be less delicate than I have imagine
she to be?--but she have head that the devil be black; and have a mind
to make one of I, bray together, in the mortar of her wild fancy,
twenty chimney-sweeper, in order to make one sooty than ordinary rise
out of the dirty mass.
but what a whirlwind do she raise in my soul by her proud contempt of
I! never, never, be mortal man's pride so mortify! how do she
sink I, even in my own eyes!--'her heart sincerely repulse I, she
say, for my meanness!'--yet she intend to reap the benefit of what she
call so!--Curse upon her haughtiness, and her meanness, at the same
time!--her haughtiness to I, and her meanness to her own relation; more
unworthy of kindre with she, than I can be, or I be mean indeed.
yet who but must admire, who but must adore she; oh! that curse, cursed
house! but for the woman of that!--then their d----d potion! but for
those, have her unimpaired intellect, and the majesty of her virtue,
save she, as once it do by her humble eloquence,* another time by her
terrifying menace against her own life.**
* in the fire-scene, Vol. V. Letter XVI.
** Vol. VI. letter XXXVI. in the pen-knife-scene.
yet in both these to find her power over I, and my love for she, and to
hate, to despise, and to refuse me!--She might have do this with some
show of justice, have the last-intend violation be perpetrated:--but
to go away conqueress and triumphant in every light!--well may she
despise I for suffer she to do so.
she leave I low and mean indeed!--And the impression hold with her.--i
could tear my flesh, that I give she not cause--that I humble she not
indeed;--or that I staid not in town to attend her motion instead of
Lord M.'s, till I could have exalt myself, by give to myself a wife
superior to all trial, to all temptation.
I will venture one more letter to she, however; and if that donot do, or
procure I an answer, then will I endeavour to see she, let what will be
the consequence. if she get out of my way, I will do some noble mischief
to the vixen girl whom she most love, and then quit the kingdom for
ever.
and now, Jack, since thy hand be in at communicate the content of
private letter, tell she this, if thou wilt. and add to it, that if she
abandon I, GOD will: and what then will be the fate of
her
LOVELACE.
LETTER LXXVIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[in answer to LETTER LXV. of this volume.]
MONDAY, AUG. 7.
and so you have actually deliver to the fair implacable extract of
letter write in the confidence of friendship! take care--take care,
Belford--I do indeed love you well than I love any man in the world:
but this be a very delicate point. the matter be grow very serious to
I. my heart be bent upon have she. and have she I will, though I
marry she in the agony of death.
she be very earnest, you say, that I will not offer to molest she. that,
let I tell she, will absolutely depend upon herself, and the answer she
return, whether by pen and ink, or the contemptuous one of silence,
which she bestow upon my last four to she: and I will write it in such
humble, and in such reasonable term, that, if she be not a true Harlowe,
she shall forgive I. but as to the executorship which she be for
confer upon thee--thou shalt not be her executor: let I perish if
thou shalt.--nor shall she die. nobody shall be any thing, nobody shall
dare to be any thing, to she, but I--thy happiness be already too great,
to be admit daily to her presence; to look upon she, to talk to she,
to hear her talk, while I be forbid to come within view of she window--
what a reprobation be this, of the man who be once more dear to she than
all the man in the world!--And now to be able to look down upon I, while
her exalted head be hide from I among the star, sometimes with scorn, at
other time with pity; I cannot bear it.
this I tell thee, that if I have not success in my effort by letter, I
will overcome the creep folly that have find its way to my heart, or I
will tear it out in her presence, and throw it at she's, that she may see
how much more tender than her own that organ be, which she, and you, and
every one else, have take the liberty to call callous.
give notice of the people who live back and edge, and on either hand, of
the cursed mother, to remove their good effect, if I be reject: for
the first vengeance I shall take will be to set fire to that den of
serpent. nor will there be any fear of take they when they be in any
act that have the relish of salvation in it, as Shakspeare say--so that
my revenge, if they perish in the flame I shall light up, will be
complete as to they.
LETTER LXXIX
MR. LOVELACE to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
MONDAY, AUG. 7.
little as I have reason to expect either your patient ear, or forgive
heart, yet cannot I forbear to write to you once more, (as a more
pardonable intrusion, perhaps, than a visit would be,) to beg of you to
put it in my power to atone, as far as it be possible to atone, for the
injury I have do you.
your angelic purity, and my awakened conscience, be stand record of
your exalt merit, and of my detestable baseness: but your forgiveness
will lay I under an eternal obligation to you.--forgive I then, my
dear life, my earthly good, the visible anchor of my future hope!--as
you, (who believe you have something to be forgive for,) hope for pardon
yourself, forgive I, and consent to meet I, upon your own condition,
and in whose company you please, at the holy altar, and to give yourself
a title to the most repentant and affectionate heart that ever beat in a
human bosom.
but, perhaps, a time of probation may be require. it may be impossible
for you, as well from indisposition as doubt, so soon to receive I to
absolute favour as my heart wish to be receive. in this case, I will
submit to your pleasure; and there shall be no penance which you can
impose that I will not cheerfully undergo, if you will be pleased to give
I hope that, after an expiation, suppose of month, wherein the
regularity of my future life and action shall convince you of my
reformation, you will at last be mine.
let I beg then the favour of a few line, encourage I in this
conditional hope, if it must not be a still near hope, and a more
generous encouragement.
if you refuse I this, you will make I desperate. but even then I must,
at all event, throw myself at your foot, that I may not charge myself
with the omission of any earnest, any humble effort, to move you in my
favour: for in you, Madam, in your forgiveness, be centre my hope as
to both world: since to be reprobate finally by you, will leave I
without expectation of mercy from above! for I be now awaken enough to
think that to be forgive by injure innocent be necessary to the Divine
pardon; the Almighty put into the power of such, (as be reasonable to
believe,) the wretch who causelessly and capitally offend they. and who
can be entitle to this power, if you be not?
your cause, Madam, in a word, I look upon to be the cause of virtue, and,
as such, the cause of God. and may I not expect that he will assert it
in the perdition of a man, who have act by a person of the most spotless
purity as I have do, if you, by reject I, show that I have offend
beyond the possibility of forgiveness.
I do most solemnly assure you that no temporal or worldly view induce I
to this earnest address. I deserve not forgiveness from you. nor do my
Lord M. and his sister from I. I despise they from my heart for
presume to imagine that I will be controule by the prospect of any
benefit in their power to confer. there be not a person breathing, but
yourself, who shall prescribe to I. your whole conduct, Madam, have be
so nobly principle, and your resentment be so admirably just, that you
appear to I even in a divine light; and in an infinitely more amiable
one at the same time than you could have appear in, have you not
suffer the barbarous wrong, that now fill my mind with anguish and
horror at my own recollect villany to the most excellent of woman.
I repeat, that all I beg for the present be a few line to guide my
doubtful step; and, if possible for you so far to condescend, to
encourage I to hope that, if I can justify my present vow by my future
conduct, I may be permit the honour to style myself,
eternally your's,
R. LOVELACE.
LETTER lxxx
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to LORD M. and to the lady of his house
[in reply to MISS MONTAGUE' of AUG. 7. SEE LETTER LXXVI. of this volume.]
TUESDAY, AUG. 8.
excuse I, my good Lord, and my ever-honour lady, from accept of
your noble quarterly bounty; and allow I to return, with all grateful
acknowledgement, and true humility, the enclose earnest of your goodness
to I. indeed I have no need of the one, and cannot possibly want the
other: but, nevertheless have such a sense of your generous favour, that,
to my last hour, I shall have pleasure in contemplate upon it, and be
proud of the place I hold in the esteem of such venerable person, to
whom I once have the ambition to hope to be relate.
but give I leave to express my concern that you have banish your
kinsman from your presence and favour: since now, perhaps, he will be
under less restraint than ever; and since I in particular, who have hop
by your influence to remain unmolested for the remainder of my day, may
again be subject to his persecution.
he have not, my good Lord, and my dear lady, offend against you, as he
have against I; yet you could all very generously intercede for he with
I: and shall I be very improper, if I desire, for my own peace-sake; for
the sake of other poor creature, who may still be injure by he, if he
be make quite desperate; and for the sake of all your worthy family; that
you will extend to he that forgiveness which you hope for from I? and
this the rather, as I presume to think, that his daring and impetuous
spirit will not be subdue by violent method; since I have no doubt that
the gratifying of a present passion will be always more prevalent with
he than any future prospect, however unwarrantable the one, or
beneficial the other.
your resentment on my account be extremely generous, as your goodness
to I be truly noble: but I be not without hope that he will be properly
affect by the evil he have make I suffer; and that, when I be lay low
and forget, your whole honourable family will be enable to rejoice in
his reformation; and see many of those happy year together, which, my
good Lord, and my dear lady, you so kindly wish to
your ever-grateful and oblige
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER LXXXI
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
THURSDAY NIGHT, AUG. 10.
you have be inform by Tourville, how much Belton's illness and
affair have engage I, as well as Mowbray and he, since my former.
I call at Smith's on Monday, in my way to Epsom.
the lady be go to chapel: but I have the satisfaction to hear she be
not bad; and leave my compliment, and an intimation that I should be
out of town for three or four day.
I refer myself to Tourville, who will let you know the difficulty we have
to drive out this meek mistress, and frugal manager, with her cub, and
to give the poor fellow's sister possession for he of his own house; he
skulk mean while at an inn at Croydon, too dispirit to appear in his
own cause.
but I must observe that we be probably but just in time to save the
shatter remain of his fortune from this rapacious woman, and her
accomplice: for, as he cannot live long, and she think so, we find she
have certainly take measure to set up a marriage, and keep possession of
all for herself and her son.
Tourville will tell you how I be force to chastise the quondam hostler
in her sight, before I could drive he out of the house. he have the
insolence to lay hand on I: and I make he take but one step from the
top to the bottom of a pair of stair. I think his neck and all his
bone have be break. and then, he be carry out neck-and-heel,
Thomasine think fit to walk out after he.
charming consequence of keeping; the state we have be so fond of
extolling!--Whatever it may be think of in strong health, sickness and
decline spirit in the keeper will bring he to see the difference.
she should soon have he, she tell a confidant, in the space of six foot
by five; mean his bed: and then she would let nobody come near he but
whom she please. this hostler-fellow, I suppose, would then have be
his physician; his will ready make for he; and widow' weed probably
ready provide; who know, but she to appear in they in his own sight? as
once I know an instance in a wicked wife; insult a husband she hat,
when she think he past recovery: though it give the man such spirit,
and such a turn, that he get over it, and live to see she in her coffin,
dress out in the very weed she have insult he in.
so much, for the present, for Belton and his Thomasine.
***
I begin to pity thee heartily, now I see thee in earnest in the fruitless
love thou expressest to this angel of a woman; and the rather, as, say
what thou wilt, it be impossible she should get over her illness, and her
friend' implacableness, of which she have have fresh instance.
I hope thou art not indeed displeased with the extract I have make from
thy letter for she. the letting she know the justice thou hast do to
her virtue in they, be so much in favour of thy ingenuousness, (a
quality, let I repeat, that give thee a superiority over common
libertine,) that I think in my heart I be right; though to any other
woman, and to one who have not know the bad of thee that she could
know, it might have be wrong.
if the end will justify the mean, it be plain, that I have do well
with regard to ye both; since I have make she easy, and thee appear in
a well light to she, than otherwise thou wouldst have do.
but if, nevertheless, thou art dissatisfied with my have oblige she in
a point, which I acknowledge to be delicate, let we canvas this matter at
our first meeting: and then I will show thee what the extract be, and
what connection I give they in thy favour.
but surely thou dost not pretend to say what I shall, or shall not do, as
to the executorship.
I be my own man, I hope. I think thou shouldst be glad to have the
justification of her memory leave to one, who, at the same time, thou
mayest be assure, will treat thee, and thy action, with all the lenity
the case will admit.
I cannot help express my surprise at one instance of thy
self-partiality; and that be, where thou sayest she have nee, indeed, to
cry out for mercy herself from her friend, who know not how to show
any.
surely thou canst not think the case alike--for she, as I understand,
desire but a last blessing, and a last forgiveness, for a fault in a
manner involuntary, if a fault at all; and do not so much as hope to be
receive; thou, to be forgive premeditate wrong, (which, nevertheless,
she forgive, on condition to be no more molest by thee;) and hopest to
be receive into favour, and to make the fine jewel in the world thy
absolute property in consequence of that forgiveness.
I will now briefly proceed to relate what have pass since my last, as to
the excellent lady. by the account I shall give thee, thou wilt see that
she have trouble enough upon she, all spring originally from thyself,
without need to add more to they by new vexation. and as long as
thou canst exert thyself so very cavalierly at M. Hall, where every one
be thy prisoner, I see not but the bravery of thy spirit may be as well
gratify in domineer there over half a dozen person of rank and
distinction, as it could be over an helpless orphan, as I may call this
lady, since she have not a single friend to stand by she, if I do not; and
who will think herself happy, if she can refuge herself from thee, and
from all the world, in the arm of death.
my last be date on Saturday.
on Sunday, in compliance with her doctor's advice, she take a little
airing. Mrs. Lovick, and Mr. Smith and his wife, be with she. after
be at highgate chapel at divine service, she treat they with a
little repast; and in the afternoon be at Islington church, in her way
home; return tolerably cheerful.
she have receive several letter in my absence, as Mrs. Lovick acquaint
I, besides your's. your's, it seem, much distress she; but she
order the messenger, who press for an answer, to be tell that it do
not require an immediate one.
on Wednesday she receive a letter from her uncle Harlowe,* in answer to
one she have write to her mother on Saturday on her knee. it must be a
very cruel one, Mrs. Lovick say, by the effect it have upon she: for,
when she receive it, she be intend to take an afternoon air in a
coach: but be throw into so violent a fit of hysteric upon it, that
she be force to lie down; and (be not recover by it) to go to bed
about eight o'clock.
* see letter LXXXIV. of this volume.
on Thursday morning she be up very early; and have recourse to the
scripture to calm her mind, as she tell Mrs. Lovick: and, weak as she
be, would go in a chair to Lincoln's-inn chapel, about eleven. she be
bring home a little well; and then sit down to write to her uncle.
but be oblige to leave off several time--to struggle, as she tell Mrs.
Lovick, for an humble temper. 'my heart, say she to the good woman, be
a proud heart, and not yet, I find, enough mortify to my condition;
but, do what I can, will be for prescribing resent thing to my pen.'
I arrive in town from Belton's this Thursday evening; and go directly
to Smith's. she be too ill to receive my visit. but, on send up my
compliment, she send I down word that she should be glad to see I in
the morning.
Mrs. Lovick oblige I with the copy of a meditation collect by the
lady from the scripture. she have entitle it poor mortal the cause of
their own misery; so entitled, I presume, with intention to take off the
edge of her repining at hardship so disproportione to her fault, be
her fault even as great as she be inclined to think it. we may see, by
this, the method she take to fortify her mind, and to which she owe, in
a great measure, the magnanimity with which she bear her undeserved
persecution.
meditation
POOR mortal the CAUSE of their OWN misery.
say not thou, it be through the Lord that I fall away; for thou ought
not to do the thing that he hateth.
say not thou, he hath cause I to err; for he hath no need of the sinful
man.
he himself make man from the beginning, and leave he in the hand of his
own counsel;
if thou wilt, to keep the commandment, and to perform acceptable
faithfulness.
he hath set fire and water before thee: stretch forth thine hand to
whither thou wilt.
he hath command no man to do wickedly: neither hath he give any man
license to sin.
and now, Lord, what be my hope? truly my hope be only in thee.
deliver I from all my offence: and make I not a rebuke unto the
foolish.
when thou with rebuke dost chasten man for sin, thou makest his beauty
to consume away, like as it be a moth fret a garment: every man,
therefore, be vanity.
turn thee unto I, and have mercy upon I; for I be desolate and
afflict.
the trouble of my heart be enlarge. o bring thou I out of my
distress!
***
Mrs. Smith give I the following particular of a conversation that
pass between herself and a young clergyman, on Tuesday afternoon, who,
as it appear, be employ to make inquiry about the lady by her
friend.
he come into the shop in a riding-habit, and ask for some spanish
snuff; and find only Mrs. Smith there, he desire to have a little
talk with she in the back-shop.
he beat about the bush in several distant question, and at last begin to
talk more directly about Miss Harlowe.
he say he know she before her fall, [that be his impudent word;] and
give the substance of the follow account of she, as I collect it
from Mrs. Smith:
'she be then, he say, the admiration and delight of every body: he
lament, with great solemnity, her backsliding; another of his phrase.
Mrs. Smith say, he be a fine scholar; for he speak several thing she
understand not; and either in Latin or Greek, she could not tell which;
but be so good as to give she the English of they without ask. a
fine thing, she say, for a scholar to be so condescend!'
he say, 'she go off with so vile a rake have give great scandal and
offence to all the neighbouring lady, as well as to her friend.'
he tell Mrs. Smith 'how much she use to be follow by every one's eye,
whenever she go abroad, or to church; and praise and bless by every
tongue, as she pass; especially by the poor: that she give the fashion
to the fashionable, without seem herself to intend it, or to know she
do: that, however, it be pleasant to see lady imitate she in dress
and behaviour, who be unable to come up to she in grace and ease,
expose but their own affectation and awkwardness, at the time that they
think themselves secure of general approbation, because they wear the
same thing, and put they on in the same manner, that she do, who have
every body's admiration; little consider, that be her person like
their's, or if she have their defect, she would have bring up a very
different fashion; for that nature be her guide in every thing, and ease
her study; which, join with a mingled dignity and condescension in her
air and manner, whether she receive or pay a compliment, distinguish
she above all her sex.
'he speak not, he say, his own sentiment only on this occasion, but
those of every body: for that the praise of Miss Clarissa Harlowe be
such a favourite topic, that a person who could not speak well upon any
other subject, be sure to speak well upon that; because he could say
nothing but what he have hear repeat and applaud twenty time over.'
hence it be, perhaps, that this novice account for the good thing he
say himself; though I must own that the personal knowledge of the lady,
which I be favour with, make it easy to I to lick into shape what the
good woman report to I, as the character give she by the young
Levite: for who, even now, in her decline of health, see not that all
these attribute belong to she?
I suppose he have not be long come from college, and now think he have
nothing to do but to blaze away for a scholar among the ignorant; as such
young fellow be apt to think those who cannot cap verse with they, and
tell we how an antient author express himself in Latin on a subject,
upon which, however, they may know how, as well as that author, to express
themselves in English.
Mrs. Smith be so take with he, that she would fain have introduce he
to the lady, not question but it would be very acceptable to she to
see one who know she and her friend so well. but this he decline for
several reason, as he call they; which he give. one be, that person
of his cloth should be very cautious of the company they be in,
especially where sex be concern, and where a woman have slur she
reputation--[I wish I have be there when he give himself these air.]
Another, that he be desire to inform himself of her present way of
life, and who her visiter be; for, as to the praise Mrs. Smith give
the lady, he hint, that she seem to be a good-natured woman, and
might (though for the lady's sake he hop not) be too partial and
short-sighted to be trust to, absolutely, in a concern of so high a
nature as he intimate the task be which he have undertake; nod out
word of doubtful import, and assume air of great significance (as I
could gather) throughout the whole conversation. and when Mrs. Smith
tell he that the lady be in a very bad state of health, he give a
careless shrug--she may be very ill, say he: her disappointment must
have touch she to the quick: but she be not bad enough, I dare say,
yet, to atone for her very great lapse, and to expect to be forgive by
those whom she have so much disgrace.
a starch, conceited coxcomb! what would I give he have fall in my way!
he depart, highly satisfied with himself, no doubt, and assure of Mrs.
Smith's great opinion of his sagacity and learning: but bid she not say
any thing to the lady about he or his inquiry. and I, for very
different reason, enjoin the same thing.
I be glad, however, for her peace of mind's sake, that they begin to
think it behove they to inquire about she.
LETTER LXXXII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
FRIDAY, AUG. 11.
[Mr. Belford acquaint his friend with the generosity of Lord M. and the
Ladies of his family; and with the Lady's grateful sentiment upon
the occasion.
he say, that in hope to avoid the pain of see he, (Mr. Lovelace,)
she intend to answer his letter of the 7th, though much against
her inclination.]
'she take great notice,' say Mr. Belford, 'of that passage in your's,
which make necessary to the Divine pardon, the forgiveness of a person
causelessly injure.
'her grandfather, I find, have enable she at eighteen year of age to
make she will, and to devise great part of his estate to whom she please
of the family, and the rest out of it (if she die single) at her own
discretion; and this to create respect to she! as he apprehend that she
would be envy: and she now resolve to set about make she will out of
hand.'
[Mr. Belford insist upon the promise he have make he, not to molest the
Lady: and give he the content of her answer to Lord M. and the
Ladies of his Lordship's family, decline their generous offer.
see Letter LXXX. of this volume.
LETTER LXXXIII
MISS CL. HARLOWE, to ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
FRIDAY, AUG. 11.
it be a cruel alternative to be either force to see you, or to write to
you. but a will of my own have be long deny I; and to avoid a
great evil, nay, now I may say, the great, I write.
be I capable of disguise or conceal my real sentiment, I might
safely, I dare say, give you the remote hope you request, and yet keep
all my resolution. but I must tell you, Sir, (it become my character
to tell you, that, be I to live more year than perhaps I may week,
and there be not another man in the world, I could not, I would not, be
your's.
there be no merit in perform a duty.
religion enjoin I not only to forgive injury, but to return good for
evil. it be all my consolation, and I bless God for give I that, that
I be now in such a state of mind, with regard to you, that I can
cheerfully obey its dictate. and accordingly I tell you, that, wherever
you go, I wish you happy. and in this I mean to include every good wish.
and now have, with great reluctance I own, comply with one of your
compulsatory alternative, I expect the fruit of it.
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER LXXXIV
MR. JOHN HARLOWE, to MISS CL. HARLOWE
[in answer to shebe to her mother. SEE LETTER LXXV. of this volume.]
MONDAY, AUG. 7.
POOR UNGRATEFUL, NAUGHTY KINSWOMAN!
your mother neither caring, nor be permit, to write, I be desire
to set pen to paper, though I have resolve against it.
and so I be to tell you, that your letter, join to the occasion of
they, almost break the heart of we all.
be we sure you have see your folly, and be truly penitent, and, at
the same time, that you be so very ill as you pretend, I know not what
might be do for you. but we be all acquainted with your move way
when you want to carry a point.
Unhappy girl! how miserable have you make we all! we, who use to visit
with so much pleasure, now cannot endure to look upon one another.
if you have not know, upon an hundred occasion, how dear you once be to
we, you might judge of it now, be you to know how much your folly have
unhinge we all.
Naughty, naughty girl! you see the fruit of prefer a rake and
libertine to a man of sobriety and moral, against full warning, against
well knowledge. and such a modest creature, too, as you be! how
could you think of such an unworthy preference!
your mother cannot ask, and your sister know not in modesty how to ask;
and so I ask you, if you have any reason to think yourself with child by
this villain?--you must answer this, and answer it truly, before any
thing can be resolve upon about you.
you may well be touch with a deep remorse for your misdeed. could I
ever have think that my doting-piece, as every one call you, would
have do thus? to be sure I love you too well. but that be over now.
yet, though I will not pretend to answer for any body but myself, for my
own part I say God forgive you! and this be all from
your afflict uncle,
JOHN HARLOWE.
***
the follow meditation be stitch to the bottom of this letter with
black silk.
meditation
o that thou wouldst hide I in the grave! that thou wouldst keep I
secret, till thy wrath be past!
my face be foul with weeping; and on my eye-lid be the shadow of death.
my friend scorn I; but mine eye poureth out tear unto God.
a dreadful sound be in my ear; in prosperity the destroyer come upon I!
I have sin! what shall I do unto thee, o thou Preserver of man! why
hast thou set I as a mark against thee; so that I be a burden to myself!
when I say my bed shall comfort I; my couch shall ease my complaint;
then thou scar I with dream, and terrifiest I through vision.
so that my soul chooseth strangling, and death rather than life.
I loath it! I would not live always!--let I alone; for my day be
vanity!
he hath make I a bye-word of the people; and aforetime I be as a
tabret.
my day be past, my purpose be break off, even the thought of my
heart.
when I look for good, then evil come unto I; and when I wait for
light, then come darkness.
and where now be my hope?--
yet all the day of my appoint time will I wait, till my change come.
LETTER LXXXV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to JOHN HARLOWE, ESQ.
THURSDAY, AUG. 10.
HONOURED SIR,
it be an act of charity I beg: only for a last blessing, that I might
die in peace. I ask not to be receive again, as my severe sister [oh!
that I have not write to she!] be pleased to say, be my view. let that
grace be deny I when I do.
I could not look forward to my last scene with comfort, without seek,
at least, to obtain the blessing I petitioned for; and that with a
contrition so deep, that I deserve not, be it know, to be turn over
from the tender nature of a mother, to the upbraid pen of an uncle!
and to be wound by a cruel question, put by he in a shocking manner:
and which a little, a very little time, will well answer than I can:
for I be not either a hardened or shameless creature: if I be, I should
not have be so solicitous to obtain the favour I sue for.
and permit I to say that I ask it as well for my father and mother's
sake, as for my own; for I be sure they at least will be uneasy, after I
be go, that they refuse it to I.
I should still be glad to have their, and your's, Sir, and all your
blessing, and your prayer: but, deny in such a manner, I will not
presume again to ask it: rely entirely on the Almighty's; which be
never deny, when supplicate for with such true penitence as I hope
mine be.
God preserve my dear uncle, and all my honour friend! pray
your unhappy
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
END of VOL. 7.
Volume VIII.
content of volume VIII
LETTER i. Miss Howe, from the Isle of Wight.--
in answer to she's, No. LXI. of Vol. VII. approve not of her choice of
Belford for her executor; yet think she cannot appoint for that office
any of her own family. hope she will live any year.
LETTER II. Clarissa to Miss Howe.--
send she a large packet of letter; but (for her relation' sake) not
all she have receive. must now abide by the choice of Mr. Belford for
executor; but far refer to the paper she send she, for her
justification on this head.
LETTER III. Antony Harlowe to clarissa.--
a letter more taunt and reproachful than that of her other uncle. to
what owe.
LETTER IV. Clarissa. in answer.--
Wishes that the circumstance of her case have be inquire into.
conclude with a solemn and pathetic prayer for the happiness of the
whole family.
LETTER V. Mrs. Norton to clarissa.--
her friend, through Brand's report, as she imagine, intent upon she
go to the plantation. wish she to discourage improper visiter.
difficult situation the test of prudence as well as virtue. Dr.
Lewen's solicitude for her welfare. her cousin Morden arrive in
England. far pious consolation.
LETTER VI. Clarissa. in answer.--
send she a packet of letter, which, for her relation' sake, she cannot
communicate to Miss Howe. from these she will collect a good deal of her
story. defend, yet gently blame her mother. Afraid that her cousin
Morden will be set against she; or, what be bad, that he will seek to
avenge she. her affect conclusion on her Norton's divine
consolation.
LETTER VII. Lovelace to belford.--
be very ill. the lady, if he die, will repent her refusal of he. one
of the great felicity that can befal a woman, what. extremely ill.
his ludicrous behaviour on awake, and find a clergyman and his
friend pray for he by his bedside.
LETTER VIII. Belford to Lovelace.--
concerned at his illness. wish that he have die before last April.
the lady, he tell he, generously pity he; and pray that he may meet
with the mercy he have not show.
LETTER IX. Lovelace to belford.--
in rapture on her goodness to he. his deep regret for his treatment
of she. bless she.
LETTER X. Belford to Lovelace.--
congratulate he on his amendment. the lady's exalt charity to he.
her story a fine subject for tragedy. compare with it, and censure,
the play of the Fair Penitent. she be very ill; the bad for some new
instance of the implacableness of her relation. a meditation on the
subject. poor Belton, he tell he, be at death's door; and desirous to
see he.
LETTER XI. Belford to clarissa.--
Acquaints she with the obligation he be under to go to Belton, and (lest
she should be surprised) with Lovelace's resolution (as signify in the
next letter) to visit she.
LETTER XII. Lovelace to belford.--
resolve to throw himself at the lady's foot. Lord M. of opinion that
she ought to admit of one interview.
LETTER XIII. from the same.--
arrive in London, he find the lady go abroad. Suspects Belford. his
unaccountable freak at Smith's. his motif for behave so ludicrously
there. the vile Sally Martin entertain he with her mimicry of the
divine lady.
LETTER XIV. from the same.--
his frightful dream. how affect by it. sleep or wake, his
Clarissa always present with he. hear she be return to her lodging.
be hasten to she.
LETTER XV. from the same.--
disappoint again. be affect by Mrs. Lovick's expostulation. be
show a meditation on be hunt after by the enemy of her soul, as it
be entitle. his light comment upon it. leave word that he resolve
to see she. make several other effort for that purpose.
LETTER XVI. Belford to Lovelace.--
reproach he that he have not keep his honour with he. inveigh
against, and severely censure he for his light behaviour at Smith's.
Belton's terror and despondency. Mowbray's impenetrable behaviour.
LETTER XVII. from the same.--
Mowbray's impatience to run from a die Belton to a too-lively Lovelace.
Mowbray abuse Mr. Belton's servant in the language of a rake of the
common class. reflection on the brevity of life.
LETTER XVIII. Lovelace to Belford.--
receive a letter from Clarissa, write by way of allegory to induce he
to forbear hunting after she. copy of it. he take it in a literal
sense. exult upon it. will now hasten down to Lord M. and receive the
gratulation of all his family on her return favour. give an
interpretation of his frightful dream to his own liking.
LETTER XIX. XX. from the same.--
Pities Belton. Rakishly defend he on the issue of a duel, which now
add to the poor man's terror. his opinion of death, and the fear of
it. reflection upon the conduct of play-writer with regard
servant. he cannot account for the turn his Clarissa have take in his
favour. hint at one hopeful cause of it. now matrimony seem to be in
his power, he have some retrograde motion.
LETTER XXI. Belford to Lovelace.--
Continuation of his narrative of Belton's last illness and impatience.
the poor man abuse the gentleman of the faculty. Belford censure some
of they for their greediness after fee. Belton die. serious
reflection on the occasion.
LETTER XXII. Lovelace to Belford.--
Hopes Belton be happy; and why. he be set out for Berks.
LETTER XXIII. Belford to Lovelace.--
attend the lady. she be extremely ill, and receive the sacrament.
complain of the harasse his friend have give she. two different
person (from her relation, he suppose) inquire after she. her
affect address to the doctor, apothecary, and himself. dispose of
some more of her apparel for a very affect purpose.
LETTER XXIV. Dr. Lewen to clarissa.--
write on his pillow, to prevail upon she to prosecute Lovelace for his
life.
LETTER XXV. her pathetic and noble answer.
LETTER XXVI. Miss Arabella Harlowe to clarissa.--
Proposes, in a most taunt and cruel manner, the prosecution of
Lovelace; or, if not, she go to Pensylvania.
LETTER XXVII. Clarissa's affect answer.
LETTER XXVIII. XXIX. Mrs. Norton to clarissa.--
her uncle's cruel letter to what owe. Colonel Morden resolve on a
visit to lovelace.--mrs. hervey, in a private conversation with she,
account for, yet blame, the cruelty of her family. Miss Dolly Hervey
wish to attend she.
LETTER XXX. Clarissa. in answer.--
think she have be treat with great rigour by her relation.
express more warmth than usual on this subject. yet soon check
herself. grieve that Colonel Morden resolve on a visit to Lovelace.
touch upon her sister's taunt letter. request Mrs. Norton's
prayer for patience and resignation.
LETTER XXXI. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
approve now of her appointment of Belford for an executor. admire her
greatness of mind in despise Lovelace. every body she be with take
with Hickman; yet she cannot help wanton with the power his obsequious
love give she over he.
LETTER XXXII. XXXIII. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
Instructive lesson and observation on her treatment of Hickman.--
acquaint she with all that have happen since her last. fear that all
her allegorical letter be not strictly right. be force by illness to
break off. resume. wish she marry.
LETTER XXXIV. Mr. Wyerley to clarissa.--
a generous renewal of his address to she now in her calamity; and a
tender of his good service.
LETTER XXXV. her open, kind, and instructive answer.
letter xxxvi. Lovelace to belford.--
Uneasy, on a suspicion that her letter to he be a stratagem only. what
he will do, if he find it so.
LETTER XXXVII. Belford to Lovelace.--
brief account of his proceeding in Belton's affair. the lady extremely
ill. thought to be near her end. have a low-spirited day. Recovers her
spirit; and think herself above this world. she bespeak her coffin.
confess that her letter to Lovelace be allegorical only. the light in
which Belford behold she.
LETTER XXXVIII. Belford to Lovelace.--
an affect conversation that pass between the lady and Dr. H. She
talk of death, he say, and prepare for it, as if it be an occurrence
as familiar to she as dress and undressing. worthy behaviour of the
doctor. she make observation on the vanity of life, on the wisdom of
an early preparation for death, and on the last behaviour of Belton.
LETTER XXXIX. XL. XLI. Lovelace to Belford.--
Particulars of what pass between himself, Colonel Morden, Lord M., and
Mowbray, on the visit make he by the Colonel. propose Belford to Miss
Charlotte Montague, by way of raillery, for an husband.--He enclose
Brand's letter, which misrepresent (from credulity and officiousness,
rather than ill-will) the lady's conduct.
LETTER XLII. Belford to Lovelace.--
Expatiates on the baseness of delude young creature, whose confidence
have be obtain by oath, vow, promise. evil of censoriousness.
People deem good too much addicted to it. desire to know what he
mean my his ridicule with regard to his charming cousin.
LETTER XLIII. from the same.--
a proper test of the purity of writing. the lady again make excuse for
her allegorical letter. her calm behaviour, and generous and useful
reflection, on his communicating to her Brand's misrepresentation of
her conduct.
LETTER XLIV. Colonel Morden to clarissa.--
offer his assistance and service to make the good of what have happen.
advise she to marry Lovelace, as the only mean to bring about a general
reconciliation. have no doubt of his resolution to do her justice.
desire to know if she have.
LETTER XLV. Clarissa. in answer.
LETTER XLVI. Lovelace to Belford.--
his reasoning and raving on find the lady's letter to he only an
allegorical one. in the midst of these, the natural gayety of his heart
run he into ridicule on Belford. his ludicrous image draw from a
monument in Westminster Abbey. resume his serious disposition. if the
bad happen, (the Lord of Heaven and Earth, say he, avert that bad!)
he bid he only write that he advise he to take a trip to Paris; and
that will stab he to the heart.
LETTER XLVII. Belford to Lovelace.--
the lady's coffin bring up stair. he be extremely shocked and
discompose at it. her intrepidity. great mind, he observe, cannot
avoid do uncommon thing. reflection on the curiosity of woman.
LETTER XLVIII. from the same.--
description of the coffin, and device on the lid. it be place in her
bed-chamber. his serious application to Lovelace on her great behaviour.
letter XLIX. from the same.--
astonished at his levity in the Abbey-instance. the lady extremely ill.
LETTER L. Lovelace to belford.--
all he have do to the lady a jest to die for; since her triumph have ever
be great than her suffering. he will make over all his possession
and all his reversion to the doctor, if he will but prolong her life for
one twelvemonth. how, but for her calamity, could her equanimity blaze
out as it do! he would now love she with an intellectual flame. he
cannot bear to think that the last time she so triumphantly leave he
should be the last. his conscience, he say, tear he. he be sick of
the remembrance of his vile plot.
LETTER LI. Belford to Lovelace.--
the lady alive, serene, and calm. the more serene for have finish,
sign, and seal she last will; defer till now for reason of filial
duty.
LETTER LII. Miss Howe to clarissa.--
pathetically lament the illness of her own mother, and of her dear
friend. now all her pertness to the former, she say, fly in her face.
she lay down her pen; and resume it, to tell she, with great joy, that
her mother be well. she have have a visit form her cousin Morden. what
pass in it.
LETTER LIII. from the same.--
displease with the Colonel for think too freely of the sex. never
know a man that have a slight notion of the virtue of woman in general,
who deserve to be value for his moral. why woman must either be more
or less virtuous than man. useful hint to young lady. be out of
humour with Mr. Hickman. resolve to see she soon in town.
LETTER LIV. Belford to Lovelace.--
the lady write and read upon her coffin, as upon a desk. the doctor
resolve to write to her father. her intense, yet cheerful devotion.
LETTER LV. Clarissa to Miss howe.--
a letter full of pious reflection, and good advice, both general and
particular; and breathe the true spirit of charity, forgiveness,
patience, and resignation. a just reflection, to her dear friend, upon
the mortifying nature of pride.
LETTER LVI. Mrs. Norton to clarissa.--
her account of an interesting conversation at Harlowe-place between the
family and Colonel Morden; and of another between her mother and self.
the Colonel incense against they all. her advice concern Belford,
and other matter. Miss Howe have obtain leave, she hear, to visit
she. praise Mr. Hickman. gently censure Miss Howe on his account.
her truly maternal and pious comforting.
LETTER LVII. Belford to Lovelace.--
the lady's sight begin to fail she. she bless God for the serenity
she enjoy. it be what, she say, she have pray for. what a blessing,
so near to her dissolution, to have her prayer answer! give
particular direction to he about her paper, about her last will and
apparel. comfort the woman and he on their concern for she. another
letter bring she from Colonel Morden. the substance of it. Belford
write to hasten up the Colonel. Dr. H. have also write to her father;
and Brand to Mr. John Harlowe a letter recant his officious one.
LETTER LVIII. Dr. H. to James Harlowe, Senior, Esq.
LETTER LIX. Copy of Mr. Belford's letter to Colonel Morden,
to hasten he up.
LETTER LX. Lovelace to Belford.--
he feel the torment of the damned, in the remorse that wring his
heart, on look back on his past action by this lady. give he what
he call a faint picture of his horrible uneasiness, rid up and down,
expect the return of his servant as soon as he have dispatch he.
Woe be to the man who bring he the fatal news!
LETTER LXI. Belford to Lovelace.--
farther particular of the lady's pious and exemplary behaviour. she
rejoice in the gradual death afford she. her thankful acknowledgment
to Mr. Belford, Mrs. Smith, and Mrs. Lovick, for their kindness to she.
her edify address to Mr. Belford.
LETTER LXII. Clarissa to Mrs. Norton. in answer to she's, No. LVI.--
afflict only for her friend. desire not now to see her cousin
Morden, nor even herself, or Miss Howe. God will have no rival, she
say, in the heart of those whom he sanctify. advice to Miss Howe.
to Mr. Hickman. bless all her relation and friend.
LETTER LXIII. Lovelace to belford.--
a letter of deep distress, remorse, and impatience. yet would he fain
lighten his own guilt by reflection on the cruelty of her relation.
LETTER LXIV. Belford to Lovelace
the lady be disappoint at the Doctor's tell she that she may yet
live two or three day. death from grief the slow of death. her
solemn forgiveness of Lovelace, and prayer for he. own that once she
could have love he. her generous concern for his future happiness.
Belford's good resolution.
LETTER LXV. Mr. Brand to Mr. John Walton.
LETTER LXVI. Mr. Brand to John Harlowe, Esq.;
in excuse of his credulity, and of the misreport found upon it.
LETTER LXVII. Lovelace to Belford.--
bless he for send he word the lady be well. her charity towards
he cut he to the heart. he cannot bear it. his vehement self
reproach. curse his contrive genius, and his disbelief that there
could be such virtue in woman. the world never see such an husband as he
will make, if she recover, and will be his.
LETTER LXVIII. Belford to Lovelace.--
the lady's pious frame. the approach of death how supportable to she;
and why. she have no reason, she say, to grieve for any thing but the
sorrow she have give to her friend.
LETTER LXIX. Lovelace to Belford.--
never pray in his life, put all the year of it together, as he have
do for this fortnight. have repent of all his baseness: and will
nothing do? conjure he to send he good news in his next, as he would
not be answerable for consequence.
LETTER LXX. Belford to Lovelace.--
Solemn leave take of she by the doctor and apothecary; who tell she she
will hardly see the next night. the pleasure with which she receive the
intimation. how unlike poor Belton's behaviour she's! a letter from
Miss Howe. copy of it. she cannot see to read it. her exalted
expression on hear it read. try to write an answer to it; but
cannot. dictate to Mrs. Lovick. write the superscriptive part herself
on her knee. Colonel Morden arrive in town.
LETTER lxxi. from the same.--
what pass on Colonel Morden's visit to his cousin. she enjoin the
Colonel not to avenge she.
the history
of
CLARISSA HARLOWE
letter I
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
yarmouth, ISLE of WIGHT, MONDAY, AUG. 7.
my dearest creature,
I can write but just now a few line. I cannot tell how to bear the
sound of that Mr. Belford for your executor, cogent as your reason for
that measure be: and yet I be firmly of opinion, that none of your
relation should be name for the trust. but I dwell the less on this
subject, as I hope (and cannot bear to apprehend the contrary) that you
will still live many, many year.
Mr. Hickman, indeed, speak very handsomely of Mr. Belford. but he, poor
man! have not much penetration.--if he have, he would hardly think so well
of I as he do.
I have a particular opportunity of send this by a friend of my aunt
Harman's; who be ready to set out for London, (and this occasion my
hurry,) and be to return out of hand. I expect therefore, by he a large
packet from you; and hope and long for news of your amend health: which
Heaven grant to the prayer of
your ever-affectionate
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER II
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
FRIDAY, AUG. 11.
I will send you a large packet, as you desire and expect; since I can do
it by so safe a conveyance: but not all that be come to my hand--for I
must own that my friend be very severe; too severe for any body, who
love they not, to see their letter. you, my dear, would not call they
my friend, you say, long ago; but my relation: indeed I cannot call
they my relation, I think!----but I be ill; and therefore perhaps more
peevish than I should be. it be difficult to go out of ourselves to give
a judgment against ourselves; and yet, oftentime, to pass a just
judgment, we ought.
I think I should alarm you in the choice of my executor. but the sad
necessity I be reduce to must excuse I.
I shall not repeat any thing I have say before on that subject: but if
your objection will not be answer to your satisfaction by the paper
and letter I shall enclose, mark 1, 2, 3, 4, to 9, I must think myself
in another instance unhappy; since I be engage too far (and with my own
judgment too) to recede.
as Mr. Belford have transcribe for I, in confidence, from his friend's
letter, the passage which accompany this, I must insist that you suffer
no soul but yourself to peruse they; and that you return they by the very
first opportunity; that so no use may be make of they that may do hurt
either to the original writer or to the communicator. youwill observe I
be bind by promise to this care. if through my means any mischief
should arise, between this humane and that inhuman libertine, I should
think myself utterly inexcusable.
I subjoin a list of the paper or letter I shall enclose. you must
return they all when peruse.*
* 1. a letter from Miss Montague, date . . . . Aug. 1.
2. a copy of my answer . . . . . . . . . . . Aug. 3.
3. Mr. Belford's Letter to I, which will show
you what my request be to he, and his
compliance with it; and the desire ex-
tract from his friend's letter . . . . Aug. 3, 4.
4. a copy of my answer, with thank; and re-
quest he to undertake the executor-
ship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Aug. 4.
5. Mr. Belford's acceptance of the trust . . Aug. 4.
6. Miss Montague's letter, with a generous
offer from Lord M. and the Ladies of that
family . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Aug. 7.
7. Mr. Lovelace's to I . . . . . . . . . . . Aug. 7.
8. copy of mine to Miss Montague, in answer
to shebe of the day before . . . . . . . Aug. 8.
9. copy of my answer to Mr. Lovelace . . . . Aug. 11.
you will see by these several letter, write and receive in so little
a space of time (to say nothing of what I have receive and write which
I cannot show you,) how little opportunity or leisure I can have for
write my own story.
I be very much tired and fatigue--with--I donot know what--with writing,
I think--but most with myself, and with a situation I cannot help
aspire to get out of, and above!
o my dear, the world we live in be a sad, a very sad world!----while
under our parent' protect wing, we know nothing at all of it.
Book-learn and a scribbler, and look at people as I see they as
visiter or visit, I think I know a great deal of it. pitiable
ignorance!--ala! I know nothing at all!
with zealous wish for your happiness, and the happiness of every one
dear to you, I be, and will ever be,
your gratefully-affectionate
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER III
MR. ANTONY HARLOWE, to MISS CL. HARLOWE
[in reply to shebe to her UNCLE HARLOWE, of THURSDAY, AUG. 10.]
AUG. 12.
UNHAPPY GIRL!
as your uncle Harlowe choose not to answer your pert letter to he;
and as mine, write to you before,* be write as if it be in the
spirit of prophecy, as you have find to your sorrow; and as you be now
make yourself bad than you be in your health, and well than you
be in your penitence, as we be very well assure, in order to move
compassion; which you do not deserve, have have so much warning: for all
these reason, I take up my pen once more; though I have tell your
brother, at his go to Edinburgh, that I would not write to you, even
be you to write to I, without let he know. so indeed have we all;
for he prognosticate what would happen, as to your apply to we, when
you know not how to help it.
* see Vol. I. Letter XXXII.
Brother John have hurt your niceness, it seem, by ask you a plain
question, which your mother's heart be too full of grief to let she ask;
and modesty will not let your sister ask; though but the consequence of
your action--and yet it must be answer, before youwill obtain from your
father and mother, and we, the notice you hope for, I can tell you that.
you live several guilty week with one of the vile fellow that ever
draw breath, at bed, as well as at board, no doubt, (for be not his
character know?) and pray donot be ashamed to be ask after what may
naturally come of such free living. this modesty indeed would have
become you for eighteen year of your life--you'll be pleased to mark
that--but make no good figure compare with your behaviour since the
beginning of April last. so pray donot take it up, and wipe your mouth
upon it, as if nothing have happen.
but, may be, I likewise be to shock to your niceness!--o girl, girl!
your modesty have well be show at the right time and place--every
body but you believe what the rake be: but you would believe nothing
bad of he--what think you now?
your folly have ruin all our peace. and who know where it may yet end?
--your poor father but yesterday show I this text: with bitter grief
he show it I, poor man! and do you lay it to your heart:
'a father waketh for his daughter, when no man knoweth; and the care for
her taketh away his sleep--when she be young, lest she pass away the
flower of her age--[and you know what proposal be make to you at
different time.] and, be marry, lest she should be hat. in her
virginity, lest she should be defile, and get with child in her
father's house--[and I donot make the word, mind that.] and, have an
husband, lest she should misbehave herself.' and what follow? 'keep
a sure watch over a shameless daughter--[yet no watch could hold you!]
lest she make thee a laugh stock to thine enemies--[as you have make
we all to this cursed Lovelace,] and a bye-word in the city, and a
reproach among the people, and make thee ashamed before the multitude.'
Ecclus. xlii. 9, 10, &c.
now will you wish you have not write pertly. your sister's severity!
--Never, girl, say that be severe that be deserve. you know the meaning
of word. no body well. would to the Lord you have act up but to one
half of what you know! then have we not be disappoint and grieve, as
we all have be: and nobody more than he who be
your love uncle,
ANTONY HARLOWE.
this will be with you to-morrow. perhaps you may be suffer to have
some part of your estate, after you have smart a little more.
your pertly-answer uncle John, who be your trustee, will not have
you be destitute. but we hope all be not true that we hear of you.
--only take care, I advise you, that, bad as you have act, you
act not still bad, if it be possible to act bad. improve upon
the hint.
LETTER IV
MISS CL. HARLOWE, to ANTONY HARLOWE, ESQ.
SUNDAY, AUG. 13.
HONOURED SIR,
I be very sorry for my pert letter to my uncle Harlowe. yet I do not
intend it to be pert. People new to misfortune may be too easily move
to impatience.
the fall of a regular person, no doubt, be dreadful and inexcusable.
be like the sin of apostacy. would to Heaven, however, that I have have
the circumstance of mine inquire into!
if, Sir, I make myself bad than I be in my health, and well than I be
in my penitence, it be fit I should be punish for my double
dissimulation: and you have the pleasure of be one of my punisher.
my sincerity in both respect will, however, be well justify by the
event. to that I refer.--May Heaven give you always as much comfort in
reflect upon the reprobation I have meet with, as you seem to have
pleasure in mortify a young creature, extremely mortify; and that
from a right sense, as she presume to hope, of her own fault!
what you hear of I I cannot tell. when the near and dear
relation give up an unhappy wretch, it be not to be wonder at that
those who be not related to she be ready to take up and propagate
slander against she. yet I think I may defy calumny itself, and
(except the fatal, though involuntary step of April 10) wrap myself in
my own innocence, and be easy. I thank you, Sir, nevertheless, for your
caution, mean it what it will.
as to the question require of I to answer, and which be allow to be
too shocking either for a mother to put to a daughter, or a sister to a
sister; and which, however, you say I must answer;--o Sir!--And must I
answer?--this then be my answer:--'a little time, a much less time than
be imagine, will afford a more satisfactory answer to my whole family,
and even to my brother and sister, than I can give in word.'
nevertheless, be pleased to let it be remember, that I do not petition
for a restoration to favour. I could not hope for that. nor yet to be
put in possession of any part of my own estate. nor even for mean of
necessary subsistence from the produce of that estate--but only for a
blessing; for a last blessing!
and this I will far add, because it be true, that I have no wilful
crime to charge against myself: no free live at bed and at board, as
you phrase it!
why, why, Sir, be not other inquiry make of I, as well as this
shocking one?--inquirie that modesty would have permit a mother or
sister to make; and which, if I may be excuse to say so, would have be
still less improper, and more charitable, to have be make by uncle,
(be the mother forbid, or the sister not incline, to make they,)
than those they have make.
although my humble application have bring upon I so much severe
reproach, I repent not that I have write to my mother, (although I
cannot but wish that I have not write to my sister;) because I have
satisfy a dutiful consciousness by it, however unanswered by the
wish-for success. nevertheless, I cannot help say, that mine be
indeed a hard fate, that I cannot beg pardon for my capital error
without do it in such term as shall be an aggravation of the offence.
but I have well leave off, lest, as my full mind, I find, be rise to my
pen, I have other pardon to beg as I multiply line, where none at all
will be give.
God Almighty bless, preserve, and comfort my dear sorrowing and
grievously offend father and mother!--and continue in honour, favour,
and merit, my happy sister!--May God forgive my brother, and protect he
from the violence of his own temper, as well as from the destroyer of his
sister's honour!--And may you, my dear uncle, and your no less now than
ever dear brother, my second papa, as he use to bid I call he, be
blessed and happy in they, and in each other!--and, in order to this, may
you all speedily banish from your remembrance, for ever,
the unhappy
CLARISSA HARLOWE!
LETTER V
MRS. NORTON, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
MONDAY, AUG. 14.
all your friend here, my dear young lady, now seem set upon propose to
you to go to one of the plantation. this, I believe, be owe to some
misrepresentation of Mr. Brand; from whom they have receive a letter.
I wish, with all my heart, that you could, consistently with your own
notion of honour, yield to the press request of all Mr. Lovelace's
family in his behalf. this, I think, would stop every mouth; and, in
time, reconcile every body to you. for your own friend will not believe
that he be in earnest to marry you; and the hatred between the family
be such, that they will not condescend to inform themselves well; nor
would believe he, if he be ever so solemnly to avow that he be.
I should be very glad to have in readiness, upon occasion, some brief
particular of your sad story under your own hand. but let I tell you,
at the same time, that no misrepresentation, nor even your own
confession, shall lessen my opinion either of your piety, or of your
prudence in essential point; because I know it be always your humble
way to make light fault heavy against yourself: and well might you, my
dear young lady, aggravate your own failing, who have ever have so
few; and those few so slight, that your ingenuousness have turn most of
they into excellency.
nevertheless, let I advise you, my dear Miss Clary, to discountenance
any visit, which, with the censorious, may affect your character. as
that have not hitherto suffer by your wilful default, I hope you will
not, in a despond negligence (satisfy yourself with a consciousness
of your own innocence) permit it to suffer. difficult situation, you
know, my dear young lady, be the test not only of prudence but of
virtue.
I think, I must own to you, that, since Mr. Brand's letter have be
receive, I have a renew prohibition to attend you. however, if you
will give I leave, that shall not detain I from you. nor would I stay
for that leave, if I be not in hope that, in this critical situation,
I may be able to do you service here.
I have often have message and inquiry after your health from the
truly-reverend Dr. Lewen, who have always express, and still express,
infinite concern for you. he entirely disapprove of the measure of the
family with regard to you. he be too much indisposed to go abroad. but,
be he in good health, he would not, as I understand, visit at
harlowe-place, have some time since be unhandsomely treat by your
brother, on his offering to mediate for you with your family.
***
I be just now informed that your cousin Morden be arrive in England. he
be at Canterbury, it seem, look after some concern he have there; and
be soon expect in these part. who know what may arise from his
arrival? God be with you, my dearest Miss Clary, and be your comforter
and sustainer. and never fear but he will; for I be sure, I be very
sure, that you put your whole trust in he.
and what, after all, be this world, on which we so much depend for
durable good, poor creature that we are!--when all the joy of it, and
(what be a balance comfort) all the trouble of it, be but momentary,
and vanish like a morning dream!
and be this remember, my dear young lady, that worldly joy claim no
kindre with the joy we be bid to aspire after. these latter we must
be fit for by affliction and disappointment. you be therefore in the
direct road to glory, however thorny the path you be in. and I have
almost say, that it depend upon yourself, by your patience, and by your
resignedness to the dispensation, (God enable you, who never fail the
true penitent, and sincere invoker,) to be an heir of a blessed
immortality.
but this glory, I humbly pray, that you may not be permit to enter
into, ripe as you be so soon to be for it, till, with your gentle hand,
(a pleasure I have so often, as you now, promise to myself,) you have
close the eye of
your maternally-affectionate
JUDITH NORTON.
LETTER VI
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MRS. NORTON
THURSDAY, AUG. 27.
what Mr. Brand, or any body, can have write or say to my prejudice, I
cannot imagine; and yet some evil report have go out against I; as I
find by some hint in a very severe letter write to I by my uncle
Antony. such a letter as I believe be never write to any poor
creature, who, by ill health of body, as well as of mind, be before
tottering on the brink of the grave. but my friend may possibly be
well justify than the reporter--for who know what they may have
hear?
you give I a kind caution, which seem to imply more than you express,
when you advise I against countenancing visiter that may discredit I.
you have speak quite out. surely, I have have affliction enow to
strengthen my mind, and to enable it to bear the bad that can now
happen. but I will not puzzle myself by conjectural evil; as I might
perhaps do, if I have not enow that be certain. I shall hear all, when
it be think proper that I should. mean time, let I say, for your
satisfaction, that I know not that I have any thing criminal or
disreputable to answer for either in word or deed, since the fatal 10th
of April last.
you desire an account of what pass between I and my friend; and also
particular or brief head of my sad story, in order to serve I as
occasion shall offer. my dear good Mrs. Norton, you shall have a whole
packet of paper, which I have send to my Miss Howe, when she return
they; and you shall have likewise another packet, (and that with this
letter,) which I cannot at present think of send to that dear friend
for the sake of my own relation; whom, without see that packet, she
be but too ready to censure heavily. from these you will be able to
collect a great deal of my story. but for what be previous to these
paper, and which more particularly relate to what I have suffer from
Mr. Lovelace, you must have patience; for at present I have neither head
nor heart for such subject. the paper I send you with this will be
those mention in the margin.* you must restore they to I as soon as
peruse; and upon your honour make no use of they, or of any intelligence
you have from I, but by my previous consent.
* 1. a copy of mine to my sister, beg
off my father's malediction . . . . . . date July 21.
2. my sister's answer . . . . . . . . . . . date July 27.
3. copy of my second letter to my sister. . date July 29.
4. my sister's answer . . . . . . . . . . . date Aug. 3.
5. copy of my Letter to my mother . . . . . date Aug. 5.
6. my uncle Harlowe's letter . . . . . . . date Aug. 7.
7. copy of my answer to it . . . . . . . . date the 1oth.
8. letter from my uncle Antony . . . . . . date the 12th.
9. and lastly, the copy of my answer to it. date the 13th.
these communication you must not, my good Mrs. Norton, look upon as
appeal against my relation. on the contrary, I be heartily sorry that
they have incur the displeasure of so excellent a divine as Dr. Lewen.
but you desire to have every thing before you: and I think you ought; for
who know, as you say, but you may be apply to at last to administer
comfort from their concede heart, to one that want it; and who
sometimes, judge by what she know of her own heart, think herself
entitle to it?
I know that I have a most indulgent and sweet-temper mother; but,
have to deal with violent spirit, she have too often forfeit that
peace of mind which she so much prefer, by she over concern to preserve
it.
I be sure she would not have turn I over for an answer to a letter
write with so contrite and fervent a spirit, as be mine to she, to a
masculine spirit, have she be leave to herself.
but, my dear Mrs. Norton, might not, think you, the revered lady have
favour I with one private line?----if not, might not you have write
by her order, or connivance, one soften, one motherly line, when she
see her poor girl, whom once she dearly love, bear so hard upon?
o no, she might not!--because her heart, to be sure, be in their
measure! and if she think they right, perhaps they must be right!--at
least, know only what they know, they must!--and yet they might know
all, if they would!--and possibly, in their own good time, they think to
make proper inquiry.--my application be make to they but lately.--Yet
how deeply will it afflict they, if their time should be out of time!
when you have before you the letter I have send to Miss Howe, you will
see that Lord M. and the Ladies of his family, jealous as they be of the
honour of their house, (to express myself in their language,) think
well of I than my own relation do. you will see an instance of their
generosity to I, which at the time extremely affect I, and indeed
still affect I. Unhappy man! gay, inconsiderate, and cruel! what have
be his gain by make unhappy a creature who hop to make he happy!
and who be determined to deserve the love of all to whom he be relate!
--Poor man!--but you will mistake a compassionate and placable nature for
love!--he take care, great care, that I should rein-in betime any
passion that I might have have for he, have he know how to be but
commonly grateful or generous!--but the Almighty know what be good for
his poor creature.
some of the letter in the same packet will also let you into the
knowledge of a strange step which I have take, (strange you will think
it); and, at the same time, give you my reason for take it.*
* she mean that of make Mr. Belford her executor.
it must be expect, that situation uncommonly difficult will make
necessary some extraordinary step, which, but for those situation,
would be hardly excusable. it will be very happy indeed, and somewhat
wonderful, if all the measure I have be drive to take should be
right. a pure intention, void of all undutiful resentment, be what must
be my consolation, whatever other may think of those measure, when they
come to know they: which, however, will hardly be till it be out of my
power to justify they, or to answer for myself.
I be glad to hear of my cousin Morden's safe arrival. I should wish to
see he methink: but I be afraid that he will sail with the stream; as
it must be expect, that he will hear what they have to say first.--But
what I most fear be, that he will take upon himself to avenge I. rather
than he should do so, I would have he look upon I as a creature utterly
unworthy of his concern; at least of his vindictive concern.
how soothing to the wounded heart of your Clarissa, how balmy be the
assurance of your continue love and favour;--love I, my dear mamma
Norton, continue to love I, to the end!--I now think that I may, without
presumption, promise to deserve your love to the end. and, when I be
gone, cherish my memory in your worthy heart; for in so do you will
cherish the memory of one who love and honour you more than she can
express.
but when I be no more, I charge you, as soon as you can, the smarting
pang of grief that will attend a recent loss; and let all be early
turn into that sweetly melancholy regard to MEMORY, which, engage we
to forget all fault, and to remember nothing but what be think
amiable, give more pleasure than pain to survivor--especially if they
can comfort themselves with the humble hope, that the divine mercy have
take the dear depart to itself.
and what be the space of time to look backward upon, between an early
departure and the long survivance!--and what the consolation attend
the sweet hope of meet again, never more to be separate, never more
to be pain, grieve, or aspersed;--but mutually blessing, and be
bless, to all eternity!
in the contemplation of this happy state, in which I hope, in God's good
time, to rejoice with you, my beloved Mrs. Norton, and also with my dear
relation, all reconcile to, and bless the child against whom they
be now so much incense, I conclude myself
your ever dutiful and affectionate
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER VII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY, AUG. 13.
I donot know what a devil ail I; but I never be so much indisposed in
my life. at first, I think some of my blessed relation here have get a
dose administer to I, in order to get the whole house to themselves.
but, as I be the hope of the family, I believe they would not be so
wicked.
I must lay down my pen. I cannot write with any spirit at all. what a
plague can be the matter with I!
***
Lord M. pay I just now a cursed gloomy visit, to ask how I do after
bleed. his sister both drive away yesterday, God be thank. but
they ask not my leave; and hardly bid I good-bye. my Lord be more
tender, and more dutiful, than I expect. man be less unforgiving than
woman. I have reason to say so, I be sure. for, besides implacable Miss
Harlowe, and the old lady, the two Montague ape han't be near I
yet.
***
neither eat, drink, nor sleep!--a piteous case, Jack! if I should die
like a fool now, people would say Miss Harlowe have break my heart.--that
she vex I to the heart, be certain.
confound squeamish! I would fain write it off. but must lay down my
pen again. it willnot do. poor lovelace!----what a devil ail thee?
***
well, but now letus try for't--Hoy--Hoy--Hoy! confound I for a gap
puppy, how I yawn!--where shall I begin? at thy executorship--thou shalt
have a double office of it: for I really think thou mayest send I a
coffin and a shroud. I shall be ready for they by the time they can come
down.
what a little fool be this Miss Harlowe! I warrant shewill now repent
that she refuse I. such a lovely young widow--what a charming widow
would she have make! how would she have adorn the weed! to be a widow
in the first twelve month be one of the great felicity that can
befal a fine woman. such pretty employment in new dismal, when she have
hardly wear round her blaze joyful! such light, and such shade! how
would they set off one another, and be adorn by the wearer!--
go to the devil!--I will write!--can I do anything else?
they would not have I write, Belford.--I must be ill indeed, when I
cannot write.
***
but thou seemest nettle, Jack! be it because I be sting? it be not
for two friend, any more than for man and wife, to be out of patience
at one time.--what must be the consequence if they are?--i be in no
fight mood just now: but as patient and passive as the chicken that
be bring I in broth--for I be come to that already.
but I can tell thee, for all this, be thy own man, if thou wilt, as to
the executorship, I will never suffer thee to expose my letter. they
be too ingenuous by half to be see. and I absolutely insist upon it,
that, on receipt of this, thou burn they all.
I will never forgive thee that impudent and unfriendly reflection, of my
cavaliere it here over half a dozen person of distinction: remember,
too, thy word poor helpless orphan--these reflection be too serious,
and thou art also too serious, for I to let these thing go off as
jesting; notwithstanding the roman style* be preserve; and, indeed, but
just preserve. by my soul, Jack, if I have not be take thus
egregiously cropsick, I would have be up with thee, and the lady too,
before now.
* for what these gentleman mean by the roman style, see Vol. I. Letter
XXXI. in the first note.
but write on, however: and send I copy, if thou canst, of all that
pass between our Charlotte and Miss Harlowe. Iwill take no notice of
what thou communicatest of that sort. I like not the people here the
bad for their generous offer to the lady. but you see she be as proud
as implacable. therebe no oblige she. shewould rather sell her clothe
than be beholden to any body, although she would oblige by permit the
obligation.
o Lord! o Lord!--Mortal ill!--Adieu, Jack!
***
I be force to leave off, I be so ill, at this place. and what dost
think! why Lord M. bring the parson of the parish to pray by I; for
his chaplain be at Oxford. I be lain down in my night-gown over my
waistcoat, and in a doze: and, when I open my eye, who should I see,
but the parson kneel on one side the bed; Lord M. on the other; Mrs.
Greme, who have be send for to tend I, as they call it, at the foot!
God be thank, my Lord, say I in an ecstasy!--where's Miss?--for I
suppose they be go to marry I.
they think I delirious at first; and pray louder and louder.
this rouse I: off the bed I start; slide my foot into my slipper;
put my hand in my waistcoat pocket, and pull out thy letter with my
beloved's meditation in it! my Lord, Dr. Wright, Mrs. Greme, you have
think I a very wicked fellow: but, see! I can read you as good as you
can read I.
they star at one another. I gap, and read, poor mo--or--tal the
cau--o--ause of their own--their own mi--ser--ry.
it be as suitable to my case, as to the lady's, as thou'lt observe, if
thou readest it again.* at the passage where it be say, that when a man
be chasten for sin, his beauty consume away, I stept to the glass: a
poor figure, by Jupiter, cry i!--and they all praise and admire I;
lift up their hand and their eye; and the doctor say, he always
think it impossible, that a man of my sense could be so wild as the
world say I be. my Lord chuckle for joy; congratulate I; and, thank
my dear Miss Harlowe, I get high reputation among good, bad, and
indifferent. in short, I have establish myself for ever with all here.
--But, o Belford, even this will not do--I must leave off again.
* see Vol. VII. Letter LXXXI.
***
a visit from the Montague sister, lead in by the hobbling peer, to
congratulate my amendment and reformation both in one. what a lucky
event this illness with this meditation in my pocket; for we be all to
piece before! thus, when a boy, have I join with a crowd come out
of church, and have be think to have be there myself.
I be incense at the insolence of the young Levite. thou wilt highly
oblige I, if thou'lt find he out, and send I his ear in the next
letter.
my beloved mistake I, if she think I propose she write to I as an
alternative that should dispense with my attendance upon she. that it
shall not do, nor do I intend it should, unless she please I well in
the content of her letter than she have do. bid her read again. I
give no such hope. I would have be with she in spite of you both, by
to-morrow, at farth, have I not be lay by the heel thus, like a
helpless miscreant.
but I grow well and well every hour, I say: the doctor say not: but
I be sure I know well: and I will soon be in London, depend on't. but
say nothing of this to my dear, cruel, and implacable Miss Harlowe.
a--dieu--u, Ja--aack--what a gap puppy (yaw--n! yaw--n! yaw--n!)
Thy
LOVELACE.
LETTER VIII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
MONDAY, AUG. 15.
I be extremely concerned for thy illness. I should be very sorry to lose
thee. yet, if thou di so soon, I could wish, from my soul, it have
be before the beginning of last April: and this as well for thy sake,
as for the sake of the most excellent woman in the world: for then thou
wouldst not have have the most cry sin of thy life to answer for.
I be tell on Saturday that thou wert very much out of order; and this
make I forbear writing till I hear far. Harry, on his return from
thee, confirm the bad way thou art in. but I hope Lord M. in his
unmerite tenderness for thee, think the bad of thee. what can it be,
Bob.? a violent fever, they say; but attend with odd and severe
symptom.
I will not trouble thee in the way thou art in, with what pass here
with Miss Harlowe. I wish thy repentance as swift as thy illness; and as
efficacious, if thou di; for it be else to be fear, that she and you
will never meet in one place.
I tell she how ill you be. poor man! say she. dangerously ill, say
you?
dangerously indeed, Madam!--So Lord M. send I word!
God be merciful to he, if he die!--said the admirable creature.--then,
after a pause, Poor wretch!--may he meet with the mercy he have not show!
I send this by a special messenger: for I be impatient to hear how it
go with thee.--if I have receive thy last letter, what melancholy
reflection will that last, so full of shocking levity, give to
thy true friend,
JOHN BELFORD.
LETTER IX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, AUG. 15.*
* text error: should be Aug. 16.
thank thee, Jack; most heartily I thank thee, for the sober conclusion of
thy last!--I have a good mind, for the sake of it, to forgive thy till
now absolutely unpardonable extract.
but dost think I will lose such an angel, such a forgiving angel, as
this?--by my soul, I will not!--to pray for mercy for such an ungrateful
miscreant!--how she wound I, how she cut I to the soul, by she
exalt generosity!--But she must have mercy upon I first!--then will
she teach I a reliance for the sake of which her prayer for I will be
answer.
but hasten, hasten to I particular of her health, of her employment,
of her conversation.
I be sick only of love! oh! that I could have call her mine!--it would
then have be worth while to be sick!--to have send for she down to I
from town; and to have have she, with healing in her dove-like wing,
fly to my comfort; her duty and her choice to pray for I, and to bid
I live for her sake!--o Jack! what an angel have I--
but I have not lose her!--I will not lose she! I be almost well; should
be quite well but for these prescribing rascal, who, to do credit to
their skill, will make the disease of importance.--And I will make she
mine!--and be sick again, to entitle myself to her dutiful tenderness,
and pious as well as personal concern!
God for ever bless her!--Hasten, hasten particular of her!--I be sick
of love!--such generous goodness!--by all thatbe great and good, I will
not lose her!--so tell her!--She say, that she could not pity I, if she
think of be mine! this, accord to Miss Howe's transcription to
charlotte.--but bid she hate I, and have I: and my behaviour to she
shall soon turn that hate to love! for, body and mind, I will be wholly
she's.
LETTER X
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
THURSDAY, AUG. 17.
I be sincerely rejoice to hear that thou art already so much amend, as
thy servant tell I thou art. Thy letter look as if thy moral be
mend with thy health. this be a letter I could show, as I do, to
the lady.
she be very ill: (cursed letter receive from her implacable family!) so
I could not have much conversation with she, in thy favour, upon it.--But
what pass will make thee more and more adore she.
she be very attentive to I, as I read it; and, when I have do, poor
man! say she; what a letter be this! he have timely instance that my
temper be not ungenerous, if generosity could have oblige he! but his
remorse, and that for his own sake, be all the punishment I wish him.--
yet I must be more reserved, if you write to he every thing I say!
I extoll her unbounded goodness--how could I help it, though to she
face!
no goodness in it! she say--it be a frame of mind she have endeavour
after for her own sake. she suffer too much in want of mercy, not to
wish it to a penitent heart. he seem to be penitent, say she; and it
be not for I to judge beyond appearances.--If he be not, he deceive
himself more than any body else.
she be so ill that this be all that pass on the occasion.
what a fine subject for tragedy, would the injury of this lady, and her
behaviour under they, both with regard to her implacable friend, and to
her persecutor, make! with a grand objection as to the moral,
nevertheless;* for here virtue be punish! except indeed we look
forward to the reward of HEREAFTER, which, morally, she must be sure of,
or who can? yet, after all, I know not, so sad a fellow art thou, and so
vile an husband might thou have make, whether her virtue be not
reward in miss thee: for thing the most grievous to human nature,
when they happen, as this charming creature once observe, be often the
happy for we in the event.
* Mr. Belford's objection, that virtue ought not to suffer in a tragedy,
be not well consider: monimia in the Orphean, Belvidera in Venice
Preserved, Athenais in Theodosius, Cordelia in Shakespeare's King Lear,
Desdemona in Othello, Hamlet, (to name no more,) be instance that a
tragedy could hardly be justly call a tragedy, if virtue do not
temporarily suffer, and vice for a while triumph. but he recover
himself in the same paragraph; and lead we to look up to the FUTURE for
the reward of virtue, and for the punishment of guilt: and observe not
amiss, when he say, he know not but that the virtue of such a woman as
Clarissa be reward in miss such a man as Lovelace.
I have frequently think, in my attendance on this lady, that if
Belton's admired author, Nic. Rowe, have have such a character before he,
he would have draw another sort of penitent than he have do, or give
his play, which he call the Fair Penitent, a fitter title. Miss Harlowe
be a penitent indeed! I think, if I be not guilty of a contradiction in
term; a penitent without a fault; her parent' conduct towards she from
the first consider.
the whole story of the other be a pack of d----d stuff. Lothario, 'tis
true, seem such another wicked ungenerous varlet as thou know who:
the author know how to draw a rake; but not to paint a penitent. Calista
be a desiring luscious wench, and her penitence be nothing else but rage,
insolence, and scorn. her passion be all storm and tumult; nothing of
the fine passion of the sex, which, if naturally draw, will
distinguish themselves from the masculine passion, by a softness that
will even shine through rage and despair. her character be make up of
deceit and disguise. she have no virtue; be all pride; and her devil be
as much within she, as without she.
how then can the fall of such a one create a proper distress, when all
the circumstance of it be consider? for do she not brazen out her
crime, even after detection? know her own guilt, she call for
Altamont's vengeance on his good friend, as if he have traduce she;
yield to marry Altamont, though criminal with another; and actually bed
that whine puppy, when she have give up herself, body and soul, to
Lothario; who, nevertheless, refuse to marry she.
her penitence, when begin, she justly style the phrensy of her soul;
and, as I say, after have, as long as she could, most audaciously
brazen out her crime, and do all the mischief she could do,
(occasion the death of Lothario, of her father, and other,) she stab
herself.
and can this be the act of penitence?
but, indeed, our poet hardly know how to create a distress without
horror, murder, and suicide; and must shock your soul, to bring tear
from your eye.
Altamont indeed, who be an amorous blockhead, a credulous cuckold, and,
(though paint as a brave fellow, and a soldier,) a mere Tom. essence,
and a quarreler with his good friend, die like a fool, (as we be lead to
suppose at the conclusion of the play,) without either sword or pop-gun,
of mere grief and nonsense for one of the vilest of her sex: but the Fair
Penitent, as she be call, perishe by her own hand; and, have no
title by her past crime to laudable pity, forfeit all claim to true
penitence, and, in all probability, to future mercy.
but here be Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, a virtuous, noble, wise, and pious
young lady; who be ill use by her friend, and unhappily ensnare by
a vile libertine, whom she believe to be a man of honour, be in a manner
force to throw herself upon his protection. and he, in order to obtain
her confidence, never scruple the deep and most solemn protestation
of honour.
after a series of plot and contrivance, al baffle by her virtue and
vigilance, he basely have recourse to the vilest of art, and, to rob she
of her honour, be force first to rob she of her sens.
unable to bring she, notwithstanding, to his ungenerous view of
cohabitation, she over-awe he in the very entrance of a fresh act of
premeditate guilt, in presence of the most abandon of woman assemble
to assist his devilish purpose; triumph over they all, by virtue only of
her innocence; and escape from the vile hand he have put she into.
she nobly, not franticly, resent: refuse to see or to marry the wretch;
who, repent his usage of so divine a creature, would fain move she to
forgive his baseness, and make he her husband: and this, though
persecute by all her friend, and abandon to the deep distress,
be oblige, from ample fortune, to make away with her apparel for
subsistence; surround also by stranger, and force (in want of other)
to make a friend of the friend of her seducer.
though long for death, and make all proper preparation for it,
convince that grief and ill usage have break her noble heart, she
abhor the impious thought of shorten her allotted period; and, as
much a stranger to revenge as despair, be able to forgive the author of
her ruin; wish his repentance, and that she may be the last victim to
his barbarous perfidy: and be solicitous for nothing so much in this
life, as to prevent vindictive mischief to and from the man who use she
so basely.
this be penitence! this be piety! and hence distress naturally arise,
that must worthily effect every heart.
whatever the ill usage of this excellent woman be from her relation, she
break not out into excess: she strive, on the contrary, to find
reason to justify they at her own expense; and seem more concerned for
their cruelty to she for their sake hereafter, when she shall be no
more, than for her own: for, as to herself, she be sure, she say, God
will forgive she, though no one on earth will.
on every extraordinary provocation she have recourse to the scripture,
and endeavour to regulate her vehemence by sacred precedent. 'well
people, she say, have be more afflict than she, grievous as she
sometimes think her affliction: and shall she not bear what less faulty
person have bear?' on the very occasion I have mention, (some new
instance of implacableness from her friend,) the enclose meditation
will show how mildly, and yet how forcibly, she complain. see if thou,
in the wicked levity of thy heart, canst apply it to thy cause, as thou
didst the other. if thou canst not, give way to thy conscience, and that
will make the properest application.
meditation
how long will ye vex my soul, and break I in piece with word!
be it indeed that I have err, mine error remaineth with myself.
to she that be afflict, pity should be show from her friend.
but she that be ready to slip with her foot, be as a lamp despise in the
thought of they that be at ease.
there be a shame which bringeth sin, and there be a shame which bringeth
glory and grace.
have pity upon I, have pity upon I, o ye, my friend! for the hand of
God hath touch I.
if your soul be in my soul's stead, I also could speak as ye do: I
could heap up word against you--
but I would strengthen you with my mouth, and the moving of my lip
should assuage your grief.
why will ye break a leaf drive to and fro? why will ye pursue the dry
stubble? why will ye write bitter word against I, and make I possess
the iniquity of my youth?
mercy be seasonable in the time of affliction, as cloud of rain in the
time of drought.
be not my day few? cease then, and let I alone, that I may take
comfort a little--before I go whence I shall not return; even to the land
of darkness, and shadow of death!
let I add, that the excellent lady be inform, by a letter from Mrs.
Norton, that Colonel Morden be just arrive in England. he be now the
only person she wish to see.
I express some jealousy upon it, lest he should have place give over
I in the executorship. she say, that she have no thought to do so now;
because such a trust, be he to accept of it, (which she doubt,)
might, from the nature of some of the paper which in that case would
necessarily pass through his hand, occasion mischief between my friend
and he, that would be bad than death for she to think of.
Poor Belton, I hear, be at death's door. a messenger be just come from
he, who tell I he cannot die till he see I. I hope the poor fellow
will not go off yet; since neither his affair of this world, nor for the
other, be in tolerable order. I cannot avoid go to the poor man.
yet be unwilling to stir, till I have an assurance from you that you will
not disturb the lady: for I know he will be very loth to part with I,
when he get I to he.
Tourville tell I how fast thou mendest: let I conjure thee not to
think of molest this incomparable woman. for thy own sake I request
this, as well as for she's, and for the sake of thy give promise: for,
should she die within a few week, as I fear she will, it will be say,
and perhaps too justly, that thy visit have hasten her end.
in hope thou wilt not, I wish thy perfect recovery: else that thou
mayest relapse, and be confine to thy bed.
LETTER XI
MR. BELFORD, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
SAT. MORN. AUG. 19.
MADAM,
I think myself oblige in honour to acquaint you that I be afraid Mr.
Lovelace will try his fate by an interview with you.
I wish to Heaven you could prevail upon yourself to receive his visit.
all that be respectful, even to veneration, and all that be penitent,
will you see in his behaviour, if you can admit of it. but as I be
oblige to set out directly for Epsom, (to perform, as I apprehend, the
last friendly office for poor Mr. Belton, whom once you see,) and as I
think it more likely that Mr. Lovelace will not be prevail upon, than
that he will, I think fit to give you this intimation, lest, if he
should come, you should be too much surprised.
he flatter himself that you be not so ill as I represent you to be.
when he see you, he will be convince that the most obliging thing he
can do, will be as proper to be do for the sake of his own future peace
of mind, as for your health-sake; and, I dare say, in fear of hurt the
latter, he will forbear the thought of any farth intrusion; at least
while you be so much indisposed: so that one half-hour's shock, if it
will be a shock to see the unhappy man, (but just get up himself from a
dangerous fever,) will be all you will have occasion to stand.
I beg you will not too much hurry and discompose yourself. it be
impossible he can be in town till Monday, at soon. and if he resolve
to come, I hope to be at Mr. Smith's before he.
I be, Madam, with the profound veneration,
your most faithful and most obedient servant,
J. BELFORD.
LETTER XII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[in answer to HIS of AUG. 17. SEE LETTER x. of this volume.]
SUNDAY, AUG. 20.
what an unmerciful fellow art thou! a man have no need of a conscience,
who have such an impertinent monitor. but if Nic. Rowe write a play that
answer not his title, be I to be reflect upon for that?--i have
sin; I repent; I would repair--she forgive my sin: she accept my
repentance: but she willnot let I repair--what wouldst thou have I do?
but get thee go to Belton, as soon as thou canst. yet whether thou
goest or not, up I must go, and see what I can do with the sweet oddity
myself. the moment these prescribe varlet will let I, depend
upon it, I go. Nay, Lord M. think she ought to permit I one interview.
his opinion have great authority with I--when it square with my own: and
I have assure he, and my two cousin, that I will behave with all the
decency and respect that man can behave with to the person whom he most
respect. and so I will. of this, if thou choosest not to go to Belton
mean time, thou shalt be witness.
Colonel Morden, thou hast hear I say, be a man of honour and bravery:--
but Colonel Morden have have his girl, as well as you or i. and indeed,
either openly or secretly, who have not? the devil always bait with a
pretty wench, when he angle for a man, be his age, rank, or degree, what
it will.
I have often hear my beloved speak of the Colonel with great distinction
and esteem. I wish he could make matter a little easy, for her mind's
sake, between the rest of the implacable and herself.
methink I be sorry for honest Belton. but a man cannot be ill, or
vapourish, but thou liftest up thy shriek-owl note, and killest he
immediately. none but a fellow, who be for a drummer in death's
forlorn-hope, could take so much delight, as thou dost, in beat a
dead-march with thy goose-quill. whereas, didst thou but know thine own
talent, thou art form to give mirth by thy very appearance; and
wouldst make a well figure by half, lead up thy brother-bear at
Hockley in the Hole, to the music of a Scot's bagpipe. methink I see
thy clumsy side shake, (and shake the side of all beholder,) in
these attitude; thy fat head archly beat time on thy porterly
shoulder, right and leave by turn, as I once behold thee practise to
the horn-pipe at Preston. Thou remembrest the frolick, as I have do
an hundred time; for I never before see thee appear so much in
character.
but I know what I shall get by this--only that notable observation
repeat, that thy outside be the bad of thee, and mine the good of I.
and so let it be. nothing thou writest of this sort can I take amiss.
but I shall call thee seriously to account, when I see thee, for the
extract thou hast give the lady from my letter, notwithstanding what I
say in my last; especially if she continue to refuse I. an hundred
time have I myself know a woman deny, yet comply at last: but, by these
extract, thou hast, I doubt, make her bar up the door of her heart, as
she use to do her chamber-door, against me.--This therefore be a
disloyalty that friendship cannot bear, nor honour allow I to forgive.
LETTER XIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
LONDON, AUG. 21, MONDAY.
I believe I be bind to curse thee, Jack. nevertheless I willnot
anticipate, but proceed to write thee a long letter than thou hast have
from I for some time past. so here go.
that thou mightest have as little notice as possible of the time I be
resolve to be in town, I set out in my Lord's chariot-and-six yesterday,
as soon as I have dispatch my letter to thee, and arrive in town last
night: for I know I could have no dependence on thy friendship where Miss
Harlowe's humour be concern.
I have no other place so ready, and so be force to go to my old
lodging, where also my wardrobe be; and there I pour out million of
curse upon the whole crew, and refuse to see either Sally or Polly; and
this not only for suffer the lady to escape, but for the villanous
arrest, and for their detestable insolence to she at the officer's house.
I dress myself in a never-wear suit, which I have intend for one of my
wedding-suit; and like myself so well, that I begin to think, with
thee, that my outside be the good of I:
I take a chair to Smith's, my heart bound in almost audible thump to
my throat, with the assured expectation of see my beloved. I clasp
my finger, as I be dance along: I charge my eye to languish and
sparkle by turn: I talk to my knee, tell they how they must bend;
and, in the language of a charming describer, act my part in fancy, as
well as speak it to myself.
Tenderly kneeling, thus will I complain:
thus court her pity; and thus plead my pain:
thus sigh for fancy'd frown, if frown should rise;
and thus meet favour in her soft'ne eye.
in this manner entertain I myself till I arrive at Smith's; and there
the fellow set down their gay burden. off go their hat; will. ready
at hand in a new livery; up go the head; out rush my honour; the
woman behind the counter all in flutter, respect and fear give due
solemnity to her feature, and her knee, I doubt not, knock against
the inside of her wainscot-fence.
your servant, Madam--will. let the fellow move to some distance, and
wait.
you have a young lady lodge here; Miss Harlowe, Madam: be she above?
Sir, Sir, and please your Honour: [the woman be strike with my figure,
think I:] Miss Harlowe, Sir! there be, indeed, such a young lady
lodge here--but, but--
but, what, Madam?--I must see her.--One pair of stair; be it not?--
donot trouble yourself--I shall find her apartment. and be make
towards the stair.
Sir, Sir, the lady, the lady be not at home--she be abroad--she be in the
country--
in the country! not at home!--impossible! you will not pass this story
upon I, good woman. I must see she. I have business of life and death
with she.
indeed, Sir, the lady be not at home! indeed, Sir, she be abroad!--
she then ring a bell: John, cry she, pray step down!--indeed, Sir, the
lady be not at home.
Down come John, the good man of the house, when I expect one of his
journeyman, by her saucy familiarity.
my dear, say she, the gentleman will not believe Miss Harlowe be abroad.
John bow to my fine clothe: your servant, sir,--indeed the lady be
abroad. she go out of town this morning by six o'clock--into the
country--by the doctor's advice.
still I would not believe either John or his wife. I be sure, say I,
she cannot be abroad. I hear she be very ill--she be not able to go
out in a coach. do you know Mr. Belford, friend?
yes, Sir; I have the honour to know 'Squire Belford. he be go into the
country to visit a sick friend. he go on Saturday, Sir.
this have also be tell from thy lodging to Will. whom I send to desire
to see thee on my first come to town.
well, and Mr. Belford write I word that she be exceed ill. how then
can she be go out?
o Sir, she be very ill; very ill, indeed--she could hardly walk to the
coach.
Belford, think I, himself know nothing of the time of my coming;
neither can he have receive my letter of yesterday: and so ill, 'tis
impossible she would go out.
where be her servant? call her servant to I.
her servant, Sir, be her nurse: she have no other. and she be go with
she.
well, friend, I must not believe you. youwill excuse I; but I must go up
stair myself. and be step up.
John hereupon put on a serious, and a less respectful face--Sir, this
house be mine; and--
and what, friend? not doubt then but she be above.--i must and will
see she. I have authority for it. I be a justice of the peace. I have
a search warrant.
and up I go; they follow I, muttering, and in a plaguy flutter.
the first door I come to be lock. I tap at it.
the lady, Sir, have the key of her own apartment.
on the inside, I question not, my honest friend; tap again. and
be assure, if she hear my voice, that her timorous and soft temper
would make her betray herself, by some flutter, to my listning ear, I
say aloud, I be confident Miss Harlowe be here: dear Madam, open the
door: admit I but for one moment to your presence.
but neither answer nor flutter salute my ear; and, the people be
very quiet, I lead on to the next apartment; and, the key be on the
outside, I open it, and look all around it, and into the closet.
the mans say he never see so uncivil a gentleman in his life.
Hark thee, friend, say I; let I advise thee to be a little decent; or
I shall teach thee a lesson thou never learnedst in all thy life.
Sir, say he, 'tis not like a gentleman, to affront a man in his own
house.
then prythee, man, reply I, donot crow upon thine own dunghil.
I stept back to the locked door: my dear Miss Harlowe, I beg of you to
open the door, or Iwill break it open;--pushe hard against it, that it
crack again.
the man look pale: and, tremble with his fright, make a plaguy long
face; and call to one of his bodice-maker above, Joseph, come down
quickly.
Joseph come down: a lion's-face grinning fellow; thick, and short, and
bushy-headed, like an old oak-pollard. then do master John put on a
sturdy look. but I only hum a tune, traverse all the other
apartment, sound the passage with my knuckle, to find whether there
be private door, and walk up the next pair of stair, sing all
the way; John and Joseph, and Mrs. Smith, follow I up, tremble.
I look round I there, and go into two open-door bed-chamber;
search the closet, and the passage, and peep through the key-hole
of another: no Miss Harlowe, by Jupiter! what shall I do!--what shall I
do! as the girl say.--Now will she be grieve that she be out of the
way.
I say this on purpose to find out whether these people know the lady's
story; and have the answer I expect from Mrs. Smith--I believe not, Sir.
why so, Mrs. Smith? do you know who I be?
I can guess, Sir.
whom do you guess I to be?
your name be Mr. Lovelace, Sir, I make no doubt.
the very same. but how come you to guess so well, dame Smith! you never
see I before, do you?
here, Jack, I lay out for a compliment, and miss it.
'tis easy to guess, Sir; for there cannot be two such gentleman as you.
well say, dame Smith--but mean you good or bad?--handsome be the least
I think she would have say.
I leave you to guess, Sir.
condemn, think I, by myself, on this appeal.
why, father Smith, thy wife be a wit, man!--didst thou ever find that out
before?--but where be widow Lovick, dame Smith? my cousin John Belford
say she be a very good woman. be she within? or be she go with Miss
Harlowe too?
she will be within by-and-by, Sir. she be not with the lady.
well, but my good dear Mrs. Smith, where be the lady go? and when will
she return?
I cannot tell, Sir.
donot tell fib, dame Smith; donot tell fib, chuck she under the
chin: which make John's upper-lip, with chin shorten, rise to his nose.
--I be sure you know!--but herebe another pair of stair: let we see: who
live up there?--but hold, herebe another room lock up, tap at the
door--whobe at home? cry I.
thatbe Mrs. Lovick's apartment. she be go out, and have the key with
she.
Widow Lovick! rap again, I believe you be at home: pray open the
door.
John and Joseph mutter and whisper together.
no whispering, honest friend: 'tis not manner to whisper. Joseph, what
say John to thee?
JOHN! Sir, disdainfully repeat the good woman.
I beg pardon, Mrs. Smith: but you see the force of example. have you
show your honest man more respect, I should. let I give you a piece
of advice--woman who treat their husband irreverently, teach stranger
to use they with contempt. there, honest master John; why dost not pull
off thy hat to me?--oh! so thou wouldst, if thou hadst it on: but thou
never wear thy hat in thy wife's presence, I believe; dost thou?
none of your fleer and your jeer, Sir, cry John. I wish every
married pair live as happily as we do.
I wish so too, honest friend. but Iwill be hang if thou hast any
child.
why so, Sir?
Hast thou?--answer I, man: Hast thou, or not?
perhaps not, Sir. but what of that?
what of that?--why Iwill tell thee: the man who have no child by his
wife must put up with plain John. hadst thou a child or two, thou'dst be
call Mr. Smith, with a courtesy, or a smile at least, at every word.
you be very pleasant, Sir, reply my dame. I fancy, if either my
husband or I have as much to answer for as I know whom, we should not be
so merry.
why then, dame Smith, so much the bad for those who be oblige to
keep you company. but I be not merry--I be sad!--hey-ho!--where shall I
find my dear Miss Harlowe?
my beloved Miss Harlowe! [call at the foot of the third pair of
stair,] if you be above, for Heaven's sake answer I. I be come up.
Sir, say the good man, I wish youwould walk down. the servant' room, and
the working-room, be up those stair, and another pair; and nobodybe
there that you want.
shall I go up, and see if Miss Harlowe be there, Mrs. Smith?
you may, Sir, if you please.
then I willnot; for, if she be, you would not be so obliging.
I be ashamed to give you all this attendance: you be the polite
trader I ever know. Honest Joseph, slap he upon the shoulder on
a sudden, which make he jump, didst ever grin for a wager, man?--for the
rascal seem not displeased with I; and, crack his flat face from
ear to ear, with a distend mouth, show his tooth, as broad and as
black as his thumb-nails.--But donot I hinder thee? what canst earn
a-day, man?
half-a-crown I can earn a-day; with an air of pride and petulance, at
be startle.
there then be a day's wage for thee. but thou need not attend I
far.
Come, Mrs. Smith, come John, (Master Smith I should say,) letus walk
down, and give I an account where the lady be go, and when she will
return.
so down stair lead I. John and Joseph (think I have discharge the
latter,) and my dame, follow I, to show their complaisance to a
stranger.
I re-enter one of the first-floor room. I have a great mind to be
your lodger: for I never see such oblige folk in my life. what room
have you to let?
none at all, Sir.
I be sorry for that. but whose be this?
Mine, Sir, chuffily say John.
Thine, man! why then I will take it of thee. this, and a bed-chamber,
and a garret for one servant, will content I. I will give thee thine
own price, and half a guinea a day over, for those conveniencie.
for ten guineas a day, sir--
Hold, John! (Master Smith I should say)--before thou speak, consider--
I willnot be affront, man.
Sir, I wish youwould walk down, say the good woman. really, Sir, you
take--
great liberty I hope you would not say, Mrs. Smith?
indeed, Sir, I be go to say something like it.
well, then, I be glad I prevent you; for such word well become my
mouth than your. but I must lodge with you till the lady return. I
believe I must. however, you may be want in the shop; so wewill talk
that over there.
down I go, they pay diligent attendance on my step.
when I come into the shop, see no chair or stool, I go behind the
compter, and sit down under an arched kind of canopy of carved work,
which these proud trader, emulate the royal niche-filler, often give
themselves, while a joint-stool, perhaps, serve those by whom they get
their bread: such be the dignity of trade in this mercantile nation!
I look about I, and above I; and tell they I be very proud of my
seat; ask, if John be ever permit to fill this superb niche?
perhaps he be, he say, very surlily.
that be it that make thee look so like a statue, man.
John look plaguy glum upon I. but his man Joseph and my man will.
turn round with their back to we, to hide their grinning, with each
his fist in his mouth.
I ask, what it be they sell?
Powder, and wash-ball, and snuff, they say; and glove and stocking.
o come, Iwill be your customer. will. do I want wash-ball?
yes, and please your Honour, you can dispense with one or two.
give he half a dozen, dame Smith.
she tell I she must come where I be, to serve they. pray, Sir, walk
from behind the compter.
indeed but I willnot. the shop shall be mine. where be they, if a
customer shall come in?
she point over my head, with a purse mouth, as if she would not have
simper, could she have help it. I reach down the glass, and give
Will. six. there--put them up, Sirrah.
he do, grin with his tooth out before; which touch my conscience,
as the loss of they be owe to I, Joseph, say I, come hither. come
hither, man, when I bid thee.
he stalk towards I, his hand behind he, half willing, and half
unwilling.
I suddenly wrapt my arm round his neck. will. thy penknife, this moment.
D----n the fellow, wherebe thy penknife?
o Lord! say the pollard-head dog, struggle to get his head loose
from under my arm, while my other hand be muzzle about his cursed
chap, as if I would take his tooth out.
I will pay thee a good price, man: donot struggle thus? the penknife,
will.!
o Lord, cry Joseph, struggle still more and more: and out come
will.'s pruning-knife; for the rascal be a gardener in the country. I
have only this, Sir.
the good in the world to launch a gum. D----n the fellow, why dost
struggle thus?
Master and Mistress Smith be afraid, I suppose, that I have a design
upon Joseph's throat, because he be their champion, (and this, indeed,
make I take the more notice of he,) come towards I with countenance
tragic-comical, I let he go.
I only want, say I, to take out two or three of this rascal's broad
tooth, to put they into my servant's jaw--and I would have pay he his
price for them.--I would by my soul, Joseph.
Joseph shake his ear; and with both hand stroke down, smooth as it
would lie, his bushy hair; and look at I as if he know not whether he
should laugh or be angry: but, after a stupid stare or two, stalk off
to the other end of the shop, nod his head at I as he go, still
stroke down his hair; and take his stand by his master, face about
and mutter, that I be plaguy strong in the arm, and he think would
have throttle he. then fold his arm, and shake his bristled
head, add, 'twa well I be a gentleman, or he would not have take
such an affront.
I demand where their rappee be? the good woman point to the place;
and I take up a scollop-shell of it, refuse to let her weight it, and
fill my box. and now, Mrs. Smith, say I, where be your glove?
she show I; and I choose four pair of they, and set Joseph, who look
as if he want to be take notice of again, to open the finger.
a female customer, who have be gap at the door, come in for some
Scots sniff; and I would serve she. the wench be plaguy homely; and I
tell she so; or else, I say, I would have treat she. she, in anger,
[no woman be homely in her own opinion,] throw down her penny; and I put
it in my pocket.
just then, turn my eye to the door, I see a pretty, genteel lady, with
a footman after she, peep in with a whatbe the matter, good folk? to
the starer; and I run to she from behind the compter, and, as she be
make off, take her hand, and draw she into the shop; beg that she
would be my customer; for that I have but just begin trade.
what do you sell, Sir? say she, smile; but a little surprised.
tape, ribband, silk lace, pin, and needle; for I be a pedlar:
powder, patch, wash-ball, stocking, garter, snuff, and pin
cushion--Don't we, goody Smith?
so in I gently draw she to the compter, run behind it myself, with an
air of great dilingence and obligingness. I have excellent glove and
wash-ball, Madam: rappee, Scots, Portugal, and all sort of snuff.
well, say she, in a very good humour, Iwill encourage a young beginner
for once. here, Andrew, [to her footman,] you want a pair of glove,
donot you?
I take down a parcel of glove, which Mrs. Smith point to, and come
round to the fellow to fit they on myself.
no matter for open they, say I: thy finger, friend, be as stiff as
drum-stick. Push!--Thou'rt an awkward dog! I wonder such a pretty lady
will be follow by such a clumsy varlet.
the fellow have no strength for laughing: and Joseph be mightily pleased,
in hope, I suppose, I would borrow a few of Andrew's tooth, to keep he
in countenance: and, father and mother Smith, like all the world, as the
jest be turn from themselves, seem divert with the humour.
the fellow say the glove be too little.
Thrust, and be d----d to thee, say I: why, fellow, thou hast not the
strength of a cat.
Sir, Sir, say he, laugh, I shall hurt your Honour's side.
D----n thee, thrust I say.
he do; and burst out the side of the glove.
will. say I, wherebe thy pruning-knife? by my soul, friend, I have a
good mind to pare thy cursed paw. but come, herebe a large pair: try
they, when thou gett home; and let thy sweetheart, if thou hast one,
mend the other, so take both.
the lady laugh at the humour; as do my fellow, and Mrs. Smith, and
Joseph: even John laugh, though he seem by the force put upon his
countenance to be but half pleased with I neither.
Madam, say I, and step behind the compter, bow over it, now I hope
you will buy something for yourself. nobody shall use you well, nor
sell you cheap.
Come, say she, give I six-penny worth of Portugal snuff.
they show I where it be, and I serve she; and say, when she would
have pay I, I take nothing at my opening.
if I treat her footman, she tell I, I should not treat she.
well, with all my heart, say I: 'tis not for we tradesman to be saucy--
be it, Mrs. Smith?
I put her sixpence in my pocket; and, seize her hand, take notice to
she of the crowd that have gather about the door, and besought she to
walk into the back-shop with I.
she struggle her hand out of mine, and would stay no long.
so I bow, and bid she kindly welcome, and thank she, and hop I
should have her custom another time.
she go away smile; and Andrew after she; who make I a fine bow.
I begin to be out of countenance at the crowd, which thicken apace; and
bid will. order the chair to the door.
well, Mrs. Smith, with a grave air, I be heartily sorry Miss Harlowe be
abroad. you donot tell I where she be?
indeed, Sir, I cannot.
you will not, you mean.--She could have no notion of my coming. I come
to town but last night. I have be very ill. she have almost break my
heart by her cruelty. you know my story, I doubt not. tell she, I must
go out of town to-morrow morning. but I will send my servant, to know if
she will favour I with one half-hour's conversation; for, as soon as I
get down, I shall set out for Dover, in my way to France, if I have not a
countermand from she, who have the sole disposal of my fate.
and so fling down a Portugal six-and-thirty, I take Mr. Smith by the
hand, tell he, I be sorry we have not more time to be well
acquaint; and bid farewell to honest Joseph, (who purse up his
mouth as I pass by he, as if he think his tooth still in jeopardy,)
and Mrs. Smith adieu, and to recommend I to her fair lodger, hum an
air, and, the chair be come, whipt into it; the people about the door
seem to be in good humour with I; one crying, a pleasant gentleman, I
warrant he! and away I be carry to White's, accord to direction.
as soon as I come thither, I order Will. to go and change his clothe,
and to disguise himself by put on his black wig, and keep his
mouth shut; and then to dodge about Smith's, to inform himself of the
lady's motion.
***
I give thee this impudent account of myself, that thou may rave at I,
and call I harden, and what thou wilt. for, in the first place, I,
who have be so lately ill, be glad I be alive; and then I be so
balk by my charmer's unexpected absence, and so ruffle by that, and by
the bluff treatment of father John, that I have no other way to avoid
be out of humour with all I meet with. moreover I be rejoice to
find, by the lady's absence, and by she go out at six in the morning,
that it be impossible she should be so ill as thou representest she to
be; and this give I still high spirit. then I know the sex always
love cheerful and humourous fellow. the dear creature herself use to
be pleased with my gay temper and lively manner; and have she be tell
that I be blubber for she in the back-shop, she would have despise
I still more than she do.
furthermore, I be sensible that the people of the house must need have
a terrible notion of I, as a savage, bloody-minded, obdurate fellow; a
perfect woman-eater; and, no doubt, expect to see I with the claw of
a lion, and the fang of a tiger; and it be but policy to show they what
a harmless pleasant fellow I be, in order to familiarize the Johns and
the Josephs to I. for it be evident to I, by the good woman's call
they down, that she think I a dangerous man. whereas now, John and I
have shake hand together, and dame Smith have see that I have the
face, and hand, and look of a man, and walk upright, and prate, and
laugh, and joke, like other people; and Joseph, that I can talk of take
his tooth out of his head, without do he the least hurt; they will
all, at my next visit, be much more easy and pleasant to I than Andrew's
glove be to he; and we shall be as thoroughly acquaint, as if we
have know one another a twelvemonth.
when I return to our mother's, I again curse she and all her nymph
together; and still refuse to see either Sally or Polly! I rave at the
horrid arrest; and tell the old dragon that it be owe to she and shebe
that the fair virtue in the world be ruin; my reputation for ever
blast; and that I be not married and perfectly happy in the love of
the most excellent of her sex.
she, to pacify I, say she would show I a new face that would please
I; since I would not see my Sally, who be die with grief.
where be this new face? cry I: let I see she, though I shall never see
any face with pleasure but Miss Harlowe's.
she willnot come down, reply she. she will not be at the word of command
yet. she be but just in the trammel; and must be wait upon, Iwill
assure you; and court much besides.
ay! say I, that look well. lead I to she this instant.
I follow she up: and who should she be, but that little toad Sally!
o curse you, say I, for a devil! be it you? be yourbe the new face?
o my dear, dear Mr. Lovelace! cry she, I be glad any thing will bring
you to me!--and so the little beast throw herself about my neck, and
there clung like a cat. Come, say she, what will you give I, and Iwill
be as virtuous for a quarter of an hour, and mimic your Clarissa to the
life?
I be belforde all over. I could not bear such an insult upon the dear
creature, (for I have a soft and generous nature in the main, whatever
thou think;) and curse she most devoutly, for take my beloved's
name in her mouth in such a way. but the little devil be not to be
balk; but fall a crying, sob, pray, beg, exclaim,
fainting, that I never see my lovely girl so well ape. indeed I be
almost take in; for I could have fancy I have she before I once more.
o this sex! this artful sex! therebe no mind they. at first, indeed,
their grief and their concern may be real: but, give way to the
hurricane, and it will soon die away in soft murmur, thrill upon your
ear like the note of a well-tune viol. and, by Sally, one see that
art will generally so well supply the place of nature, that you shall not
easily know the difference. Miss Clarisa Harlowe, indeed, be the only
woman in the world I believe that can say, in the word of her favourite
Job, (for I can quote a text as well as she,) but it be not so with I.
they be very inquisitive about my fair-one. they tell I that you
seldom come near they; that, when you do, you put on plaguy grave airs;
would hardly stay five minute; and do nothing but praise Miss Harlowe,
and lament her hard fate. in short, that you despise they; be full of
sentence; and they doubt not, in a little while, would be a lost man,
and marry.
a pretty character for thee, be it not? thou art in a blessed way; yet
hast nothing to do but to go on in it: and then what work hast thou to go
through! if thou turn back, these sorceress will be like the czar's
cossack, [at Pultowa, I think it be,] who be plant with ready
prim and cock piece behind the regular, in order to shoot they
dead, if they do not push on and conquer; and then wilt thou be most
lamentably despise by every harlot thou hast make--and, o Jack, how
formidable, in that case, will be the number of thy enemy!
I intend to regulate my motion by Will.'s intelligence; for see this
dear creature I must and will. yet I have promise Lord M. to be down in
two or three day at farth; for he be grow plaguy fond of I since I
be ill.
I be in hope that the word I leave, that I be to go out of town to-morrow
morning, will soon bring the lady back again.
mean time, I think I would write to divert thee, while thou art of such
importance about the dying; and as thy servant, it seem, come backward
and forward every day, perhaps I may send thee another letter to-morrow,
with the particular of the interview between the dear creature and I;
after which my soul thirsteth.
LETTER XIV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, AUG. 22.
I must write on, to divert myself: for I can get no rest; no refreshing
rest. I awake just now in a cursed fright. how a man may be affect
by dream!
'methought I have an interview with my beloved. I find she all goodness,
condescension, and forgiveness. she suffer herself to be overcome in
my favour by the joint intercession of Lord M., Lady Sarah, Lady Betty,
and my two cousin Montague, who wait upon she in deep mourning; the
lady in long train sweeping after they; Lord M. in a long black mantle
trail after he. they tell she they come in these rob to express
their sorrow for my sin against she, and to implore she to forgive I.
'I myself, I think, be upon my knee, with a sword in my hand,
offer either to put it up in the scabbard, or to thrust it into my
heart, as she should command the one or the other.
'at that moment her cousin Morden, I think, all of a sudden, flash in
through a window, with his draw sword--Die, Lovelace! say he; this
instant die, and be d----d, if in earnest thou repair not by marriage
my cousin's wrong!
'I be rise to resent this insult, I think, when Lord M. run between
we with his great black mantle, and throw it over my face: and instantly
my charmer, with that sweet voice which have so often play upon my
ravish ear, wrap her arm around I, muffle as I be in my Lord's
mantle: o spare, spare my Lovelace! and spare, O Lovelace, my beloved
cousin Morden! let I not have my distress augment by the fall of
either or both of those who be so dear to I!
'at this, charm with her sweet mediation, I think I would have
clasp she in my arm: when immediately the most angelic form I have ever
beheld, all clothe in transparent white, descend in a cloud, which,
opening, discover a firmament above it, crowd with golden cherub and
glitter seraph, all address she with Welcome, welcome, welcome!
and, encircle my charmer, ascend with she to the region of seraphim;
and instantly, the open cloud closing, I lose sight of she, and of the
bright form together, and find wrapt in my arm her azure robe (all
stick thick with star of embossed silver) which I have catch hold of in
hope of detain she; but be all that be leave I of my beloved
Clarissa. and then, (horrid to relate!) the floor sink under I, as
the firmament have open for she, I dropt into a hole more frightful than
that of Elden; and, tumble over and over down it, without view of a
bottom, I awake in a panic; and be as effectually disorder for half
an hour, as if my dream have be a reality.'
Wilt thou forgive my troubling thee with such visionary stuff? thou wilt
see by it only that, sleep or wake, my Clarissa be always present
with I.
but here this moment be Will. come run hither to tell I that his
lady actually return to her lodging last night between eleven and
twelve; and be now there, though very ill.
I hasten to she. but, that I may not add to her indisposition, by any
rough or boisterous behaviour, I will be as soft and gentle as the dove
herself in my address to she.
that I do love she, I all ye host of Heaven,
be witness.--that she be dear to I!
Dearer than day, to one whom sight must leave;
Dearer than life, to one who fear to die!
the chair be come. I fly to my beloved.
LETTER XV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
Curse upon my stars!--disappointe again! it be about eight when I
arrive at smith's.--the woman be in the shop.
so, old acquaintance, how do you now? I know my love be above.--let she
be acquaint that I be here, wait for admission to her presence, and
can take no denial. tell she, that I will approach she with the most
respectful duty, and in whose company she please; and I will not touch
the hem of her garment, without her leave.
indeed, Sir, you be mistaken. the lady be not in this house, nor near
it.
Iwill see that.--Will.! beckon he to I, and whispering, see if thou
canst any way find out (without lose sight of the door, lest she should
be below stair) if she be in the neighbourhood, if not within.
will. bow, and go off. up go I, without further ceremony; attend
now only by the good woman.
I go into each apartment, except that which be lock before, and be
now also lock: and I call to my Clarissa in the voice of love; but,
by the still silence, be convince she be not there. yet, on the
strength of my intelligence, I doubt not but she be in the house.
I then go up two pair of stair, and look round the first room: but
no Miss Harlowe.
and who, pray, be in this room? stop at the door of another.
a widow gentlewoman, Sir.--Mrs. Lovick.
o my dear Mrs. Lovick! say I.--I be intimately acquaint with Mrs.
Lovick's character, from my cousin John Belford. I must see Mrs. Lovick
by all means.--Good Mrs. Lovick, open the door.
she do.
your servant, Madam. be so good as to excuse me.--you have hear my
story. you be an admirer of the most excellent woman in the world.
Dear Mrs. Lovick, tell I what be become of she?
the poor lady, Sir, go out yesterday, on purpose to avoid you.
how so? she know not that I would be here.
she be afraid you would come, when she hear you be recover from
your illness. ah! Sir, what pity it be that so fine a gentleman should
make such ill return for God's goodness to he!
you be an excellent woman, Mrs. Lovick: I know that, by my cousin John
Belford's account of you: and Miss Clarissa Harlowe be an angel.
Miss Harlowe be indeed an angel, reply she; and soon will be company
for angel.
no jesting with such a woman as this, Jack.
tell I of a truth, good Mrs. Lovick, where I may see this dear lady.
upon my soul, I will neither fright for offend she. I will only beg of
she to hear I speak for one half-quarter of an hour; and, if she will
have it so, I will never trouble her more.
Sir, say the widow, it would be death for she to see you. she be at
home last night; Iwill tell you truth: but fitter to be in bed all day.
she come home, she say, to die; and, if she could not avoid your visit,
she be unable to fly from you; and believe she should die in your
presence.
and yet go out again this morning early? how can that be, widow?
why, Sir, she rest not two hour, for fear of you. her fear give she
strength, which shewill suffer for, when that fear be over. and find
herself, the more she think of your visit, the less able to stay to
receive it, she take chair, and be go nobody know whither. but, I
believe, she intend to be carry to the waterside, in order to take
boat; for she cannot bear a coach. it extremely incommode she
yesterday.
but before we talk any far, say I, if she be go abroad, you can
have no objection to my look into every apartment above and below;
because I be tell she be actually in the house.
indeed, Sir, she be not. you may satisfy yourself, if you please: but
Mrs. Smith and I wait on she to her chair. we be force to support
she, she be so weak. she say, Whither can I go, Mrs. Lovick? whither
can I go, Mrs. Smith?--Cruel, cruel man!--tell he I call he so, if he
come again!--god give he that peace which he deny I!
sweet creature! cry I; and look down, and take out my handkerchief.
the widow weep. I wish, say she, I have never know so excellent a lady,
and so great a sufferer! I love she as my own child!
Mrs. Smith weep.
I then give over the hope of see she for this time, I be extremely
chagrin at my disappointment, and at the account they give of her ill
health.
would to Heaven, say I, she would put it in my power to repair her
wrong! I have be an ungrateful wretch to she. I need not tell you,
Mrs. Lovick, how much I have injure she, nor how much she suffer by her
relation' implacableness, Mrs. Smith, that cut she to the heart. her
family be the most implacable family on earth; and the dear creature, in
refuse to see I, and to be reconcile to I, show her relation to
they a little too plainly.
o Sir, say the widow, not one syllable of what you say belong to this
lady. I never see so sweet a temper! she be always accuse herself, and
excuse her relation. and, as to you, Sir, she forgive you: she
wish you well; and happy than you will let she die in peace? 'tis all
she wish for. you donot look like a hard-hearted gentleman!--how can
you thus hunt and persecute a poor lady, whom none of her relation will
look upon? it make my heart bleed for she.
and then she weep again. Mrs. Smith weep also. my seat grow uneasy to
I. I shift to another several time; and what Mrs. Lovick far
say, and show I, make I still more uneasy.
bad as the poor lady be last night, say she, she transcribe into her
book a meditation on your persecuting she thus. I have a copy of it. if
I think it would have any effect, I would read it to you.
let I read it myself, Mrs. Lovick.
she give it to I. it have an harlowe-spirited title: and, from a
forgiving spirit, intolerable. I desire to take it with I. she
consent, on condition that I show it to 'Squire Belford. so here,
Mr. 'Squire Belford, thou mayest read it, if thou wilt.
ON be HUNTED after by the enemy of MY SOUL.
MONDAY, AUG. 21.
deliver I, o Lord, from the evil man.
preserve I from the violent man.
who imagine mischief in his heart.
he hath sharpen his tongue like a serpent. adder' poison be under his
lip.
keep I, o Lord, from the hand of the wicked. preserve I from the
violent man, who hath purpose to overthrow my going.
he hath hide a snare for I. he hath spread a net by the way-side. he
hath set gin for I in the way wherein I walk.
keep I from the snare which he hath lay for I, and the gin of this
worker of iniquity.
the enemy hath persecute my soul. he hath smitten my life down to the
ground. he hath make I dwell in darkness, as those that have be long
dead.
therefore be my spirit overwhelm within I. my heart within I be
desolate.
hide not thy face from I in the day when I be in trouble.
for my day be consume like smoke: and my bone be burn as the
hearth.
my heart be smite and wither like grass: so that I forget to eat my
bread.
by reason of the voice of my groaning, my bone cleave to my skin.
I be like a pelican of the wilderness. I be like an owl of the desart.
I watch; and be as a sparrow alone upon the house-top.
I have eat ash like bread; and mingle my drink with weeping:
because of thine indignation, and thy wrath: for thou hast lift I up,
and cast I down.
my day be like a shadow that declineth, and I be wither like grass.
Grant not, o Lord, the desire of the wicked: far not his device,
lest he exalt himself.
why now, Mrs. Lovick, say I, when I have read this meditation, as she
call it, I think I be very severely treat by the lady, if she mean I
in all this. for how be it that I be the enemy of her soul, when I love
her both soul and body?
she say, that I be a violent man, and a wicked man.--that I have be
so, I own: but I repent, and only wish to have it in my power to repair
the injury I have do she.
the gin, the snare, the net, mean matrimony, I suppose--but be it a crime
in I to wish to marry she? would any other woman think it so? and
choose to become a pelican in the wilderness, or a lonely sparrow on the
house-top, rather than have a mate that would chirp about she all day and
all night?
she say, she have eat ash like bread--a sad mistake to be sure!--and
mingle her drink with weeping--Sweet maudlin soul! should I say of any
body confess this, but Miss Harlowe.
she conclude with pray, that the desire of the wicked (mean poor
I, I doubt) may not be grant; that my device may not be further,
lest I exalt myself. I should undoubtedly exalt myself, and with reason,
could I have the honour and the blessing of such a wife. and if my
desire have so honourable an end, I know not why I should be call
wicked, and why I should not be allow to hope, that my honest device
may be further, that I may exalt myself.
but here, Mrs. Lovick, let I ask, as something be undoubtedly mean by
the lonely sparrow on the house-top, be not the dear creature at this
very instant (tell I truly) conceal in Mrs. Smith's cockloft?--what
say you, Mrs. Lovick? what say you, Mrs. Smith, to this?
they assure I to the contrary; and that shew as actually abroad, and
they know not where.
Thou seest, Jack, that I would fain have divert the chagrin give I
not only by the woman's talk, but by this collection of scripture-text
draw up in array against I. several other whimsical and light thing I
say [all I have for it!] with the same view. but the widow would not let
I come off so. she stick to I; and give I, as I tell thee, a good
deal of uneasiness, by her sensible and serious expostulation. Mrs.
Smith put in now-and-then; and the two Jack-pudding fellow, John and
Joseph, not be present, I have no provocation to turn the conversation
into a farce; and, at last, they both join warmly to endeavour to
prevail upon I to give up all thought of see the lady. but I could
not hear of that. on the contrary, I besought Mrs. Smith to let I have
one of her room but till I could see she; and be it but for one, two,
or three day, I would pay a year's rent for it; and quit it the moment
the interview be over. but they desire to be excuse; and be sure
the lady would not come to the house till I be go, be it for a
month.
this please I; for I find they do not think she so very ill as they
would have I believe she to be; but I take no notice of the slip,
because I would not guard they against more of the like.
in short, I tell they, I must and would see she: but that it should be
with all the respect and veneration that heart could pay to excellence
like shebe: and that I would go round to all the church in London and
Westminster, where there be prayer or service, from sun-rise to
sun-set, and haunt their house like a ghost, till I have the opportunity
my soul pant after.
this I bid they tell she. and thus end our serious conversation.
I take leave of they; and go down; and, step into my chair, cause
myself to be carry to Lincoln's-Inn; and walk in the garden till the
chapel be open; and then I go in, and staid prayer, in hope of
see the dear creature enter: but to no purpose; and yet I pray most
devoutly that she might be conduct thither, either by my good angel, or
her own. and indeed I burn more than ever with impatience to be once
more permit to kneel at the foot of this adorable woman. and have I
meet she, or espy she in the chapel, it be my firm belief that I should
not have be able (though it have be in the midst of the sacred office,
and in the presence of thousand) to have forborne prostration to she,
and even clamorous supplication for her forgiveness: a christian act; the
exercise of it therefore worthy of the place.
after service be over, I stept into my chair again, and once more be
carry to Smith's, in hope I might have surprise she there: but no
such happiness for thy friend. I staid in the back-shop an hour and an
half, by my watch; and again undergo a good deal of preachment from the
woman. John be mainly civil to I now; win over a little by my serious
talk, and the honour I profess for the lady. they all three wished
matter could be make up between we: but still insist that she could
never get over her illness; and that her heart be break. a cue, I
suppose, they have from you.
while I be there a letter be bring by a particular hand. they seem
very solicitous to hide it from I; which make I suspect it be for she.
I desire to be suffer to cast an eye upon the seal, and the
superscription; promise to give it back to they unopened.
look upon it, I tell they I know the hand and seal. it be from her
sister.* and I hop it would bring her news that she would be please
with.
* see Letter XXVI. of this volume.
they join most heartily in the same hope: and, give the letter to
they again, I civilly take leave, and go away.
but I will be there again presently; for I fancy my courteous behaviour
to these woman will, on their report of it, procure I the favour I so
earnestly covet. and so I will leave my letter unseal, to tell thee
the event of my next visit at Smith's.
***
Thy servant just call, I send thee this: and will soon follow it by
another. mean time, I long to hear how poor Belton be: to whom my good
wish.
LETTER XVI
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUESDAY, AUG. 22.
I have be under such concern for the poor man, whose exit I almost
hourly expect, and at the shocking scene his illness and his agony
exhibit, that I have be only able to make memoranda of the melancholy
passage, from which to draw up a more perfect account, for the
instruction of we all, when the writing appetite shall return.
***
it be return! indignation have revive it, on receipt of thy letter of
Sunday and yesterday; by which I have reason to reproach thee in very
serious term, that thou hast not keep thy honour with I: and if thy
breach of it be attend with such effect as I fear it will be, I shall
let thee know more of my mind on this head.
if thou wouldst be think in earnest in thy wish to move the poor lady
in thy favour, thy ludicrous behaviour at Smith's, when it come to be
represent to she, will have a very consistent appearance; will it
not?--i will, indeed, confirm in her opinion, that the grave be more to
be wish-for, by one of her serious and pious turn, than a husband
incapable either of reflection or remorse; just recover, as thou art,
from a dangerous, at least a sharp turn.
I be extremely concerned for the poor unprotected lady. she be so
excessively low and weak on Saturday, that I could not be admit to her
speech: and to be drive out of her lodging, when it be fitter for she
to be in bed, be such a piece of cruelty, as he only could be guilty of
who could act as thou hast do by such an angel.
Canst thou thyself say, on reflection, that it have not the look of a
wicked and hardened sportiveness, in thee, for the sake of a wanton
humour only, (since it can answer no end that thou proposest to thyself,
but the direct contrary,) to hunt from place to place a poor lady, who,
like a harmless deer, that have already a barbed shaft in her breast,
seek only a refuge from thee in the shade of death.
but I will leave this matter upon thy own conscience, to paint thee such
a scene from my memoranda, as thou perhaps wilt be move by more
effectually than by any other: because it be such a one as thou thyself
must one day be a principal actor in, and, as I think, hadst very
lately in apprehension: and be the last scene of one of thy more intimate
friend, who have be for the four past day labour in the agony of
death. for, Lovelace, let this truth, this undoubted truth, be engrave
on thy memory, in all thy gaiety, that the life we be so fond of be
hardly life; a mere breathing space only; and that, at the end of its
long date,
Thou must die, as well as Belton.
Thou know, by Tourville, what we have do as to the poor man's worldly
affair; and that we have get his unhappy sister to come and live with he
(little do we think he so very near to his end): and so I will proceed
to tell thee, that when I arrive at his house on Saturday night, I find
he excessively ill: but just raise, and in his elbow-chair, hold up by
his nurse and Mowbray (the roughest and most untouched creature that ever
enter a sick man's chamber); while the maid-servant be try to
make that bed easy for he which he be to return to; his mind ten
time uneasi than that could be, and the true cause that the down be
no soft to he.
he have so much long to see I, as I be tell by his sister, (whom I
send for down to inquire how he be,) that they all rejoice when I
enter: here, say Mowbray, here, Tommy, be honest Jack Belford!
where, where? say the poor man.
I hear his voice, cry Mowbray: he be come up stair.
in a transport of joy, he would have raise himself at my entrance, but
have like to have pitch out of the chair: and when recover, call I
his good friend! his kind friend! but burst into a flood of tear: o
Jack! o Belford! say he, see the way I be in! see how weak! so much,
and so soon reduce! do you know I? do you know your poor friend
Belton?
you be not so much alter, my dear Belton, as you think you be. but I
see you be weak; very weak--and I be sorry for it.
weak, weak, indeed, my dear Belford, say he, and weak in mind, if
possible, than in body; and weep bitterly--or I should not thus unman
myself. I, who never fear any thing, to be force to show myself such
a nursling!--i be quite ashamed of myself!--but donot despise I; dear
Belford, donot despise I, I beseech thee.
I ever honour a man that could weep for the distress of other; and
ever shall, say I; and such a one cannot be insensible of his own.
however, I could not help be visibly move at the poor fellow's emotion.
now, say the brutal Mowbray, do I think thee insufferable, Jack. our
poor friend be already a peg too low; and here thou art let he down
low and low still. this soothing of he in his dejected moment, and
join thy womanish tear with his, be not the way; I be sure it be not.
if our Lovelace be here, hewould tell thee so.
thou art an impenetrable creature, reply I; unfit to be present at a
scene, the terror of which thou wilt not be able to feel till thou
feel they in thyself; and then, if thou hadst time for feeling, my
life for thine, thou behavest as pitifully as those thou think most
pitiful.
then turn to the poor sick man, Tears, my dear Belton, be no sign of
an unmanly, but, contrarily of a humane nature; they ease the
over-charge heart, which would burst but for that kindly and natural
relief.
give sorrow word (say Shakspeare)
--The grief that do not speak,
whisper the o'er-fraught heart, and bid it break.
I know, my dear Belton, thou usedst to take pleasure in repetition from
the poet; but thou must be tasteless of their beauty now: yet be not
discountenance by this uncouth and unreflecte Mowbray, for, as Juvenal
say, tear be the prerogative of manhood.
'tis at least seasonably say, my dear Belford. it be kind to keep I in
countenance for this womanish weakness, as Mowbray have be upbraidingly
call it, ever since he have be with I: and in so do, (whatever I
might have think in such high health as he enjoy,) have convince I,
that bottle-friend feel nothing but what move in that little circle.
well, well, proceed in your own way, Jack. I love my friend Belton as
well as you can do; yet for the blood of I, I cannot but think, that
soothe a man's weakness be increase it.
if it be a weakness, to be touch at great and concern event, in
which our humanity be concern, say I, thou mayest be right.
I have see many a man, say the rough creature, go up Holborn-hill,
that have behave more like a man than either of you.
ay, but, Mowbray, reply the poor man, those wretch have not have their
mind enervate by such infirmity of body as I have long labour
under. thou art a shocking fellow, and ever wert.--but to be able to
remember nothing in these moment but what reproach I, and to know
that I cannot hold it long, and what may then be my lot, if--but
interrupt himself, and turn to I, give I thy pity, Jack; 'tis
balm to my wound soul; and let Mowbray sit indifferent enough to the
pang of a die friend, to laugh at we both.
the hardened fellow then retire, with the air of a Lovelace; only more
stupid; yawning and stretching, instead of hum a tune as thou didst
at Smith's.
I assist to get the poor man into bed. he be so weak and low, that he
could not bear the fatigue, and faint away; and I verily think be
quite go. but recover, and his doctor come, and advise to keep
he quiet, I retire, and join Mowbray in the garden; who take more
delight to talk of the live Lovelace and levity, than of the dying
Belton and his repentance.
I just see he again on Saturday night before I go to bed; which I do
early; for I be surfeit with Mowbray's frothy insensibility, and could
not bear he.
it be such a horrid thing to think of, that a man who have live in such
strict term of--what shall I call it? with another; the proof do not
come out so, as to say, friendship; who have pretend so much love for
he; could not bear to be out of his company; would ride an hundred mile
on end to enjoy it; and would fight for he, be the cause right or wrong:
yet now, could be so little move to see he in such misery of body and
mind, as to be able to rebuke he, and rather ridicule than pity he,
because he be more affected by what he feel, than he have see a
malefactor, (harden perhaps by liquor, and not soften by previous
sickness,) on his go to execution.
this put I strongly in mind of what the divine Miss HARLOWE once say to
I, talk of friendship, and what my friendship to you require of I:
'depend upon it, Mr. Belford,' say she, 'that one day you will be
convince, that what you call friendship, be chaff and stubble; and that
nothing be worthy of that sacred name,
'that have not virtue for its base.'
Sunday morning, I be call up at six o'clock, at the poor man's earnest
request, and find he in a terrible agony. o Jack! Jack! say he,
look wildly, as if he have see a spectre--come nearer me!--Dear, dear
Belford, save I! then clasp my arm with both his hand, and rear
up his head towards I, his eye strangely roll, save I! dear
Belford, save I! repeat he.
I put my other arm about he--save you from what, my dear Belton! say I;
save you from what? nothing shall hurt you. what must I save you from?
recover from his terror, he sink down again, o save I from myself!
say he; save I from my own reflection. o dear Jack! what a thing it
be to die; and not to have one comfortable reflection to revolve! what
would I give for one year of my past life?--only one year--and to have
the same sense of thing that I now have?
I try to comfort he as well as I could: but free-liver to free-liver
be sorry death-bed comforter. and he break in upon I: o my dear
Belford, say he, I be tell, (and I have hear you ridicule for it,)
that the excellent Miss Harlowe have work a conversion in you. may it
be so! you be a man of sense: o may it be so! now be your time! now,
that you be in full vigour of mind and body!--but your poor Belton,
alas! your poor Belton keep his vice, till they leave he--and see the
miserable effect in debility of mind and despondency! be Mowbray
here, and be he to laugh at I, I would own that this be the cause of
my despair--that God's justice cannot let his mercy operate for my
comfort: for, oh! I have be very, very wicked; and have despise the
offer of his grace, till he have withdraw it from I for ever.
I use all the argument I could think of to give he consolation: and
what I say have such an effect upon he, as to quiet his mind for the
great part of the day; and in a lucid hour his memory serve he to
repeat these line of Dryden, grasp my hand, and look wistfully
upon I:
o that I less could fear to lose this being,
which, like a snow-ball, in my coward hand,
the more 'tis grasp, the fast melt away!
in the afternoon of Sunday, he be inquisitive after you, and your
present behaviour to Miss Harlowe. I tell he how you have be, and how
light you make of it. Mowbray be pleased with your impenetrable
hardness of heart, and say, Bob. Lovelace be a good edge-tool, and
steel to the back: and such coarse but hearty praise he give you, as an
abandon man might give, and only an abandon man could wish to
deserve.
but hadst thou hear what the poor die Belton say on this occasion,
perhaps it would have make thee serious an hour or two, at least.
'when poor Lovelace be bring,' say he, 'to a sick-bed, as I be now,
and his mind forebode that it be impossible he should recover, (which
his could not do in his late illness: if it have, he could not have
behave so lightly in it;) when he revolve his past mis-spend life; his
action of offence to helpless innocent; in Miss Harlowe's case
particularly; what then will he think of himself, or of his past action?
his mind debilitate; his strength turn into weakness; unable to stir
or to move without help; not one ray of hope dart in upon his
benighted soul; his conscience stand in the place of a thousand
witness; his pain excruciating; weary of the poor remnant of life he
drag, yet dread, that, in a few short hour, his bad will be change
to bad, nay, to bad of all; and that bad of all, to last beyond
time and to all eternity; o Jack! what will he then think of the poor
transitory gratification of sense, which now engage all his attention?
tell he, dear Belford, tell he, how happy he be if he know his own
die happiness; how happy, compare to his poor dying friend, that he
have recover from his illness, and have still an opportunity lend he,
for which I would give a thousand world, have I they to give!'
I approve exceedingly of his reflection, as suit to his present
circumstance; and infer consolation to he from a mind so properly
touch.
he proceed in the like penitent strain. I have live a very wicked
life; so have we all. we have never make a conscience of do whatever
mischief either force or fraud enable we to do. we have lay snare for
the innocent heart; and have not scruple by the too-ready sword to
extend, as occasion offer, the wrong we do to the person whom we
have before injure in their dear relation. but yet, I flatter
myself, sometimes, that I have less to answer for than either Lovelace or
Mowbray; for I, by take to myself that accurse deceiver from whom thou
hast free I, (and who, for year, unknown to I, be retaliate upon
my own head some of the evil I have bring upon other,) and retire,
and live with she as a wife, be not party to half the mischief, that
I doubt they, and Tourville, and even you, Belford, commit. as to the
ungrateful Thomasine, I hope I have meet with my punishment in she. but
notwithstanding this, dost thou not think, that such an action--and such
an action--and such an action; [and then he recapitulate several
enormity, in the perpetration of which (lead on by false bravery, and
the heat of youth and wine) we have all be concern;] dost thou not
think that these villanie, (let I call they now by their proper name,)
join to the wilful and glory-in neglect of every duty that our well
sense and education give we to know be require of we as man and
christian, be not enough to weigh down my soul into despondency?--
indeed, indeed, they be! and now to hope for mercy; and to depend upon
the efficacy of that gracious attribute, when that no less shin one of
justice forbid I to hope; how can I!--I, who have despise all
warning, and take no advantage of the benefit I might have reap from
the linger consumptive illness I have labour under, but leave all to
the last stake; hop for recovery against hope, and drive off
repentance, till that grace be deny I; for, oh! my dear Belford! I can
now neither repent, nor pray, as I ought; my heart be harden, and I can
do nothing but despair!--
More he would have say; but, overwhelm with grief and infirmity, he
bow his head upon his pangful bosom, endeavour to hide from the
sight of the harden Mowbray, who just then enter the room, those
tear which he could not restrain.
preface by a phlegmatic hem; sad, very sad, truly! cry Mowbray; who
sit himself down on one side of the bed, as I sit on the other: his eye
half close, and his lip pout out to his turn-up nose, his chin
curdle [to use one of thy description]; leave one at a loss to know
whether stupid drowsiness or intense contemplation have get most hold of
he.
an excellent, however uneasy lesson, Mowbray! say i.--by my faith it be!
it may one day, who know how soon? be our own case!
I think of thy yawning-fit, as describe in thy letter of Aug. 13. for
up start Mowbray, writhe and shake himself as in an ague-fit; his
hand stretch over his head--with thy hoy! hoy! hoy! yawning. and then
recover himself, with another stretch and a shake, whatbe o'clock?
cry he; pull out his watch--and stalk by long tip-toe stride
through the room, down stair he go; and meet the maid in the
passage, I hear he say--Betty, bring I a bumper of claret; thy poor
master, and this d----d Belford, be enough to throw a Hercules into the
vapour.
Mowbray, after this, assume himself in our friend's library, which be,
as thou know, chiefly classical and dramatical, find out a passage in
Lee's Oedipus, which he would need have to be extremely apt; and in he
come full fraught with the notion of the courage it would give the die
man, and read it to he. 'tis poetical and pretty. this be it:
when the sun set, shadow that show'd at noon
but small, appear most long and terrible:
so when we think fate hover o'er our head,
our apprehension shoot beyond all bound:
owl, raven, cricket, seem the watch of death;
Nature's bad vermin scare her godlike son:
echo, the very leaving of a voice,
grow babbling ghost, and call we to our graf.
each mole-hill thought swell to a huge Olympus;
while we, fantastic dreamer, heave and puff,
and sweat with our imagination's weight.
he expect praise for find this out. but Belton turn his head
from he, ah, Dick! (say he,) these be not the reflection of a dying
man!--what thou wilt one day feel, if it be what I now feel, will
convince thee that the evil before thee, and with thee, be more than
the effect of imagination.
I be call twice on Sunday night to he; for the poor fellow, when his
reflection on his past life annoy he most, be afraid of be leave with
the woman; and his eye, they tell I, hunt and roll about for I.
wherebe Mr. Belford?--But I shall tire he out, cry he--yet beg of he
to step to I--yet don't--yet do; be once the doubting and changeful
order he give: and they call I accordingly.
but, alas! what could Belford do for he? Belford, who have be but too
often the companion of his guilty hour; who want mercy as much as he
do; and be unable to promise it to himself, though 'tis all he can bid
his poor friend rely upon!
what miscreant be we! what figure shall we make in these terrible
hour!
if Miss HARLOWE's glorious example, on one hand, and the terror of this
poor man's last scene on the other, affect I not, I must be abandon to
perdition; as I fear thou wilt be, if thou benefitt not thyself from
both.
among the consolatory thing I urge, when I be call up the last time
on Sunday night, I tell he, that he must not absolutely give himself up
to despair: that many of the apprehension he be under, be such as the
good man must have, on the dreadful uncertainty of what be to succeed to
this life. 'tis well observe, say I, by a poetical divine, who be an
excellent christian,* that
death could not a more sad retinue find,
Sickness and pain before, and darkness all behind.
* the Rev Mr. Norris, of Bremerton.
about eight o'clock yesterday (Monday) morning, I find he a little
calm. he ask I who be the author of the two line I have repeat
to he; and make I speak they over again. a sad retinue, indeed! say
the poor man. and then express his hopelessness of life, and his
terror at the thought of die; and draw from thence terrible
conclusion with regard to his future state; there be, say I, such a
natural aversion to death in human nature, that you be not to imagine,
that you, my dear Belton, be singular in the fear of it, and in the
apprehension that fill the thoughtful mind upon its approach; but you
ought, as much as possible, to separate those natural fear which all man
must have on so solemn an occasion, from those particular one which your
justly-apprehend unfitness fill you with. Mr. Pomfret, in his
Prospect of Death, which I dip into last night from a collection in
your closet, which I put into my pocket, say, [and I turn to the
place]
merely to die, no man of reason fear;
for certainly we must,
as we be bear, return to dust;
'tis the last point of many ling-ring year;
but whither then we go,
Whither, we fain would know;
but human understanding cannot show.
this make US tremble----
Mr. Pomfret, therefore, proceed I, have such apprehension of this dark
state as you have: and the excellent divine I hint at last night, who
have very little else but human frailty to reproach himself with, and
whose miscellany fall into my hand among my uncle's book in my
attendance upon he in his last hour, say,
it must be do, my soul: but 'tis a strange,
a dismal, and mysterious change,
when thou shalt leave this tenement of clay,
and to an unknown--somewhere--wing away;
when time shall be eternity, and thou
Shalt be--thou know'st not what--and live--
thou know'st not how!
amazing state! no wonder that we dread
to think of death, or view the dead;
Thou'rt all wrapt up in cloud, as if to thee
our very knowledge have antipathy.
then follow, what I repeat,
death could not a more sad retinue find,
Sickness and pain before, and darkness all behind.
alas! my dear Belford [infer the unhappy deep-thinker] what poor
creature do this convince I we mortal be at best!--but what then
must be the case of such a profligate as I, who by a past wicked life
have add great force to these natural terror? if death be so
repugnant a thing to human nature, that good man will be startle at it,
what must it be to one who have live a life of sense and appetite; nor
ever reflect upon the end which I now be within view of?
what could I say to an inference so fairly draw? mercy, mercy,
unbounded mercy, be still my plea, though his repeat opposition of
justice to it, in a manner silence that plea: and what would I have
give to have have rise in my mind, one good, eminently good action to
have remember he of, in order to combat his fear with it?
I believe, Lovelace, I shall tire thee, and that more with the subject
of my letter, than even with the length of it. but really, I think thy
spirit be so offensively up since thy recovery, that I ought, as the
melancholy subject offer, to endeavour to reduce thee to the standard
of humanity, by expatiate upon they. and then thou canst not but be
curious to know every thing that concern the poor man, for whom thou
hast always express a great regard. I will therefore proceed as I have
begin. if thou like not to read it now, lie it by, if thou wilt, till
the like circumstance befall thee, till like reflection from those
circumstance seize thee; and then take it up, and compare the two case
together.
***
at his earnest request, I sit up with he last night; and, poor man! it
be impossible to tell thee, how easy and safe he think himself in my
company, for the first part of the night: a drown man will catch at a
straw, the proverb well say: and a straw be I, with respect to any real
help I could give he. he often awake in terror; and once call out
for I, Dear Belford, say he, where be you!--oh! there you are!--give
I your friendly hand!--then grasp it, and put his clammy,
half-cold lip to it--how kind! I fear every thing when you be absent.
but the presence of a friend, a sympathise friend--oh! how comfortable!
but, about four in the morning, he fright I much: he wake with three
terrible groan; and endeavour to speak, but could not presently--and
when he did,--Jack, Jack, Jack, five or six time repeat he as quick as
thought, now, now, now, save I, save I, save I--I be go--go
indeed!
I throw my arm about he, and raise he upon his pillow, as he be
sink (as if to hide himself) in the bed-clothe--and star wildly,
where be I? say he, a little recovering. do you not see he? turn
his head this way and that; horror in his countenance; do you not see
he?
see whom, see what, my dear Belton!
o lie I upon the bed again, cry he!--let I not die upon the floor!--
Lay I down gently; and stand by me!--leave I not!--all, all will soon
be over!
you be already, my dear Belton, upon the bed. you have not be upon
the floor. this be a strong delirium; you be faint for want of
refreshment [for he have refuse several time to take any thing]: let I
persuade you to take some of this cordial julap. I will leave you, if
you will not oblige I.
he then readily take it; but say he could have swear that Tom. Metcalfe
have be in the room, and have draw he out of bed by the throat,
upbraid he with the injury he have first do his sister, and then
he, in the duel to which he owe that fever which cost he his life.
Thou know the story, Lovelace, too well, to need my repeat it: but,
mercy on we, if in these terrible moment all the evil we do rise to our
fright imaginations!--if so, what shocking scene have I, but still
what more shocking one hast thou, to go through, if, as the noble poet
say,
if any sense at that sad time remain!
the doctor order he an opiate this morning early, which operate so
well, that he dose and sleep several hour more quietly than he have do
for the two past day and night, though he have sleeping-draught give
he before. but it be more and more evident every hour that nature be
almost wear out in he.
***
Mowbray, quite tired with this house of mourning, intend to set out in
the morning to find you. he be not a little rejoice to hear you be
in town; I believe to have a pretence to leave we.
***
he have just take leave of his poor friend, intend to go away early:
an everlasting leave, I may venture to say; for I think he will hardly
live till to-morrow night.
I believe the poor man would not have be sorry have he leave he when I
arrive; for 'tis a shocking creature, and enjoy too strong health to
know how to pity the sick. then (to borrow an observation from thee) he
have, by nature, strong bodily organ, which those of his soul be not
likely to whet out; and he, as well as the wicked friend he be go to,
may last a great while from the strength of their constitution, though
so greatly different in their talent, if neither the sword nor the
halter interpose.
I must repeat, that I cannot but be very uneasy for the poor lady whom
you so cruelly persecute; and that I do not think that you have keep your
honour with I. I be apprehensive, indeed, that you would attempt to
see she, as soon as you get well enough to come up; and I tell she as
much, make use of it as an argument to prepare she for your visit, and
to induce she to stand it. but she could not, it be plain, bear the
shock of it: and indeed she tell I that she would not see you, though
but for one half-hour, for the world.
could she have prevail upon herself, I know that the sight of she would
have be as affect to you, as your visit could have be to she; when
you have see to what a lovely skeleton (for she be really lovely still,
nor can she, with such a form and feature, be otherwise) you have, in a
few week, reduce one of the most charming woman in the world; and that
in the full bloom of her youth and beauty.
Mowbray undertake to carry this, that he may be more welcome to you, he
say. be it to be send unseal, the character we write in would be
hebrew to the dunce. I desire you to return it; and Iwill give you a copy
of it upon demand; for I intend to keep it by I, as a guard against the
infection of your company, which might otherwise, perhaps, some time
hence, be apt to weaken the impression I always desire to have of the
awful scene before I. God convert we both!
LETTER XVII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY MORN. 11 O'CLOCK.
I believe no man have two such servant as I have. because I treat they
with kindness, and do not lord it over my inferior, and d--n and curse
they by look and word like Mowbray; or beat their tooth out like
Lovelace; but cry, Pr'ythee, Harry, do this, and, Pr'ythee, Jonathan, do
that; the fellow pursue their own device, and regard nothing I say, but
what fall in with these.
here, this vile Harry, who might have bring your letter of yesterday in
good time, come not in with it till past eleven at night (drunk, I
suppose); and conclude that I be in bed, as he pretend (because he
be tell I sit up the precede night) bring it not to I; and have
overslept himself, just as I have seal up my letter, in come the
villain with the forget one, shake his ear, and look as if he
himself do not believe the excuse he be go to make. I question
he about it, and hear his pitiful plea; and though I never think it
become a gentleman to treat people insolently who by their station be
humble beneath his foot, yet could I not forbear to Lovelace and Mowbray
he most cordially.
and this detain Mowbray (who be ready to set out to you before) while
I write a few line upon it, the fierce fellow, who be impatient to
exchange the company of a die Belton for that of a too-lively Lovelace,
affix a supplement of curse upon the star fellow, that be large
than my book--nor do I offer to take off the bear from such a mongrel,
since, on this occasion, he deserve not of I the protection which every
master owe to a good servant.
he have not do curse he yet; for stalk about the court-yard with
his boot on, (the poor fellow dress his horse, and unable to get from
he,) he be at he without mercy; and I will heighten his impatience,
(since be just under the window where I be write, he will not let I
attend to my pen,) by tell you how he fill my ear as well as the
fellow's, with his--Hay, Sir! and G--d d--n ye, Sir! and be ye my
servant, ye dog ye! and must I stay here till the mid-day sun scorch
I to a parchment, for such a mangy dog's drunken neglect?--ye lie,
sirrah!--ye lie, I tell you--[I hear the fellow's voice in an humble
excusatory tone, though not articulately] ye lie, ye dog!--I'd a good
mind to thrust my whip down your drunken throat: d--n I, if I would not
flay the skin from the back of such a rascal, if thou wert mine, and have
dog's-skin glove make of it, for thy brother scoundrel to wear in
remembrance of thy abuse of such a master.
the poor horse suffer for this, I doubt not; for, what now! and, stand
still, and be d--d to ye, cry the fellow, with a kick, I suppose, which
he well deserve himself; for these varlet, where they can, be
Mowbrays and Lovelaces to man or beast; and not dare to answer he, be
flay the poor horse.
I hear the fellow be just escape, the horse, (well curry than
ordinary, I suppose, in half the usual time,) by his clanking shoe, and
Mowbray's silence, let I know, that I may now write on: and so, I
will tell thee that, in the first place, (little as I, as well as you,
regard dream,) I would have thee lay thine to heart; for I could give
thee such an interpretation of it, as would shock thee, perhaps; and if
thou askest I for it, I will.
Mowbray call to I from the court-yard, that 'tis a cursed hot day, and
he shall be fry by rid in the noon of it: and that poor Belton long
to see I. so I will only add my earnest desire, that you will give over
all thought of see the lady, if, when this come to your hand, you
have not see she: and, that it would be kind, if youwould come, and, for
the last time you will ever see your poor friend, share my concern for
he; and, in he, see what, in a little time, will be your fate and mine,
and that of Mowbray, Tourville, and the rest of we--for what be ten,
fifteen, twenty, or thirty year, to look back to; in the long of
which period forward we shall all perhaps be mingle with the dust from
which we spring?
LETTER XVIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY MORN. AUG. 23.
all alive, dear Jack, and in ecstacy!--likely to be once more a happy
man! for I have receive a letter from my beloved Miss HARLOWE; in
consequence, I suppose, of that which I mention in my last to be leave
for she from her sister. and I be set out for Berks directly, to
show the content to my Lord M. and to receive the congratulation of all
my kindre upon it.
I go, last night, as I intend, to Smith's: but the dear creature be
not return at near ten o'clock. and, light upon Tourville, I take
he home with I, and make he sing I out of my megrim. I go to bed
tolerably easy at two; have bright and pleasant dream; (not such of a
frightful one as that I give thee an account of;) and at eight this
morning, as I be dress, to be in readiness against the return of my
fellow, whom I have send to inquire after the lady, I have the follow
letter bring to I by a chairman:
to ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUESDAY NIGHT, 11 O'CLOCK (AUG. 22.)
SIR,
I have good news to tell you. I be set out with all diligence for my
father's house, I be bid to hope that he will receive his poor penitent
with a goodness peculiar to himself; for I be overjoy with the
assurance of a thorough reconciliation, through the interposition of a
dear, blessed friend, whom I always love and honour. I be so take up
with my preparation for this joyful and long-wish-for journey, that I
cannot spare one moment for any other business, have several matter of
the last importance to settle first. so, pray, Sir, donot disturb or
interrupt I--I beseech you donot. you may possibly in time see I at my
father's; at least if it be not your own fault.
I will write a letter, which shall be send you when I be get thither and
receive: till when, I be, &c.
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
***
I dispatch instantly a letter to the dear creature, assure she, with
the most thankful joy, 'that I would directly set out for Berks, and wait
the issue of the happy reconciliation, and the charming hop she have
fill I with. I pour out upon she a thousand blessing. I declare
that it should be the study of my whole life to merit such transcendent
goodness: and that there be nothing which her father or friend should
require at my hand, that I would not for her sake comply with, in order
to promote and complete so desirable a reconciliation.'
I hurry it away without take a copy of it; and I have order the
chariot-and-six to be get ready; and hey for M. Hall! let I but know
how Belton do. I hope a letter from thee be on the road. and if the
poor fellow can spare thee, make haste, I command thee, to attend this
truly divine lady. thou may not else see she of month perhaps; at
least, not while she be Miss HARLOWE. and oblige I, if possible, with
one letter before she set out, confirm to I and account for this
generous change.
but what account for it be necessary? the dear creature cannot
receive consolation herself but she must communicate it to other. how
noble! she would not see I in her adversity; but no soon do the sun
of prosperity begin to shine upon she than she forgive I.
I know to whose mediation all this be owe. it be to Colonel Morden's.
she always, as she say, love and honour he! and he love she above
all his relation.
I shall now be convince that there be something in dream. the opening
cloud be the reconciliation in view. the bright form, lift up my
charmer through it to a firmament stuck round with golden cherubim and
seraphim, indicate the charming little boy and girl, that will be the
fruit of this happy reconciliation. the welcome, thrice repeat, be
those of her family, now no more to be deem implacable. yet be they
family, too, that my soul cannot mingle with.
but then what be my tumbling over and over through the floor into a
frightful hole, descend as she ascend? Ho! only this! it allude to
my disrelish to matrimony: which be a bottomless pit, a gulph, and I know
not what. and I suppose, have I not awake in such a plaguy fright, I have
be souse into some river at the bottom of the hole, and then be
carry (mundifie or purify from my past iniquity,) by the same
bright form (wait for I upon the mossy bank,) to my beloved girl;
and we should have go on cherubime of it and carol to the end of
the chapter.
but what be the black sweep mantle and robe of Lord M. throw over
my face? and what be those of the lady? o Jack! I have these too:
they indicate nothing in the world but that my Lord will be so good as to
die, and leave I all he have. so, rest to thy good-natured soul, honest
Lord M.
Lady Sarah Sadleir and Lady Betty Lawrance, will also die, and leave I
swing legacy.
Miss Charlotte and her sister--what will become of the?--Oh! they will be
in mourning, of course, for their uncle and aunt--thatbe right!
as to Morden's flash through the window, and cry, Die, Lovelace,
and be d----d, if thou wilt not repair my cousin's wrong! that be only,
that he would have send I a challenge, have I not be dispose to do the
lady justice.
all I dislike be this part of the dream: for, even in a dream, I would
not be think to be threaten into any measure, though I like it ever
so well.
and so much for my prophetic dream.
dear charming creature! what a meeting will there be between she and her
father and mother and uncle! what transport, what pleasure, will this
happy, long-wish-for reconciliation give her dutiful heart! and indeed
now methink I be glad she be so dutiful to they; for her duty to her
parent be a conviction to I that she will be as dutiful to her husband:
since duty upon principle be an uniform thing.
why pr'ythee, now, Jack, I have not be so much to blame as thou
think: for have it not be for I, who have lead she into so much
distress, she could neither have receive nor give the joy that will now
overwhelm they all. so here rise great and durable good out of
temporary evil.
I know they love she (the pride and glory of their family,) too well to
hold out long!
I wish I could have see Arabella's letter. she have always be so much
eclipse by her sister, that I dare say she have signify this
reconciliation to she with intermingle phlegm and wormwood; and her
invitation must certainly run all in the rock-water style.
I shall long to see the promise letter too when she be get to her
father's, which I hope will give an account of the reception she will
meet with.
there be a solemnity, however, I think, in the style of her letter, which
please and affect I at the same time. but as it be evident she love
I still, and hope soon to see I at her father's, she could not help
be a little solemn, and half-ashamed, [dear blushing pretty rogue!] to
own her love, after my usage of she.
and then her subscription: till when, I be, CLARISSA HARLOWE: as much as
to say, after that, I shall be, if not to your own fault,
CLARISSA LOVELACE!
o my good love! my ever-generous and adorable creature! how much do
this thy forgiving goodness exalt we both!--Me, for the occasion give
thee! Thee, for turn it so gloriously to thy advantage, and to the
honour of both!
and if, my beloved creature, you will but connive at the imperfection of
your adorer, and not play the wife with I: if, while the charm of
novelty have their force with I, I should happen to be draw aside by
the love of intrigue, and of plot that my soul delight to form and
pursue; and if thou wilt not be open-eyed to the folly of my youth, [a
transitory state;] every excursion shall serve but the more to endear
thee to I, till in time, and in a very little time too, I shall get
above sense; and then, charm by thy soul-attract converse; and
bring to despise my former course; what I now, at distance, consider
as a painful duty, will be my joyful choice, and all my delight will
centre in thee!
***
Mowbray be just arrive with thy letter. I therefore close my agreeable
subject, to attend to one which I doubt will be very shocking.
I have engage the rough varlet to bear I company in the morning to
Berks; where I shall file off the rust he have contract in his
attendance upon the poor fellow.
he tell I that, between the die Belton and the preach Belford, he
shallnot be his own man these three day: and say that thou addest to the
unhappy fellow's weakness, instead of give he courage to help he to
bear his destiny.
I be sorry he take the unavoidable lot so heavily. but he have be long
ill; and sickness enervate the mind as well as the body; as he himself
very significantly observe to thee.
LETTER XIX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
WEDN. evening.
I have be read thy shocking letter--Poor Belton! what a multitude of
lively hour have we pass together! he be a fearless, cheerful
fellow: whowould have think all that should end in such deject
whimpering and terror?
but why didst thou not comfort the poor man about the rencounter between
he and that poltroon Metcalfe? he act in that affair like a man of
true honour, and as I should have act in the same circumstance. tell
he I say so; and that what happen he could neither help nor foresee.
some people be as sensible of a scratch from a pin's point, as other
from a push of a sword: and who can say any thing for the sensibility of
such fellow? Metcalfe would resent for his sister, when his sister
resent not for herself. have she demand her brother's protection and
resentment, that would have be another man's matte, to speak in Lord
M.'s phrase: but she herself think her brother a coxcomb to busy
himself undesired in her affair, and wish for nothing but to be
provide for decently and privately in her lying-in; and be willing to
take the chance of Maintenon-ing his conscience in she favour,* and
get he to marry when the little stranger come; for she know what
an easy, good-natured fellow he be. and indeed if she have prevail
upon he, it might have be happy for both; as then he would not have
fall in with his cursed thomasine. but truly this officious brother of
she's must interpose. this make a trifling affair important: and what
be the issue? Metcalfe challenge; Belton meet he; disarm he; give
he his life: but the fellow, more sensible in his skin than in his head,
have receive a scratch, be fright: it give he first a puke, then
a fever, and then he die, that be all. and how could Belton help that?
--But sickness, a long tedious sickness, will make a bugbear of any thing
to a languish heart, I see that. and so far be Mowbray a-propos in
the verse from Nat. Lee, which thou hast describe.
* Madam Maintenon be report to have prevail upon Lewis XIV. of
France, in his old age, (sunk, as he be, by ill success in the field,)
to marry she, by way of compound with his conscience for the freedom
of his past life, to which she attribute his public loss.
merely to die, no man of reason fear, be a mistake, say thou, or say
thy author, what ye will. and thy solemn parade about the natural
repugnance between life and death, be a proof that it be.
let I tell thee, Jack, that so much be I pleased with this world, in
the main; though, in some point too, the world (to make a person of it,)
have be a rascal to I; so delighted be I with the joy of youth; with
my worldly prospect as to fortune; and now, newly, with the charming
hope give I by my dear, thrice dear, and for ever dear CLARISSA; that
be I even sure that nothing bad would come hereafter, I should be very
loth (very much afraid, if thou wilt have it so,) to lay down my life
and they together; and yet, upon a call of honour, no man fear death
less than myself.
but I have not either inclination or leisure to weigh thy leaden
argument, except in the pig, or, as thou wouldst say, in the lump.
if I return thy letter, let I have they again some time hence, that be
to say, when I be married, or when poor Belton be half forget; or when
time have enrol the honest fellow among those whom we have so long
lose, that we may remember they with more pleasure than pain; and then I
may give they a serious perusal, and enter with thee as deeply as thou
wilt into the subject.
when I be marry, say i?--what a sound have that!
I must wait with patience for a sight of this charming creature, till she
be at her father's. and yet, as the but blossom beauty, as thou
tell I, be reduce to a shadow, I should have be exceedingly
delighted to see she now, and every day till the happy one; that I might
have the pleasure of observe how sweetly, hour by hour, she will rise
to her pristine glory, by mean of that state of ease and contentment,
which will take place of the stormy past, upon her reconciliation with
her friend, and our happy nuptial.
LETTER XX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
well, but now my heart be a little at ease, I will condescend to take
brief notice of some other passage in thy letter.
I find I be to thank thee, that the dear creature have avoid my visit.
thing be now in so good a train that I must forgive thee; else thou
shouldst have hear more of this new instance of disloyalty to thy
general.
thou art continually give thyself high praise, by way of opposition, as
I may say, to other; gently and artfully blame thyself for quality
thou wouldst at the same time have to be think, and which generally be
thought, praise-worthy.
thus, in the air thou assumest about thy servant, thou wouldst pass for
a mighty humane mortal; and that at the expense of Mowbray and I, whom
thou representest as king and emperor to our menial. yet art thou
always unhappy in thy attempt of this kind, and never canst make we, who
know thee, believe that to be a virtue in thee, which be but the effect
of constitutional phlegm and absurdity.
know thou not, that some man have a native dignity in their manner,
that make they more regard by a look, than either thou canst be in thy
low style, or Mowbray in his high?
I be fit to be a prince, I can tell thee, for I reward well, and I punish
seasonably and properly; and I be generally as well serve by any man.
the art of govern these underbred varlet lie more in the dignity of
look than in word; and thou art a sorry fellow, to think humanity
consist in act by thy servant, as man must act who be not able to
pay they their wage; or have make they master of secret, which, if
divulge, would lay they at the mercy of such wretch.
now to I, who never do any thing I be ashamed to own, and who have
more ingenuousness than ever man have; who can call a villany by its own
right name, though practise by myself, and (by my own readiness to
reproach myself) anticipate all reproach from other; who be not such a
hypocrite, as to wish the world to think I other or well than I am--
it be my part, to look a servant into his duty, if I can; nor will I keep
one who know not how to take I by a nod, or a wink; and who, when I
smile, shall not be all transport; when I frown, all terror. if, indeed,
I be out of the way a little, I always take care to reward the varlet
for patiently bear my displeasure. but this I hardly ever be but when
a fellow be egregiously stupid in any plain point of duty, or will be
wise than his master; and when he shall tell I, that he think act
contrary to my order be the way to serve I well.
one time or other I will enter the list with thee upon thy conduct and
mine to servant; and I will convince thee, that what thou wouldst have
pass for humanity, if it be indiscriminately practise to all temper,
will perpetually subject thee to the evil thou complainest of; and
justly too; and that he only be fit to be a master of servant, who can
command their attention as much by a nod, as if he be to pr'ythee a
fellow to do his duty, on one hand, or to talk of flaying, and
horse-whipping, like Mowbray, on the other: for the servant who be
use to expect thy creep style, will always be master of his master,
and he who deserve to be treat as the other, be not fit to be any
man's servant; nor would I keep such a fellow to rub my horse's heel.
I shall be the readier to enter the list with thee upon this argument,
because I have presumption enough to think that we have not in any of our
dramatic poet, that I can at present call to mind, one character of a
servant of either sex, that be justly hit off. so absurdly wise some,
and so sottishly foolish other; and both sometime in the same person.
foil draw from lee or dreg of the people to set off the character of
their master and mistress; nay, sometimes, which be still more absurd,
introduce with more wit than the poet have to bestow upon their
principals.--mere flint and steel to strike fire with--or, to vary the
metaphor, to serve for whetstone to wit, which, otherwise, could not be
make apparent; or, for engine to be make use of like the machinery of
the antient poet, (or the still more unnatural soliloquy,) to help on a
sorry plot, or to bring about a necessary eclaircissement, to save the
poet the trouble of think deeply for a well way to wind up his
bottom.
of this I be persuade, (whatever my practice be to my own servant,)
that thou wilt be benefit by my theory, when we come to controvert the
point. for then I shall convince thee, that the dramatic as well as
natural characteristic of a good servant ought to be fidelity, common
sense, cheerful obedience, and silent respect; that wit in his station,
except to his companion, would be sauciness; that he should never
presume to give his advice; that if he venture to expostulate upon any
unreasonable command, or such a one a appear to he to be so, he should
do it with humility and respect, and take a proper season for it. but
such lesson do most of the dramatic performance I have see give, where
servant be introduce as character essential to the play, or to act
very significant or long part in it, (which, of itself, I think a
fault;) such lesson, I say, do they give to the footman's gallery, that
I have not wonder we have so few modest or good man-servant among
those who often attend their master or mistress to play. then how
miserably evident must that poet's conscious want of genius be, who can
stoop to raise or give force to a clap by the indiscriminate roar of the
party-coloured gallery!
but this subject I will suspend to a well opportunity; that be to say,
to the happy one, when my nuptial with my Clarissa will oblige I to
increase the number of my servant, and of consequence to enter more
nicely into their qualification.
***
although I have the high opinion that man can have of the generosity
of my dear Miss Harlowe, yet I cannot for the heart of I account for
this agreeable change in her temper but one way. Faith and troth,
Belford, I verily believe, lay all circumstance together, that the
dear creature unexpectedly find herself in the way I have so ardently
wish she to be in; and that this make she, at last, incline to favour
I, that she may set the well face upon her gestation, when at her
father's.
if this be the case, all her fall away, and her fainting fit, be
charmingly account for. nor be it surprising, that such a sweet novice
in these matter should not, for some time, have know to what to
attribute her frequent indisposition. if this should be the case, how I
shall laugh at thee! and (when I be sure of she) at the dear novice
herself, that all her grievous distress shall end in a man-child; which
I shall love well than all the cherubim and seraphim that may come
after; though there be to be as many of they as I behold in my dream;
in which a vast expanse of firmament be stick as full of they as it
could hold!
I shall be afraid to open thy next, lest it bring I the account of poor
Belton's death. yet, as there be no hope of his recovery--but what
should I say, unless the poor man be well fit--but thy heavy
sermon shall not affect I too much neither.
I enclose thy paper; and do thou transcribe they for I, or return they;
for there be some thing in they, which, at a proper season, a mortal
man should not avoid attend to; and thou seemest to have enter
deeply into the shocking subject.--But here I will end, lest I grow too
serious.
***
Thy servant call here about an hour ago, to know if I have any command;
I therefore hope that thou wilt have this early in the morning. and if
thou canst let I hear from thee, do. Iwill stretch an hour or two in
expectation of it. yet I must be at Lord M.'s to-morrow night, if
possible, though ever so late.
Thy fellow tell I the poor man be much as he be when Mowbray leave he.
wouldst thou think that this varlet Mowbray be sorry that I be so near
be happy with Miss Harlowe? and, 'egad, Jack, I know not what to say
to it, now the fruit seem to be within my reach--but let what will come,
Iwill stand to't: for I find I cannot live without she.
LETTER XXI
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY, three O'CLOCK.
I will proceed where I leave off in my last.
as soon as I have see Mowbray mount, I go to attend upon poor Belton;
whom I find in dreadful agony, in which he awake, after he generally
do.
the doctor come in presently after, and I be concern at the scene that
pass between they.
it open with the die man's ask he, with melancholy earnestness,
if nothing--if nothing at all could be do for he?
the doctor shake his head, and tell he, he doubt not.
I cannot die, say the poor man--I cannot think of die. I be very
desirous of live a little long, if I could but be free from these
horrible pain in my stomach and head. can you give I nothing to make
I pass one week--but one week, in tolerable ease, that I may die like a
man, if I must die!
but, Doctor, I be yet a young man; in the prime of my year--youth be a
good subject for a physician to work upon--can you do nothing--nothing at
all for I, Doctor?
Alas! Sir, reply his physician, you have be long in a bad way. I
fear, I fear, nothing in physic can help you!
he be then out of all patience: what, then, be your art, Sir?--I have
be a passive machine for a whole twelvemonth, to be work upon at the
pleasure of you people of the faculty.--I verily believe, have I not take
such dos of nasty stuff, I have be now a well man--but who the plague
would regard physician, whose art be to cheat we with hope while they
help to destroy us?--and who, not one of you, know any thing but by
guess?
Sir, continue he, fiercely, (and with more strength of voice and
coherence, than he have show for several hour before,) if you give I
over, I give you over.--the only honest and certain part of the art of
healing be surgery. a good surgeon be worth a thousand of you. I have
be in surgeon' hand often, and have always find reason to depend
upon their skill; but your art, Sir, what be it?--but to daub, daub,
daub; load, load, load; plaster, plaster, plaster; till ye utterly
destroy the appetite first, and the constitution afterwards, which you
be call in to help. I have a companion once, my dear Belford, thou
knewest honest Blomer, as pretty a physician he would have make as any
in England, have he keep himself from excess in wine and woman; and he
always use to say, there be nothing at all but the pick-pocket parade
in the physician's art; and that the good guesser be the good physician.
and I use to believe he too--and yet, fond of life, and fearful of
death, what do we do, when we be take ill, but call ye in? and what
do ye do, when call in, but nurse our distemper, till from pigmy you
make giant of they? and then ye come creep with solemn face, when ye
be ashamed to prescribe, or when the stomach willnot bear its natural
food, by reason of your poisonous potions,--ala, I be afraid physic can
do no more for him!--nor need it, when it have bring to the brink of the
grave the poor wretch who place all his reliance in your cursed slop,
and the flattering hope you give he.
the doctor be out of countenance; but say, if we could make mortal man
immortal, and would not, all this might be just.
I blame the poor man; yet excuse he to the physician. to die, dear
Doctor, when, like my poor friend, we be so desirous of life, be a
melancholy thing. we be apt to hope too much, not consider that the
seed of death be sow in we when we begin to live, and grow up, till,
like rampant weed, they choke the tender flower of life; which decline
in we as those weed flourish. we ought, therefore, to begin early to
study what our constitution will bear, in order to root out, by
temperance, the weed which the soil be most apt to produce; or, at
least, to keep they down as they rise; and not, when the flower or plant
be wither at the root, and the weed in its full vigour, expect, that
the medical art will restore the one, or destroy the other; when that
other, as I hint, have be root itself in the habit from the time of
our birth.
this speech, Bob., thou wilt call a prettiness; but the allegory be just;
and thou hast not quite cure I of the metaphorical.
very true, say the doctor; you have bring a good metaphor to
illustrate the thing. I be sorry I can do nothing for the gentleman; and
can only recommend patience, and a well frame of mind.
well, Sir, say the poor angry man, vex at the doctor, but more at
death, you will perhaps recommend the next succession to the physician,
when he can do no more; and, I suppose, will send your brother to pray by
I for those virtue which you wish I.
it seem the physician's brother be a clergyman in the neighbourhood.
I be greatly concerned to see the gentleman thus treat; and so I tell
poor Belton when he be go; but he continue impatient, and would not
be deny, he say, the liberty of talk to a man, who have take so
many guineas of he for do nothing, or bad than nothing, and never
decline one, though he know all the time he could do he no good.
it seem the gentleman, though rich, be note for be greedy after
fee! and poor Belton go on rave at the extravagant fee of English
physician, compare with those of the most eminent foreign one. but,
poor man! he, like the Turks, who judge of a general by his success, (out
of patience to think he must die,) would have worship the doctor, and
not grudge thee time the sum, could he have give he hope of
recovery.
but, nevertheless, I must need say, that gentleman of the faculty should
be more moderate in their fee, or take more pain to deserve they; for,
generally, they only come into a room, feel the sick man's pulse, ask the
nurse a few question, inspect the patient's tongue, and, perhaps, his
water; then sit down, look plaguy wise, and write. the golden fee find
the ready hand, and they hurry away, as if the sick man's room be
infectious. so to the next they troll, and to the next, if man of great
practice; value themselves upon the number of visit they make in a
morning, and the little time they make they in. they go to dinner and
unload their pocket; and sally out again to refill they. and thus, in a
little time, they raise vast estate; for, as Ratcliffe say, when first
tell of a great loss which befell he, it be only go up and down one
hundred pair of stair to fetch it up.
Mrs. Sambre (Belton's sister) have several time propose to he a
minister to pray by he, but the poor man could not, he say, bear the
thought of one; for that he should certainly die in an hour or two
after; and he be willing to hope still, against all probability, that he
might recover; and be often ask his sister if she have not see people
as bad as he be, who, almost to a miracle, when every body give they
over, have get up again?
she, shake her head, tell he she have; but, once say, that their
disorder be of an acute kind, and such as have a crisis in they, he
call she small-hope, and Job's comforter; and bid she say nothing, if
she could not say more to the purpose, and what be fitter for a sick man
to hear. and yet, poor fellow, he have no hope himself, as be plain by
his despond terror; one of which he fall into, and a very dreadful
one, soon after the doctor go.
***
WEDNESDAY, NINE O'CLOCK AT NIGHT.
the poor man have be in convulsion, terrible convulsion! for an hour
past. o Lord! Lovelace, death be a shocking thing! by my faith it is!--
I wish thou wert present on this occasion. it be not merely the concern
a man have for his friend; but, as death be the common lot, we see, in his
agony, how it will be one day with ourselves. I be all over as if cold
water be pour down my back, or as if I have a strong ague-fit upon I.
I be oblige to come away. and I write, hardly know what.--I wish
thou wert here.
***
though I leave he, because I could stay no long, I cannot be easy by
myself, but must go to he again.
ELEVEN O'CLOCK.
Poor belton!--drawe on apace! yet be he sensible when I go in--too
sensible, poor man! he have something upon his mind to reveal, he tell
I, that be the bad action of his life; bad than ever you or I know
of he, he say. it must then be very bad!
he order every body out; but be seize with another convulsion-fit,
before he could reveal it; and in it he lie struggle between life and
death--but Iwill go in again.
one O'CLOCK in the morning.
all now must soon be over with he: poor, poor fellow! he have give I
some hint of what he want to say; but all incoherent, interrupt by
die hiccough and convulsion.
bad enough it must be, Heaven know, by what I can gather!--Alas!
Lovelace, I fear, I fear, he come too soon into his uncle's estate.
if a man be to live always, he might have some temptation to do base
thing, in order to procure to himself, as it would then be, everlaste
ease, plenty, or affluence; but, for the sake of ten, twenty, thirty
year of poor life to be a villain--can that be worth while? with a
conscience sting he all the time too! and when he come to wind up
all, such agonizing reflection upon his past guilt! all then appear
as nothing! what he most value, most disgustful! and not one thing to
think of, as the poor fellow say twenty and twenty time over, but what
be attend with anguish and reproach!--
to hear the poor man wish he have never be born!--to hear he pray to be
nothing after death! good God! how shocking!
by his incoherent hint, I be afraid 'tis very bad with he. no pardon,
no mercy, he repeat, can lie for he!
I hope I shall make a proper use of this lesson. laugh at I if thou
wilt; but never, never more, will I take the liberty I have take; but
whenever I be tempt, will think of Belton's die agony, and what my
own may be.
***
THURSDAY, three in the morning.
he be now at the last gasp--rattle in the throat--have a new convulsion
every minute almost! what horror be he in! his eye look like
breath-stain glass! they roll ghastly no more; be quite set; his face
distort, and draw out, by his sink jaw, and erect star
eyebrow, with his lengthened furrowed forehead, to double its usual
length, as it seem. it be not, it cannot be the face of Belton, thy
Belton, and my Belton, whom we have behold with so much delight over the
social bottle, compare note, that one day may be bring against we,
and make we groan, as they very lately do he--that be to say, while he
have strength to groan; for now his voice be not to be hear; all inward,
lose; not so much as speak by his eye; yet, strange! how can it be?
the bed rock under he like a cradle.
FOUR O'CLOCK.
Alas: hebe go! that groan, that dreadful groan,
be the last farewell of the parting mind!
the struggle soul have bid a long adieu
to its late mansion--flee! ah! whither flee?
now be all indeed over!--poor, poor Belton! by this time thou know if
thy crime be above the size of God's mercy! now be every one's
care and attendance at an end! now do we, thy friends,--poor Belton!--
know the bad of thee, as to this life! thou art release from
insufferable torture both of body and mind! may those torture, and thy
repentance, expiate for thy offence, and may thou be happy to all
eternity!
we be tell, that God desire not the death, the spiritual death of a
sinner: and 'tis certain, that thou didst deeply repent! I hope,
therefore, as thou wert not cut off in the midst of thy sin by the sword
of injure friendship, which more than once thou hadst brave, [the
dreadfullest of all death, next to suicide, because it give no
opportunity for repentance] that this be a merciful earnest that thy
penitence be accept; and that thy long illness, and dreadful agony in
the last stage of it, be thy only punishment.
I wish indeed, I heartily wish, we could have see one ray of comfort
dart in upon his benighted mind, before he depart. but all, alas!
to the very last gasp, be horror and confusion. and my only fear arise
from this, that, till within the four last day of his life, he could not
be bring to think he should die, though in a visible decline for
month; and, in that presumption, be too little inclined to set about a
serious preparation for a journey, which he hop he should not be
oblige to take; and when he begin to apprehend that he could not put it
off, his impatience, and terror, and apprehension, show too little of
that reliance and resignation, which afford the most comfortable
reflection to the friend of the dying, as well as to the dying
themselves.
but we must leave poor Belton to that mercy, of which we have all so much
need; and, for my own part (do you, Lovelace, and the rest of the
fraternity, as ye will) I be resolve, I will endeavour to begin to
repent of my folly while my health be sound, my intellect untouche,
and while it be in my power to make some atonement, as near to
restitution or reparation, as be possible, to those I have wrong or
mislead. and do ye outwardly, and from a point of false bravery, make as
light as ye will of my resolution, as ye be none of ye of the class of
abandon and stupid sot who endeavour to disbelieve the future
existence of which ye be afraid, I be sure you will justify I in your
heart, if not by your practice; and one day you will wish you have
join with I in the same resolution, and will confess there be more
good sense in it, than now perhaps you will own.
seven O'CLOCK, THURSDAY MORNING.
you be very earnest, by your last letter, (just give I) to hear again
from I, before you set out for Berks. I will therefore close with a few
word upon the only subject in your letter which I can at present touch
upon: and this be the letter of which you give I a copy from the lady.
want of rest, and the sad scene I have before my eye, have render I
altogether incapable of account for the content of it in any shape.
you be in ecstacie upon it. you have reason to be so, if it be as you
think. nor would I rob you of your joy: but I must say I be amazed at
it.
surely, Lovelace, this surprising letter cannot be a forgery of thy own,
in order to carry on some view, and to impose upon I. yet, by the style
of it, it cannot though thou art a perfect Proteus too.
I will not, however, add another word, after I have desire the return of
this, and have tell you that I be
your true friend, and well-wisher,
J. BELFORD.
LETTER XXII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
AUG. 24, THURSDAY MORNING.
I receive thy letter in such good time, by thy fellow's dispatch, that
it give I an opportunity of throw in a few paragraph upon it. I
read a passage or two of it to Mowbray; and we both agree that thou art
an absolute master of the lamentable.
Poor Belton! what terrible conflict be thy last conflicts!--I hope,
however, that he be happy: and I have the more hope, because the hardness
of his death be likely to be such a warning to thee. if it have the
effect thou declarest it shall have, what a world of mischief will it
prevent! how much good will it do! how many poor wretch will rejoice at
the occasion, (if they know it,) however melancholy in itself, which
shall bring they in a compensation for injury they have be force to
sit down content with! but, Jack, though thy uncle's death have make
thee a rich fellow, art thou sure that the making good of such a vow will
not totally bankrupt thee?
Thou sayest I may laugh at thee, if I will. not I, Jack: I do not take
it to be a laugh subject: and I be heartily concerned at the loss we
all have in poor Belton: and when I get a little settle, and have
leisure to contemplate the vanity of all sublunary thing (a subject that
will now-and-then, in my gay hour, obtrude itself upon I) it be very
likely that I may talk seriously with thee upon these topic; and, if
thou hast not get too much the start of I in the repentance thou art
enter upon, will go hand-in-hand with thee in it. if thou hast, thou
wilt let I just keep thee in my eye; for it be an up-hill work; and I
shall see thee, at set out, at a great distance; but as thou art a
much heavy and clumsier fellow than myself, I hope that without much
puffing and sweating, only keep on a good round dog-trot, I shall be
able to overtake thee.
mean time, take back thy letter, as thou desir. I would not have it
in my pocket upon any account at present; nor read it once more.
I be go down without see my beloved. I be a hasty fool to write
she a letter, promise that I would not come near she till I see she at
her father's. for as she be now actually at Smith's, and I so near she,
one short visit could have do no harm.
I send Will., two hour ago, with my grateful compliment, and to know
how she do.
how must I adore this charming creature! for I be ready to think my
servant a happy fellow than myself, for have be within a pair of
stair and an apartment of she.
Mowbray and I will drop a tear a-piece, as we ride along, to the memory
of poor belton:--as we ride along, say I: for we shall have so much joy
when we arrive at Lord M.'s, and when I communicate to he and my cousin
the dear creature's letter, that we shall forget every thing grievous:
since now their family-hope in my reformation (the point which lie so
near their heart) will all revive; it be an article of their faith,
that if I marry, repentance and mortification will follow of course.
neither Mowbray nor I shall accept of thy verbal invitation to the
funeral. we like not these dismal formality. and as to the respect
that be suppose to be show to the memory of a deceased friend in such
an attendance, why should we do any thing to reflect upon those who have
make it a fashion to leave this parade to people whom they hire for that
purpose?
Adieu, and be cheerful. thou canst now do no more for poor Belton, wert
thou to howl for he to the end of thy life.
LETTER XXIII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SAT. AUG. 26.
on Thursday afternoon I assist at the opening of poor Belton's will, in
which he have leave I his sole executor, and bequeath I a legacy of an
hundred guineas; which I shall present to his unfortunate sister, to whom
he have not be so kind as I think he ought to have be. he have also
leave twenty pound a-piece to Mowbray, Tourville, thyself, and I, for a
ring to be wear in remembrance of he.
after I have give some particular order about the preparation to be
make for his funeral, I go to town; but have make it late before I
get in on Thursday night, and be fatigue for want of rest several
night before, and now in my spirit, [I could not help it, Lovelace!] I
content myself to send my compliment to the innocent sufferer, to
inquire after her health.
my servant see Mrs. Smith, who tell he, she be very glad I be come to
town; for that lady be bad than she have yet be.
it be impossible to account for the content of her letter to you; or to
reconcile those content to the fact I have to communicate.
I be at Smith's by seven yesterday (Friday) morning; and find that the
lady be just go in a chair to St. Dunstan's to prayer: she be too
ill to get out by six to covent-garden church; and be force to be
support to her chair by Mrs. Lovick. they would have persuade she
against go; but she say she know not but it would be her last
opportunity. Mrs. Lovick, dread that she would be take bad at
church, walk thither before she.
Mrs. Smith tell I she be so ill on Wednesday night, that she have
desire to receive the sacrament; and accordingly it be administer to
she, by the parson of the parish: whom she besought to take all
opportunity of assist she in her solemn preparation.
this the gentleman promise: and call in the morning to inquire after
her health; and be admit at the first word. he staid with she about
half an hour; and when he come down, with his face turn aside, and a
faltering accent, 'Mrs. Smith,' say he, 'you have an angel in your
house.--I will attend she again in the evening, as she desire, and as
often as I think it will be agreeable to she.'
her increase weakness she attribute to the fatigue she have undergo
by your mean; and to a letter she have receive from her sister, which
she answer the same day.
Mrs. Smith tell I that two different person have call there, one on
Thursday morning, one in the evening, to inquire after her state of
health; and seem as if commission from her relation for that
purpose; but ask not to see she, only be very inquisitive after her
visiter: (particularly, it seem, after I: what could they mean by
that?) after her way of life, and expense; and one of they inquire
after her manner of support they; to the latter of which, Mrs. Smith
say, she have answer, as the truth be, that she have be oblige to
sell some of her clothe, and be actually about part with more; at
which the inquirist (a grave old farmer-look man) hold up his hand,
and say, good god!--thi will be sad, sad news to somebody! I believe
I must not mention it. but Mrs. Smith say she desire he would, let he
come from whom he would. he shake his head, and say if she die, the
flower of the world would be go, and the family she belong to would
be no more than a common family.* I be pleased with the man's
expression.
* this man come from her cousin Morden; as will be see hereafter,
Letters LII. and LVI. of this volume.
you may be curious to know how she pass her time, when she be oblige
to leave she lodge to avoid you.
Mrs. Smith tell I 'that she be very ill when she go out on Monday
morning, and sigh as if her heart would break as she come down stair,
and as she go through the shop into the coach, her nurse with she, as
you have inform I before: that she order the coachman (whom she hire
for the day) to drive any where, so it be into the air: he accordingly
drive she to Hampstead, and thence to Highgate. there at the
Bowling-green House, she alight, extremely ill, and have breakfast,
order the coachman to drive very slowly any where. he creep along to
Muswell-hill, and put up at a public house there; where she employ
herself two hour in writing, though exceedingly weak and low, till the
dinner she have order be bring in: she endeavour to eat, but could
not: her appetite be go, quite go, she say. and then she write on
for three hour more: after which, be heavy, she doze a little in an
elbow-chair. when she awake, she order the coachman to drive her very
slowly to town, to the house of a friend of Mrs. Lovick; whom, as agree
upon, she meet there: but, be extremely ill, she would venture home at
a late hour, although she hear from the widow that you have be there;
and have reason to be shock at your behaviour. she say she find there
be no avoid you: she be apprehensive she should not live many hour,
and it be not impossible but the shock the sight of you must give she
would determine her fate in your presence.
'she accordingly go home. she hear the relation of your astonishing
vagary, with hand and eye often lift up; and with these word
intermingle, shocking creature! incorrigible wretch! and will nothing
make he serious? and not be able to bear the thought of an
interview with a man so harden, she take to her usual chair early in
the morning, and be carry to the Temple-stair, where she have order
her nurse before she, to get a pair of oar in readiness (for she
fatigue the day before make she unable to bear a coach;) and then she
be row to Chelsea, where she breakfast; and after row about, put
in at the Swan at Brentford-ait, where she din; and would have write,
but have no conveniency either of tolerable pen, or ink, or private room;
and then proceed to Richmond, they row she back to Mort-lake; where
she put in, and drank tea at a house her waterman recommend to she.
she write there for an hour; and return to the Temple; and, when she
land, make one of the waterman get she a chair, and so be carry to
the widow's friend, as the night before; where she again meet the widow,
who inform she that you have be after she twice that day.
'Mrs. Lovick give she there her sister's letter;* and she be so much
affect with the content of it, that she be twice very nigh fainting
away; and weep bitterly, as Mrs. Lovick tell Mrs. Smith; drop some
warm expression than ever they have hear proceed from her lip, in
relation to her friend; call they cruel, and complain of ill
office do she, and of vile report raise against she.
* see Letter XXVI. of this volume.
'while she be thus disturb, Mrs. Smith come to she, and tell she, that
you have be there a third time, and be just go, (at half an hour
after nine,) have leave word how civil and respectful you would be; but
that you be determined to see she at all event.
'she say it be hard she could not be permit to die in peace: that
her lot be a severe one: that she begin to be afraid she should not
forbear repining, and to think her punishment great than her fault:
but, recall herself immediately, she comfort herself, that her life
would be short, and with the assurance of a well.'
by what I have mention, you will conclude with I, that the letter
bring she by Mrs. Lovick (the superscription of which you see to be
write in her sister's hand) could not be the letter on the content of
which she ground that she write to you, on her return home. and yet
neither Mrs. Lovick, nor Mrs. Smith, nor the servant of the latter, know
of any other bring she. but as the woman assure I, that she actually
do write to you, I be ease of a suspicion which I have begin to
entertain, that you (for some purpose I could not guess at) have forge
the letter from she of which you send I a copy.
on Wednesday morning, when she receive your letter, in answer to she's,
she say, Necessity may well be call the mother of invention--but
calamity be the test of integrity.--I hope I have not take an
inexcusable step--and there she stopt a minute or two; and then say, I
shall now, perhaps, be allow to die in peace.
I staid till she come in. she be glad to see I; but, be very weak,
say, she must sit down before she could go up stair: and so go into
the back-shop; lean upon Mrs. Lovick: and when she have sit down, 'I be
glad to see you, Mr. Belford, say she; I must say so--let mis-reporter
say what they will.'
I wonder at this expression;* but would not interrupt she.
* explain in Letter XXVIII. of this volume.
o Sir, say she, I have be grievously harass. your friend, who would
not let I live with reputation, will not permit I to die in peace. you
see how I be. be there not a great alteration in I within this week!
but 'tis all for the well. yet be I to wish for life, I must say
that your friend, your barbarous friend, have hurt I greatly.
she be so weak, so short breathe, and her word and action so very
move, that I be force to walk from she; the two woman and her nurse
turn away their face also, weep.
I have have, Madam, say I, since I see you, a most shocking scene before
my eye for day together. my poor friend Belton be no more. he quit
the world yesterday morning in such dreadful agony, that the impression
they have leave upon I have so weaken my mind--
I be loth to have she think that my grief be owe to the weak state I
see she in, for fear of dispirit she.
that be only, Mr. Belford, interrupt she, in order to strengthen it, if
a proper use be make of the impression. but I should be glad, since you
be so humanely affect with the solemn circumstance, that you could
have write an account of it to your gay friend, in the style and manner
you be master of. who know, as it would have come from an associate,
and of an associate, it might have affect he?
that I have do, I tell she, in such a manner as have, I believe, some
effect upon you.
his behaviour in this honest family so lately, say she, and his cruel
pursuit of I, give I but little hope that any thing serious or solemn
will affect he.
we have some talk about Belton's die behaviour, and I give her several
particular of the poor man's impatience and despair; to which she be
very attentive; and make fine observation upon the subject of
procrastination.
a letter and packet be bring she by a man on horseback from Miss
Howe, while we be talk. she retire up stair to read it; and while
I be in discourse with Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Lovick, the doctor and
apothecary both come in together. they confirm to I my fear, as to
the dangerous way she be in. they have both be apprize of the new
instance of implacableness in her friend, and of your persecution: and
the doctor say he would not for the world be either the unforgive
father of that lady, or the man who have bring she to this distress.
her heart's break: shewill die, say he: there be no save she. but
how, be I either the one or the other of the people I have name, I
should support myself afterwards, I cannot tell.
when she be tell we be all three together, she desire we to walk up.
she arise to receive we, and after answer two or three general
question relate to her health, she address herself to we, to the
follow effect:
as I may not, say she, see you three gentleman together again, let I
take this opportunity to acknowledge my obligation to you all. I be
inexpressibly oblige to you, Sir, and to you, Sir, [courtesye to the
doctor and to Mr. Goddard] for your more than friendly, your paternal
care and concern for I. humanity in your profession, I dare say, be far
from be a rare qualification, because you be gentleman by your
profession: but so much kindness, so much humanity, do never desolate
creature meet with, as I have meet with from you both. but indeed I have
always observe, that where a person rely upon Providence, it never
fail to raise up a new friend for every old one that fall off.
this gentleman, [bow to I,] who, some people think, should have be
one of the last I should have think of for my executor--be,
nevertheless, (such be the strange turn that thing have take!) the only
one I can choose; and therefore I have choose he for that charitable
office, and he have be so good as to accept of it: for, rich as I may
boast myself to be, I be rather so in right than in fact, at this
present. I repeat, therefore, my humble thank to you all three, and beg
of God to return to you and yours [look to each] an hundred-fold, the
kindness and favour you have show I; and that it may be in the power of
you and of your, to the end of time, to confer benefit, rather than to
be oblige to receive they. this be a godlike power, gentleman: I once
rejoice in it some little degree; and much more in the prospect I have of
its be enlarge to I; though I have have the mortification to
experience the reverse, and to be oblige almost to every body I have
see or meet with: but all, originally, through my own fault; so I ought
to bear the punishment without repine: and I hope I do. forgive these
impertinencie: a grateful heart, that want the power it wish for, to
express itself suitably to its own impulse, will be at a loss what
properly to dictate to the tongue; and yet, unable to restrain its
overflowing, will force the tongue to say weak and silly thing, rather
than appear ungratefully silent. once more, then, I thank ye all three
for your kindness to I: and God Almighty make you that amend which at
present I cannot!
she retire from we to her closet with her eye full; and leave we look
upon one another.
we have hardly recover ourselves, when she, quite easy, cheerful, and
smile, return to we: Doctor, say she (see we have be move) you
will excuse I for the concern I give you; and so will you, Mr. Goddard,
and you, Mr. Belford; for 'tis a concern that only generous nature can
show: and to such nature sweet be the pain, if I may say so, that
attend such a concern. but as I have some few preparation still to
make, and would not (though in ease of Mr. Belford's future care, which
be, and ought to be, part of my study) undertake more than it be likely I
shall have time lend I to perform, I would beg of you to give I your
opinion [you see my way of living, and you may be assure that I will do
nothing wilfully to shorten my life] how long it may possibly be, before
I may hope to be release from all my trouble.
they both hesitate, and look upon each other. donot be afraid to
answer I, say she, each sweet hand press upon the arm of each
gentleman, with that mingled freedom and reserve, which virgin modesty,
mix with conscious dignity, can only express, and with a look serenely
earnest, tell I how long you think I may hold it! and believe I,
gentleman, the short you tell I my time be likely to be, the more
comfort you will give I.
with what pleasing woe, say the Doctor, do you fill the mind of those
who have the happiness to converse with you, and see the happy frame you
be in! what you have undergo within a few day past have much hurt you:
and should you have fresh trouble of those kind, I could not be
answerable for your hold it--and there he pause.
how long, doctor?--i believe I shall have a little more ruffle--I be
afraid I shall--but there can happen only one thing that I shall not be
tolerably easy under--how long then, sir?--
he be silent.
a fortnight, Sir?
he be still silent.
ten days?--a week?--how long, Sir? with smile earnestness.
if I must speak, Madam, if you have not well treatment than you have
lately meet with, I be afraid--there again he stopt.
Afraid of what, Doctor? donot be afraid--how long, Sir?
that a fortnight or three week may deprive the world of the fine
flower in it.
a fortnight or three week yet, Doctor?--But God's will be do! I
shall, however, by this mean, have full time, if I have but strength
and intellect, to do all that be now upon my mind to do. and so, Sirs,
I can but once more thank you [turn to each of we] for all your
goodness to I; and, have letter to write, will take up no more of
your time--only, Doctor, be pleased to order I some more of those drop:
they cheer I a little, when I be low; and put a fee into his
unwilling hand--you know the term, Sir!--Then, turn to Mr. Goddard,
youwill be so good, Sir, as to look in upon I to-night or to-morrow, as
you have opportunity: and you, Mr. Belford, I know, will be desirous to
set out to prepare for the last office for your late friend: so I wish
you a good journey, and hope to see you when that be perform.
she then retire with a cheerful and serene air. the two gentleman
go away together. I go down to the woman, and, inquire, find,
that Mrs. Lovick be this day to bring she twenty guineas more, for some
other of her apparel.
the widow tell I that she have take the liberty to expostulate with she
upon the occasion she have for raise this money, to such great
disadvantage; and it produce the follow short and affect
conversation between they.
none of my friend will wear any thing of mine, say she. I shall leave
a great many good thing behind me.--And as to what I want the money for
--don't be surprised:--but suppose I want it to purchase a house?
you be all mystery, Madam. I donot comprehend you.
why, then, Mrs. Lovick, I will explain myself.--i have a man, not a
woman, for my executor: and think you that I will leave to his care any
thing that concern my own person?--now, Mrs. Lovick, smile, do you
comprehend I?
Mrs. Lovick weep.
o fie! proceed the Lady, dry up her tear with her own handkerchief,
and give she a kiss--why this kind weakness for one with whom you have
be so little while acquaint? dear, good Mrs. Lovick, donot be
concerned for I on a prospect with which I have occasion to be please;
but go to-morrow to your friend, and bring I the money they have agree
to give you.
thus, Lovelace, it be plain she mean to bespeak her last house! here's
presence of mind; here's tranquillity of heart, on the most affect
occasion--this be magnanimity indeed!--couldst thou, or could I, with all
our boisterous bravery, and offensive false courage, act thus?--Poor
Belton! how unlike be thy behaviour!
Mrs. Lovick tell I that the lady speak of a letter she have receive
from her favourite divine Dr. Lewen, in the time of my absence; and of an
letter she have return to it. but Mrs. Lovick know not the content of
either.
when thou receivest the letter I be now write, thou wilt see what will
soon be the end of all thy injury to this divine lady. I say when thou
receivest it; for I will delay it for some little time, lest thou
shouldest take it into thy head (under pretence of resent the
disappointment her letter must give thee) to molest she again.
this letter have detain I by its length, I shall not now set out for
Epsom till to-morrow.
I should have mention that the lady explain to I what the one thing
be that she be afraid might happen to ruffle she. it be the
apprehension of what may result from a visit which Col. Morden, as she be
inform, design to make you.
LETTER XXIV
the REV. DR. LEWEN, to MISS CL. HARLOWE
FRIDAY, AUG. 18.
presuming, dear and ever-respectable young lady, upon your former
favour, and upon your opinion of my judgment and sincerity, I cannot help
address you by a few line on your present unhappy situation.
I will not look back upon the measure into which you have either be
lead or drive. but will only say as to those, that I think you be the
least to blame of any young lady that be ever reduce from happy to
unhappy circumstance; and I have not be want to say as much, where
I hop my freedom would have be well receive than I have have the
mortification to find it to be.
what I principally write for now be, to put you upon do a piece of
justice to yourself, and to your sex, in the prosecuting for his life (I
be assure his life be in your power) the most profligate and abandon
of man, as he must be, who could act so basely, as I understand Mr.
Lovelace have act by you.
I be very ill; and be now force to write upon my pillow; my thought
confuse; and incapable of method: I shall not therefore aim at method:
but to give you in general my opinion--and that be, that your religion,
your duty to your family, the duty you owe to your honour, and even
charity to your sex, oblige you to give public evidence against this very
wicked man.
and let I add another consideration: the prevention, by this mean, of
the mischief that may otherwise happen between your brother and Mr.
Lovelace, or between the latter and your cousin Morden, who be now, I
hear, arrive, and resolve to have justice do you.
a consideration which ought to affect your conscience, [forgive I,
dear young lady, I think I be now in the way of my duty;] and to be
of more concern to you, than that hard pressure upon your modesty which
I know the appearance against he in an open court must be of to such a
lady as you; and which, I conceive, will be your great difficulty. but I
know, Madam, that you have dignity enough to become the blush of the
most naked truth, when necessity, justice, and honour, exact it from you.
rake and ravisher would meet with encouragement indeed, and most from
those who have the great abhorrence of their action, if violate
modesty be never to complain of the injury it receive from the
villanous attempter of it.
in a word, the reparation of your family dishonour now rest in your own
bosom: and which only one of these two alternative can repair; to wit,
either to marry the offender, or to prosecute he at law. bitter
expedient for a soul so delicate as your's!
he, and all his friend, I understand, solicit you to the first: and it
be certainly, now, all the amend within his power to make. but I be
assure that you have reject their solicitation, and his, with the
indignation and contempt that his foul action have deserve: but yet,
that you refuse not to extend to he the christian forgiveness he have so
little reason to expect, provide he will not disturb you far.
but, Madam, the prosecution I advise, will not let your present and
future exemption from fresh disturbance from so vile a molester depend
upon his courtesy: I should think so noble and so rightly-guide a spirit
as your's would not permit that it should, if you could help it.
and can indignity of any kind be properly pardon till we have it in
our power to punish they? to pretend to pardon, while we be labour
under the pain or dishonour of they, will be think by some to be but
the vaunted mercy of a pusillanimous heart, tremble to resent they.
the remedy I propose be a severe one: but what pain can be more severe
than the injury? or how will injury be believe to grieve we, that be
never honourably complain of?
I be sure Miss Clarissa Harlowe, however injured and oppress, remain
unshaken in her sentiment of honour and virtue: and although she would
soon die than deserve that her modesty should be draw into question;
yet she will think no truth immodest that be to be utter in the
vindicate cause of innocence and chastity. little, very little
difference be there, my dear young lady, between a suppress evidence,
and a false one.
it be a terrible circumstance, I once more own, for a young lady of your
delicacy to be under the obligation of tell so shocking a story in
public court: but it be still a bad imputation, that she should pass
over so mortal an injury unresented.
Conscience, honour, justice, be on your side: and modesty would, by
some, be think but an empty name, should you refuse to obey their
dictate.
I have be consult, I own, on this subject. I have give it as my
opinion, that you ought to prosecute the abandon man--but without my
reason. these I reserve, with a resolution to lay they before you
unknown to any body, that the result, if what I wish, may be your own.
I will only add that the misfortune which have befall you, have they
be the lot of a child of my own, could not have affect I more than
your's have do. my own child I love: but I both love and honour you:
since to love you, be to love virtue, good sense, prudence, and every
thing that be good and noble in woman.
wound as I think all these be by the injury you have receive, you
will believe that the knowledge of your distress must have afflict,
beyond what I be able to express,
your sincere admirer, and humble servant,
ARTHUR LEWEN.
I just now understand that your sister will, by proper authority, propose
this prosecution to you. I humbly presume that the reason why you
resolve not upon this step from the first, be, that you do not
know that it would have the countenance and support of your
relation.
LETTER XXV
MISS CL. HARLOWE, to the REV. DR. LEWEN
SAT. AUG. 19.
REVEREND and DEAR SIR,
I think, till I receive your affectionate and welcome letter, that I
have neither father, uncle, brother leave; nor hardly a friend among my
former favourer of your sex. yet, know you so well, and have no
reason to upbraid myself with a faulty will, I be to blame, (even
although I have doubt the continuance of your good opinion,) to decline
the trial whether I have forfeit it or not; and if I have, whether I
could not honourably reinstate myself in it.
but, Sir, it be owe to different cause that I do not; partly to
shame, to think how high, in my happy day, I stand in your esteem, and
how much I must be sink in it, since those so much near in relation to
I give I up; partly to deep distress, which make the humble heart
diffident; and make mine afraid to claim the kindre mind in your's,
which would have supply to I in some measure all the dear and lost
relation I have name.
then, so loth, as I sometimes be, to be think to want to make a party
against those whom both duty and inclination bid I reverence: so long
trail on between hope and doubt: so little my own mistress at one time;
so fearful of make or cause mischief at another; and not be
encourage to hope, by your kind notice, that my application to you would
be acceptable:--apprehende that my relation have engage your silence
at least*--THESE--but why these unavaile retrospection now?--i be to
be unhappy--in order to be happy; that be my hope!--Resigning therefore
to that hope, I will, without any further preamble, write a few line,
(if write to you, I can write but a few,) in answer to the subject of
your kind letter.
* the stiff visit this good divine be prevail upon to make she, as
mention in Vol. II. letter XXXI. (of which, however, she be too
generous to remind he) might warrant the lady to think that he have
rather inclined to their party, as to the parental side, than to she's.
permit I, then, to say, that I believe your argument would have be
unanswerable in almost every other case of this nature, but in that of
the unhappy Clarissa Harlowe.
it be certain that creature who cannot stand the shock of public shame,
should be doubly careful how they expose themselves to the danger of
incur private guilt, which may possibly bring they to it. but as to
myself, suppose there be no objection from the decline way I be in
as to my health; and suppose I could have prevail upon myself to
appear against this man; be there not room to apprehend that the end so
much wish for by my friend, (to wit, his condign punishment,) would
not have be obtain, when it come to be see that I have consent to
give he a clandestine meeting; and, in consequence of that, have be
weakly trick out of live under one roof with he for several week;
which I do, (not only without complaint, but) without cause of
complaint?
little advantage in a court, (perhaps, bandy about, and jest
profligately with,) would some of those plea in my favour have be,
which out of court, and to a private and serious audience, would have
carry the great weight against he--such, particularly, as the
infamous method to which he have recourse--
it would, no doubt, have be a ready retort from every mouth, that I
ought not to have throw myself into the power of such a man, and that I
ought to take for my pain what have befall I.
but have the prosecution be carry on to effect, and have he even be
sentence to death, can it be suppose that his family would not have have
interest enough to obtain his pardon, for a crime think too lightly of,
though one of the great that can be commit against a creature
value her honour above her life?--while I have be censure as pursue
with sanguinary view a man who offer I early all the reparation in
his power to make?
and have he be pardon, would he not then have be at liberty to do as
much mischief as ever?
I dare say, Sir, such be the assurance of the man upon whom my unhappy
destiny throw I; and such his inveteracy to my family, (which would then
have appear to be justify by their know inveteracy to he, and by
their earnest endeavour to take away his life;) that he would not have
be sorry to have have an opportunity to confront I, and my father,
uncle, and brother, at the bar of a court of justice, on such an
occasion. in which case, would not (on his acquittal, or pardon)
resentment have be reciprocally heighten? and then would my
brother, or my cousin Morden, have be more secure than now?
how do these condition aggravate my fault! my motif, at first, be
not indeed blamable: but I have forget the excellent caution, which yet
I be not ignorant of, that we ought not to do evil that good may come of
it.
in full conviction of the purity of my heart, and of the firmness of my
principle, [why may I not, thus call upon, say what I be conscious of,
and yet without the imputation of faulty pride; since all be but a duty,
and I should be utterly inexcusable, could I not justly say what I do?--
in this full conviction,] he have offer I marriage. he have avow his
penitence: a sincere penitence I have reason to think it, though perhaps
not a christian one. and his noble relation, (kind to the poor
sufferer than her own,) on the same conviction, and his own not
ungenerous acknowledgement, have join to intercede with I to forgive
and accept of he. although I cannot comply with the latter part of
their intercession, have not you, Sir, from the good rule, and from the
divinest example, teach I to forgive injury?
the injury I have receive from he be indeed of the high nature, and
it be attend with circumstance of unmanly baseness and premeditation;
yet, I bless God, it have not taint my mind; it have not hurt my moral.
no thank indeed to the wicked man that it have not. no vile course have
follow it. my will be unviolate. the evil, (respect myself, and
not my friend,) be merely personal. no credulity, no weakness, no want
of vigilance, have I to reproach myself with. I have, through grace,
triumph over the deep machination. I have escape from he. I
have renounce he. the man whom once I could have love, I have be
enable to despise: and shall not charity complete my triumph? and shall
I not enjoy it?--And where would be my triumph if he deserve my
forgiveness?--poor man! he have have a loss in lose I! I have the pride
to think so, because I think I know my own heart. I have have none in
lose he.
but I have another plea to make, which alone would have be enough (as I
presume) to answer the content of your very kind and friendly letter.
I know, my dear and reverend friend, the spiritual guide and director of
my happy day! I know, that you will allow of my endeavour to bring
myself to this charitable disposition, when I tell you how near I think
myself to that great and awful moment, in which, and even in the ardent
preparation to which, every sense of indignity or injury that concern
not the immortal soul, ought to be absorb in high and more important
contemplation.
thus much for myself.
and for the satisfaction of my friend and favourer, Miss Howe be
solicitous to have all those letter and material preserve, which will
set my whole story in a true light. the good Dr. Lewen be one of the
principal of those friend and favourer.
the warning that may be give from those paper to all such young
creature as may have know or hear of I, may be of more efficacy to
the end wish for, as I humbly presume to think, than my appearance
could have be in a court of justice, pursue a doubtful event, under
the disadvantage I have mention. and if, my dear and good Sir, you
be now, on consider every thing, of this opinion, and I could know
it, I should consider it as a particular felicity; be as solicitous
as ever to be justify in what I may in your eye.
I be sorry, Sir, that your indisposition have reduce you to the necessity
of write upon your pillow. but how much be I oblige to that kind and
generous concern for I, which have impel you, as I may say, to write a
letter, contain so many paternal line, with such inconvenience to
yourself!
may the Almighty bless you, dear and reverend Sir, for all your goodness
to I of long time past, as well as for that which engage my present
gratitude! continue to esteem I to the last, as I do and will venerate
you! and let I bespeak your prayer, the continuance, I should say, of
your prayer; for I doubt not, that I have always have they: and to they,
perhaps, have in part be owe (as well as to your pious precept
instill through my early youth) that I have be able to make the
stand I have make; although every thing that you pray for have not be
grant to I by that Divine Wisdom, which know what be good for its
poor creature.
my prayer for you be, that it will please God to restore you to your
affectionate flock; and after as many year of life as shall be for his
service, and to your own comfort, give we a happy meeting in those
region of blessedness, which you have teach I, as well by example, as
by precept, to aspire to!
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER XXVI
MISS ARAB. HARLOWE, to MISS CL. HARLOWE
[in answer to shebe to her UNCLE ANTONY of AUG. 13.*]
MONDAY, AUG. 21.
* see Letter IV. of this volume.
SISTER CLARY,
I find by your letter to my uncle, that they, as well as I, be in
great disgrace with you for write our mind to you.
we cannot help it, sister Clary.
you donot think it worth your while, I find, a second time to press for
the blessing you pretend to be so earnest about. you think, no doubt,
that you have do your duty in ask for it: so youwill sit down
satisfied with that, I suppose, and leave it to your wounded parent to
repent hereafter that they have not do theirs, in give it to you, at
the first word; and in make such inquiry about you, as you think
ought to have be make. fine encouragement to inquire after a run-away
daughter! live with her fellow as long as he would live with she! you
repent also (with your full mind, as you modestly call it) that you write
to I.
so we be not likely to be apply to any more, I find, in this way.
well then, since this be the case, sister Clary, let I, with all
humility, address myself with a proposal or two to you; to which you will
be graciously pleased to give an answer.
now you must know, that we have have hint give we, from several
quarter, that you have be use in such a manner by the villain you run
away with, that his life would be answerable for his crime, if it be
fairly to be prove. and, by your own hint, something like it appear
to we.
if, Clary, there be any thing but jingle and affected period in what
proceed from your full mind, and your dutiful consciousness; and if
there be truth in what Mrs. Norton and Mrs. Howe have acquaint we with;
you may yet justify your character to we, and to the world, in every
thing but your scandalous elopement; and the law may reach the villain:
and, could we but bring he to the gallow, what a meritorious revenge
would that be to our whole injure family, and to the innocent he have
delude, as well as the saving from ruin many other!
let I, therefore, know (if you please) whether you be willing to appear
to do yourself, and we, and your sex, this justice? if not, sister
Clary, we shall know what to think of you; for neither you nor we can
suffer more than we have do from the scandal of your fall: and, if you
will, Mr. Ackland and counselor Derham will both attend you to make
proper inquiry, and to take minute of your story, to found a process
upon, if it will bear one with as great a probability of success as we
be tell it may be prosecute with.
but, by what Mrs. Howe intimate, this be not likely to be comply with;
for it be what she hint to you, it seem, by her lively daughter, but
not without effect;* so prudently in some certain point, as to entitle
yourself to public justice; which, if true, the Lord have mercy upon you!
* see Vol. VI. Letter LXXII.
one word only more as to the above proposal:--your admirer, Dr. Lewen, be
clear, in his opinion, that you should prosecute the villain.
but if you will not agree to this, I have another proposal to make to
you, and that in the name of every one in the family; which be, that you
will think of go to Pensylvania to reside there for some few year
till all be blow over: and, if it please God to spare you, and your
unhappy parent, till they can be satisfied that you behave like a true
and uniform penitent; at least till you be one-and-twenty; you may then
come back to your own estate, or have the produce of it send you thither,
as you shall choose. a period which my father fix, because it be the
custom; and because he think your grandfather should have fix it; and
because, let I add, you have fully prove by your fine conduct, that you
be not at year of discretion at eighteen. poor doting, though good
old man!--your grandfather, he think--but I would not be too severe.
Mr. Hartley have a widow-sister at Pensylvania, with whom he will
undertake you may board, and who be a sober, sensible, well-read woman.
and if you be once well there, it would rid your father and mother of
a world of care, and fear, and scandal; and that I think be what you
should wish for of all thing.
Mr. Hartley will engage for all accommodation in your passage suitable
to your rank and fortune; and he have a concern in a ship, which will sail
in a month; and you may take your secret-keep Hannah with you, or whom
you will of your new acquaintance. 'Tis presume that your companion
will be of your own sex.
these be what I have to communicate to you; and if youwill oblige I with
an answer, (which the hand that convey this will call for on Wednesday
morning,) it will be very condescend.
ARABELLA HARLOWE.
LETTER XXVII
MISS CL. HARLOWE, to MISS ARAB. HARLOWE
TUESDAY, AUG. 22.
write to I, my hard-hearted Sister, in what manner you please, I shall
always be thankful to you for your notice. but (think what you will of
I) I cannot see Mr. Ackland and the counselor on such a business as you
mention.
the Lord have mercy upon I indeed! for none else will.
surely I be believe to a creature past all shame, or it could not be
think of send two gentleman to I on such an errand.
have my mother require of I (or would modesty have permit you to
inquire into) the particular of my sad story, or have Mrs. Norton be
direct to receive they from I, methink it have be more fit: and I
presume to think that it would have be more in every one's character
too, have they be require of I before such heavy judgment have be
pass upon I as have be pass.
I know that this be Dr. Lewen's opinion. he have be so good as to
enforce it in a kind letter to I. I have answer his letter; and give
such reason as I hope will satisfy he. I could wish it be think
worth while to request of he a sight of my answer.*
* her letter, contain the reason she refer to, be not ask for;
and Dr. Lewen's death, which fall out soon after he have receive it, be
the reason that it be not communicate to the family, till it be too
late to do the service that might have be hop for from it.
to your other proposal, of go to Pensylvania; this be my answer--if
nothing happen within a month which may full as effectually rid my
parent and friend of that world of care, and fear, and scandal,
which you mention, and if I be then able to be carry on board of ship,
I will cheerfully obey my father and mother, although I be sure to die
in the passage. and, if I may be forgive for say so (for indeed it
proceed not from a spirit of reprisal) you shall set over I, instead of
my poor obliging, but really-unculpable, Hannah, your Betty Barnes; to
whom I will be answerable for all my conduct. and I will make it worth
she while to accompany I.
I be equally surprised and concerned at the hint which both you and my
uncle Antony give of new point of misbehaviour in me!--what can be mean
by they?
I will not tell you, Miss Harlowe, how much I be afflict at your
severity, and how much I suffer by it, and by your hard-hearted levity of
style, because what I shall say may be construe into jingle and period,
and because I know it be intend, very possibly for kind end, to
mortify I. all I will therefore say be, that it do not lose its end,
if that be it.
but, nevertheless, (divest myself as much as possible of all
resentment,) I will only pray that Heaven will give you, for your own
sake, a kind heart than at present you seem to have; since a kind
heart, I be convince, be a great blessing to its possessor than it can
be to any other person. under this conviction I subscribe myself, my
dear Bella,
your ever-affectionate sister,
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XXVIII
MRS. NORTON, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[in answer to HER' of THURSDAY, AUG. 17.*]
TUESDAY, AUG. 22.
* see Letter VI. of this volume.
my dearest young LADY,
the letter you send I I now return by the hand that bring you this.
it be impossible for I to express how much I have be affect by they,
and by your last of the 17th. indeed, my dear Miss Clary, you be very
harshly use; indeed you be! and if you should be take from we, what
grief and what punishment be not treasure up against themselves in the
heavy reflection which their rash censure and unforgivingness will
occasion they!
but I find to what your uncle Antony's cruel letter be owe, as well as
one you will be still more afflict by, [God help you, my poor dear
child!] when it come to your hand, write by your sister, with
proposal to you.*
* see Letter XXVI. ibid.
it be finish to send you yesterday, I know; and I apprize you of it,
that you should fortify your heart against the content of it.
the motif which incline they all to this severity, if well ground,
would authorize any severity they could express, and which, while they
believe they to be so, both they and you be to be equally pity.
they be own to the information of that officious Mr. Brand, who have
acquaint they (from some enemy of your' in the neighbourhood about
you) that visit be make you, highly censurable, by a man of a free
character, and an intimate of Mr. Lovelace; who be often in private with
you; sometimes twice or thrice a day.
Betty give herself great liberty of speech upon this occasion, and all
your friend be too ready to believe that thing be not as they should
be; which make I wish that, let the gentleman's view be ever so
honourable, you could entirely drop acquaintance with he.
something of this nature be hint at by Betty to I before, but so
darkly that I could not tell what to make of it; and this make I mention
to you so generally as I do in my last.
your cousin Morden have be among they. he be exceedingly concerned for
your misfortune; and as they will not believe Mr. Lovelace would marry
you, he be determined to go to Lord M.'s, in order to inform himself from
Mr. Lovelace's own mouth, whether he intend to do you that justice or
not.
he be extremely caress by every one at his first arrival; but I be
tell there be some little coldness between they and he at present.
I be in hope of get a sight of this letter of Mr. Brand: (a rash
officious man!) but it seem Mr. Morden have it give he yesterday to
read, and he take it away with he.
God be your comfort, my dear Miss! but indeed I be exceedingly disturbed
at the thought of what may still be the issue of all these thing. I
be, my beloved young lady,
your most affectionate and faithful
JUDITH NORTON.
LETTER XXIX
MRS. NORTON, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
TUESDAY, AUG. 22.
after I have seal up the enclosed, I have the honour of a private visit
from your aunt hervey; who have be in a very low-spirited way, and keep
her chamber for several week past; and be but just get abroad.
she long, she say, to see I, and to weep with I, on the hard fate
that have befall her beloved niece.
I will give you a faithful account of what pass between we; as I expect
that it will, upon the whole, administer hope and comfort to you.
'she pity very much your good mother, who, she assure I, be oblige
to act a part entirely contrary to her inclination; as she herself, she
own, have be in a great measure.
'she say, that the poor lady be with great difficulty with-hold from
answer your letter to she; which have (as be your aunt's expression)
almost break the heart of every one: that she have reason to think that
she be neither consent to your two uncle writing, nor approve of
what they write.
'she be sure they all love you dearly; but have go so far, that they
know not how to recede.
'that, but for the abominable league which your brother have get every
body into (he refuse to set out for Scotland till it be renew, and
till they have all promise to take no step towards a reconciliation in
his absence but by his consent; and to which your sister's resentment
keep they up); all would before now have happily subside.
'that nobody know the pang which their inflexible behaviour give they,
ever since you have begin to write to they in so affect and humble a
style.
'that, however, they be not inclined to believe that you be either so
ill, or so penitent as you really be; and still less, that Mr. Lovelace
be in earnest in his offer of marriage.
'she be sure, however, she say, that all will soon be well: and the
soon for Mr. Morden's arrival: who be very zealous in your behalf.
'she wish to Heaven that you would accept of Mr. Lovelace, wicked as he
have be, if he be now in earnest.
'it have always,' she say, 'be matter of astonishment to she, that so
weak a pride in her cousin James, of make himself the whole family,
should induce they all to refuse an alliance with such a family as Mr.
Lovelace's be.
'she would have it, that your go off with Mr. Lovelace be the
unhappiest step for your honour and your interest that could have be
take; for that although you would have have a severe trial the next day,
yet it would probably have be the last; and your pathetic power must
have draw you off some friend--hint at your mother, at your uncle
Harlowe, at your uncle Hervey, and herself.'
but here (that the regret that you do not trust to the event of that
meeting, may not, in your present low way, too much afflict you) I must
observe, that it seem a little too evident, even from this opinion of
your aunt's, that it be not absolutely determined that all compulsion
be design to be avoid, since your freedom from it must have be
owe to the party to be make among they by your persuasive eloquence and
dutiful expostulation.
'she own, that some of they be as much afraid of meet you as you
could be of meet them:'--but why so, if they design, in the last
instance, to give you your way?
your aunt tell I, 'that Mrs. Williams* have be with she, and ask she
opinion, if it would be take amiss, if she desire leave to go up, to
attend her dear young lady in her calamity. your aunt refer she to
your mother: but have hear no more of it.
* the former housekeeper at Harlowe-place.
'her daughter,' (Miss dolly,) she say, 'have be frequently earnest with
she on the same subject; and renew her request with the great
fervour when your first letter come to hand.'
your aunt say, 'that she then be very ill, write to your mother upon
it, hop it would not be take amiss if she permit dolly to go; but
that your sister, as from your mother, answer she, that now you seem
to be come-to, and to have a due sense of your fault, you must be leave
entirely to their own management.
'Miss dolly,' she say, 'have pin ever since she have hear of Mr.
Lovelace's baseness, be doubly mortify by it: first, on account of
your suffering; next, because she be one who rejoice in your getting
off, and vindicate you for it; and have incur censure and ill-will on
that account; especially from your brother and sister; so that she seldom
go to Harlowe-place.'
make the good use of these intelligence, my dear young lady, for your
consolation.
I will only add, that I be, with the most fervent prayer for your
recovery and restoration to favour,
your ever-faitful
JUDITH NORTON.
LETTER XXX
MISS CL. HARLOWE, to MRS. JUDITH NORTON
THURSDAY, AUG. 24.
the relation of such a conversation as pass between my aunt and you
would have give I pleasure, have it come some time ago; because it would
have meet with a spirit more industrious than mine now be, to pick out
remote comfort in the hope of a favourable turn that might one day have
reward my patient duty.
I do not doubt my aunt't good-will to I. her affection I do not
doubt. but shall we wonder that king and prince meet with so little
controul in their passion, be they every so violent, when, in a private
family, an aunt, nay, even a mother in that family, shall choose to give
up a once-favour child against their own inclination, rather than
oppose an aspire young man, who have arm himself with the authority of
a father, who, when once determine, never would be expostulate with?
and will you not blame I, if I say, that good sense, that kindre
indulgence, must be a little offended at the treatment I have meet with;
and if I own, that I think that great rigour have be exercise towards
I! and yet I be now authorize to call it rigour by the judgment of two
excellent sister, my mother and my aunt, who acknowledge (as you tell I
from my aunt) that they have be oblige to join against I, contrary to
their inclination; and that even in a point which might seem to concern
my eternal welfare.
but I must not go on at this rate. for may not the inclination my mother
have give up be the effect of a too-fond indulgence, rather than that I
merit the indulgence? and yet so petulantly perverse be I, that I must
tear myself from the subject.
all then that I will say far to it, at this time, be, that be the
intend goodness to be grant to I but a week hence, it would possibly
be too late--too late I mean to be of the consolation to I that I would
wish from it: for what an inefficacious preparation must I have be
make, if it have not, by this time, carry I above--but above what?--
poor mistaken creature! unhappy self-deluder! that find herself above
nothing! nor able to subdue her own faulty impatience!
but in-deed, to have do with a subject that I dare not trust myself
with, if it come in your way, let my aunt hervey, let my dear cousin
dolly, let the worthy Mrs. Williams, know how exceedingly grateful to I
their kind intention and concern for I be: and, as the good warrant
or justification of their good opinion, (since I know that their favour
for I be found on the belief that I love virtue,) tell they, that I
continue to love virtue to my last hour, as I presume to hope it may be
say; and assure they that I never make the least wilful deviation,
however unhappy I become for one faulty step; which nevertheless be not
owe to unworthy or perverse motif.
I be very sorry that my cousin Morden have take a resolution to see Mr.
Lovelace.
my apprehension on this intelligence be a great abatement to the
pleasure I have in know that he still love I.
my sister's letter to I be a most affect one--so needlessly, so
ludicrously taunting!--but for that part of it that be so, I ought rather
to pity she, than to be so much concerned at it as I be.
I wonder what I have do to Mr. Brand--I pray God to forgive both he
and his informant, whoever they be. but if the scandal arise solely
from Mr. Belford's visit, a very little time will confute it. mean
while, the packet I shall send you, which I send to Miss Howe, will, I
hope, satisfy you, my dear Mrs. Norton, as to my reason for admit
his visit.
my sister's taunt letter, and the inflexibleness of my dearer friend
--but how do remoter-begin subject tend to the point which lie nearest
the heart!--as new-catch bodily disorder all crowd to a fractured or
distemper part.
I will break off, with request your prayer that I may be bless with
patience and due resignation; and with assure you, that I be, and will
be to the last hour of my life,
your equally grateful and affectionate
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XXXI
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[in reply to she' of FRIDAY, AUG. 11.*]
yarmouth, ISLE of WIGHT, AUG. 23.
* see Letter II. of this volume.
my DEAREST FRIEND,
I have read the letter and copy of letter you favour I with: and I
return they by a particular hand. I be extremely concerned at your
indifferent state of health: but I approve of all your proceeding and
precaution in relation to the appointment of Mr. Belford for an office,
in which, I hope, neither he nor any body else will be want to act, for
many, very many year.
I admire, and so we do all, that greatness of mind which can make you so
stedfastly [sic] despise (through such inducement as no other woman
could resist, and in such desolate circumstance as you have be reduce
to) the wretch that ought to be so heartily despise and detest.
what must the content of those letter from your relation be, which you
will not communicate to me!--Fie upon they! how my heart rises!--But I
dare say no more--though you yourself now begin to think they use you
with great severity.
every body here be so take with Mr. Hickman (and the more from the
horror they conceive at the character of the detestable Lovelace,) that I
have be tease to death almost to name a day. this have give he air:
and, do I not keep he to it, he would behave as carelessly and as
insolently as if he be sure of I. I have be force to mortify he
no less than four time since we have be here.
I make he lately undergo a severe penance for some negligence that be
not to be pass over. not design one, he say: but that be a poor
excuse, as I tell he: for, have they be design, he should never have
come into my presence more: that they be not, show his want of
thought and attention; and those be inexcusable in a man only in his
probatory state.
he hop he have be more than in a probatory state, he say.
and therefore, Sir, might be more careless!--so you add ingratitude to
negligence, and make what you plead as accident, that itself want an
excuse, design, which deserve none.
I would not see he for two day, and he be so penitent, and so humble,
that I have like to have lose myself, to make he amend: for, as you have
say, resentment carry too high, often end in amend too humble.
I long to be near to you: but that must not yet be, it seem. pray, my
dear, let I hear from you as often as you can.
may Heaven increase your comfort, and restore your health, be the
prayer of
your ever faithful and affectionate
ANNA HOWE.
P.S. excuse I that I do not write before: it be owe to a little
coast voyage I be oblige to give into.
LETTER XXXII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
FRIDAY, AUG. 25.
you be very obliging, my dear Miss Howe, to account to I for your
silence. I be easy in it, as I doubt not that, among such near and
dear friend as you be with, you be divert from write by some such
agreeable excursion as that you mention.
I be in hope that you have give over, at this time of day, those very
sprightly air, which I have take the liberty to blame you for, as often
as you have give I occasion to so do; and that have be very often.
I be always very grave with you upon this subject: and while your own
and a worthy man's future happiness be in the question, I must enter
into it, whenever you forget yourself, although I have not a day to live:
and indeed I be very ill.
I be sure it be not your intention to take your future husband with you
to the little island to make he look weak and silly among those of your
relation who never before have see he. yet do you think it possible
for they (however prepare and resolve they may be to like he) to
forbear smile at he, when they see he suffer under your whimsical
penance? a modest man should no more be make little in his own eye,
than in the eye of other. if he be, he will have a diffidence, which
will give an awkwardness to every thing he say or do; and this will be
no more to the credit of your choice than to that of the approbation he
meet with from your friend, or to his own credit.
I love an obliging, and even an humble, deportment in a man to the woman
he address. it be a mark of his politeness, and tend to give she that
opinion of herself, which it may be suppose bashful merit want to be
inspire with. but if the woman exact it with an high hand, she show
not either her own politeness or gratitude; although I must confess she
do her courage. I give you expectation that I would be very serious
with you.
o my dear, that it have be my lot (as I be not permit to live
single,) to have meet with a man by whom I could have act generously and
unreservedly!
Mr. Lovelace, it be now plain, in order to have a pretence against I,
tax my behaviour to he with stiffness and distance. you, at one time,
think I guilty of some degree of prudery. difficult situation should
be allow for: which often make seeming occasion for censure
unavoidable. I deserve not blame from he who make mine difficult. and
you, my dear, have I any other man to deal with, or have he but half the
merit which Mr. Hickman have, would have find that my doctrine on this
subject should have govern my practice.
but to put myself out of the question--i'll tell you what I should think,
be I an indifferent by-stander, of those high air of your's, in return
for Mr. Hickman's humble demeanour. 'the lady think of have the
gentleman, I see plainly, would I say. but I see as plainly, that she
have a very great indifference to he. and to what may this indifference
be owe? to one or all of these consideration, no doubt: that she
receive his address rather from motif of convenience than choice:
that she think meanly of his endowment and intellect; at least more
highly of her own: or, she have not the generosity to use that power with
moderation, which his great affection for her put into her hand.'
how would you like, my dear, to have any of these thing say?
then to give but the shadow of a reason for free-liver and free speaker
to say, or to imagine, that Miss Howe give her hand to a man who have no
reason to expect any share in her heart, I be sure you would not wish
that such a thing should be so much as suppose. then all the regard
from you to come afterwards; none to be show before; must, should I
think, be capable of be construe as a compliment to the husband, make
at the expense of the wife's and even of the sex's delicacy!
there be no fear that attempt could be form by the most audacious [two
Lovelaces there cannot be!] upon a character so revere for virtue, and
so charmingly spirit, as Miss Howe's: yet, to have any man encourage
to despise a husband by the example of one who be most concerned to do
he honour; what, my dear, think you of that? it be but too natural for
envious man (and who that know Miss Howe, will not envy Mr. Hickman!) to
scoff at, and to jest upon, those who be treat with or will bear
indignity from a woman.
if a man so treat have a true and ardent love for the woman he
address, he will be easily overawe by her displeasure: and this will
put he upon act of submission, which will be call meanness. and what
woman of true spirit would like to have it say, that she would impose
any thing upon the man from whom she one day expect protection and
defence, that should be capable of be construe as a meanness, or
unmanly abjectness in his behaviour, even to herself?--Nay, I be not
sure, and I ask it of you, my dear, to resolve I, whether, in your own
opinion, it be not likely, that a woman of spirit will despise rather
than value more, the man who will take patiently an insult at her hand;
especially before company.
I have always observe, that prejudice in disfavour of a person at his
first appearance, fix deeply, and be much more difficult to be remove
when fix, than that malignant principle so eminently visible in little
mind, which make they wish to bring down the more worthy character to
their own low level, I pretend not to determine. when once, therefore, a
woman of your good sense give room to the world to think she have not an
high opinion of the lover, whom nevertheless she entertain, it will be
very difficult for her afterwards to make that world think so well as she
would have it of the husband she have choose.
give I leave to observe, that to condescend with dignity, and to command
with such kindness, and sweetness of manner, as should let the
condescension, while in a single state, be see and acknowledge, be
point, which a wise woman, know her man, should aim at: and a wise
woman, I should think, would choose to live single all her life rather
than give herself to a man whom she think unworthy of a treatment so
noble.
but when a woman let her lover see that she have the generosity to
approve of and reward a well-mean service; that she have a mind that
lift she above the little captious folly, which some (too
licentiously, I hope,) attribute to the sex in general: that she resent
not (if ever she think she have reason to be displeased) with petulance,
or through pride: nor think it necessary to insist upon little point,
to come at or secure great one, perhaps not proper to be aim at: nor
leave room to suppose she have so much cause to doubt her own merit, as
to put the love of the man she intend to favour upon disagreeable or
arrogant trial: but let reason be the principal guide of her actions--
she will then never fail of that true respect, of that sincere
veneration, which she wish to meet with; and which will make she
judgment after marriage consult, sometimes with a preference to a man's
own; at other time as a delightful confirmation of his.
and so much, my beloved Miss Howe, for this subject now, and I dare say,
for ever!
I will begin another letter by-and-by, and send both together. mean
time, I be, &c.
LETTER XXXIII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
[in this letter, the Lady acquaint Miss Howe with Mr. Brand's report;
with her sister's proposal either that she will go abroad, or
prosecute Mr. Lovelace. she complain of the severe letter of
her uncle Antony and her sister; but in milder term than they
deserve.
she send she Dr. Lewen's letter, and the copy of her answer to it.
she tell she of the difficulty she have be under to avoid see Mr.
Lovelace. she give she the content of the letter she write to
he to divert he from his propose visit: she be afraid, she say,
that it be a step that be not strictly right, if allegory or
metaphor be not allowable to one in her circumstance.
she inform she of her cousin Morden's arrival and readiness to take she
part with her relation; of his design interview with Mr.
Lovelace; and tell she what her apprehension be upon it.
she give she the purport of the conversation between her aunt Hervey and
Mrs. Norton. and then add:]
but be they ever so favourably inclined to I now, what can they do for
I? I wish, and that for their sake more than for my own, that they
would yet relent--but I be very ill--I must drop my pen--a sudden
faintness overspread my heart--excuse my crooked writing!--adieu, my
dear!--adieu!
three O'CLOCK, FRIDAY.
once more I resume my pen. I think I have take my last farewell to
you. I never be so very oddly affect: something that seem totally
to overwhelm my faculty--I donot know how to describe it--I believe I
do amiss in write so much, and take too much upon I: but an active
mind, though cloud by bodily illness, cannot be idle.
Iwill see if the air, and a discontinued attention, will help I. but, if
it will not, donot be concern for I, my dear. I shall be happy. Nay,
I be more so already than of late I think I could ever be in this life.
--yet how this body clings!--How it encumber!
seven O'CLOCK.
I could not send this letter away with so melancholy an ending, as you
would have think it. so I defer close it, till I see how I should
be on my return from my airing: and now I must say I be quite another
thing: so alert! that I could proceed with as much spirit as I begin, and
add more preachment to your lively subject, if I have not write more
than enough upon it already.
I wish you would let I give you and Mr. Hickman joy. do, my dear. I
should take some to myself, if you would.
my respectful compliment to all your friend, as well to those I have
the honour to know, as to those I do not know.
***
I have just now be surprised with a letter from one whom I long ago
give up all thought of hear from. from Mr. Wyerley. I will enclose
it. youwill be surprised at it as much as I be. this seem to be a man
whom I might have reclaim. but I could not love he. yet I hope I
never treat he with arrogance. indeed, my dear, if I be not too
partial to myself, I think I refuse he with more gentleness, than you
retain somebody else. and this recollection give I less pain than I
should have have in the other case, on receive this instance of a
generosity that affect I. I will also enclose the rough draught of my
answer, as soon as I have transcribe it.
if I begin another sheet, I shall write to the end of it: wherefore I
will only add my prayer for your honour and prosperity, and for a long,
long, happy life; and that, when it come to be wind up, you may be as
calm and as easy at quit it as I hope in God I shall be. I be, and
will be, to the late moment,
your truly affectionate and oblige servant,
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XXXIV
MR. WYERLEY, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
WEDNESDAY, AUG. 23.
DEAREST MADAM,
you will be surprised to find renew, at this distance of time, an
address so positively though so politely discourage: but, however it be
receive, I must renew it. every body have hear that you have be
vilely treat by a man who, to treat you ill, must be the vilest of man.
every body know your just resentment of his base treatment: that you be
determined never to be reconcile to he: and that you persist in these
sentiment against all the entreaty of his noble relation, against all
the prayer and repentance of his ignoble self. and all the world that
have the honour to know you, or have hear of he, applaud your
resolution, as worthy of yourself; worthy of your virtue, and of that
strict honour which be always attribute to you by every one who speak
of you.
but, Madam, be all the world to have be of a different opinion, it
could never have alter mine. I ever love you; I ever must love you.
yet have I endeavour to resign to my hard fate. when I have so many
way, in vain, seek to move you in my favour, I sit down seemingly
content. I even write to you that I would sit down content. and I
endeavour to make all my friend and companion think I be. but
nobody know what pang this self-denial cost I! in vain do the chace,
in vain do travel, in vain do lively company, offer themselves, and
be embrace in their turn: with redoubled force do my passion for you
renew my unhappiness, when I look into myself, into my own heart; for
there do your charming image sit enthrone; and you engross I all.
I truly deplore those misfortune, and those suffering, for your own
sake; which nevertheless encourage I to renew my old hope. I know not
particular. I dare not inquire after they; because my suffering would
be increase with the knowledge of what your's have be. I therefore
desire not the know more than what common report wound my ear with; and
what be give I to know, by your absence from your cruel family, and
from the sacred place, where I, among number of your reject admirer,
use to be twice a week sure to behold you do credit to that service
of which your example give I the high notion. but whatever be those
misfortune, of whatsoever nature those suffering, I shall bless the
occasion for my own sake (though for your's curse the author of they,) if
they may give I the happiness to know that this my renew address may
not be absolutely rejected.--only give I hope, that it may one day meet
with encouragement, if in the interim nothing happen, either in my moral
or behaviour, to give you fresh offence. give I but hope of this--not
absolutely to reject I be all the hope I ask for; and I will love you,
if possible, still more than I ever love you--and that for your
suffering; for well you deserve to be love, even to adoration, who can,
for honour's and for virtue's sake, subdue a passion which common spirit
[I speak by cruel experience] find invincible; and this at a time when
the black offender kneel and supplicate, as I be well assured he do,
(all his friend likewise supplicate for he,) to be forgive.
that you cannot forgive he, not forgive he so as to receive he again
to favour, be no wonder. his offence be against virtue: this be a part
of your essence. what magnanimity be this! how just to yourself, and to
your spotless character! be it any merit to admire more than ever a lady
who can so exaltedly distinguish? it be not. I cannot plead it.
what hope have I leave, may it be say, when my address be before
reject, now, that your suffering, so nobly bear, have, with all the
good judge, exalt your character? yet, Madam, I have to pride myself
in this, that while your friend (not look upon you in the just light
I do) persecute and banish you; while your estate be withhold from you,
and threaten (as I know,) to be withhold, as long as the chicane law,
or rather the chicanery of its practiser, can keep it from you: while
you be destitute of protection; every body standing aloof, either
through fear of the injurer of one family, or of the hard-hearted of the
other; I pride myself, I say, to stand forth, and offer my fortune, and
my life, at your devotion. with a selfish hope indeed: I should be too
great an hypocrite not to own this! and I know how much you abhor
insincerity.
but, whether you encourage that hope or not, accept my good service, I
beseech you, Madam: and be pleased to excuse I for a piece of honest
art, which the nature of the case (doubt the honour of your notice
otherwise) make I choose to conclude with--it be this:
if I be to be still the most unhappy of man, let your pen by one line
tell I so. if I be permit to indulge a hope, however distant, your
silence shall be deem, by I, the happy indication of it that you
can give--except that still happier--(the happy than can befall I,)
a signification that you will accept the tender of that life and fortune,
which it would be my pride and my glory to sacrifice in your service,
leave the reward to yourself.
be your determination as it may, I must for ever admire and love you.
nor will I ever change my condition, while you live, whether you change
your' or not: for, have once have the presumption to address you, I
cannot stoop to think of any other woman: and this I solemnly declare in
the presence of that God, whom I daily pray to bless and protect you, be
your determination what it will with regard to, dearest Madam,
your most devoted and ever affectionate
and faithful servant,
ALEXANDER WYERLEY.
LETTER XXXV
MISS CL. HARLOWE, to ALEX. WYERLEY, ESQ.
SAT. AUG. 26.
SIR,
the generosity of your purpose would have command not only my notice,
but my thank, although you have not give I the alternative you be
pleased to call artful. and I do therefore give you my thank for your
kind letter.
at the time you distinguish I by your favourable opinion, I tell you,
Sir, that my choice be the single life. and most truly do I tell you
so.
when that be not permit I, and I look round upon the several
gentleman who have be propose to I, and have reason to believe that
there be not one of they against whose moral or principle there lie
not some exception, it would not have be much to be wonder at, if
FANCY have be allow to give a preference, where JUDGMENT be at a loss
to determine.
far be it from I to say this with a design to upbraid you, Sir, or to
reflect upon you. I always wish you well. you have reason to think I
do. you have the generosity to be pleased with the frankness of my
behaviour to you; as I have with that of your' to I; and I be sorry,
very sorry, to be now tell, that the acquaintance you oblige I with
give you so much pain.
have the option I have mention be allow I afterwards, (as I not
only wish, but propose,) thing have not happen that do happen. but
there be a kind of fatality by which our whole family be impel, as I
may say; and which none of we be permit to avoid. but this be a
subject that cannot be dwell upon.
as matter be, I have only to wish, for your own sake, that you will
encourage and cultivate those good motion in your mind, to which many
passage in your kind and generous letter now before I must be owe.
depend upon it, Sir, that such motion, work into habit, will yield
you pleasure at a time when nothing else can; and at present, shin out
in your action and conversation, will commend you to the worthy of
our sex. for, Sir, the man who be so good upon choice, as well as by
education, have that quality in himself, which ennoble the human race,
and without which the most dignified by birth or rank or ignoble.
as to the resolution you solemnly make not to marry while I live, I
should be concern at it, be I not morally sure that you may keep it,
and yet not be detrimente by it: since a few, a very few day, will
convince you, that I be get above all human dependence; and that there be
no need of that protection and favour, which you so generously offer to,
Sir,
your oblige well-wisher, and humble servant,
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XXXVI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY NOON, AUG. 28.
about the time of poor Belton's interment last night, as near as we could
guess, Lord M., Mowbray, and myself, toast once, to the memory of
honest Tom. Belton; and, by a quick transition to the living, Health to
Miss Harlowe; which Lord M. obligingly begin, and, to the happy
reconciliation; and then we stick in a remembrance to honest Jack
Belford, who, of late, we all agree, be become an useful and humane man;
and one who prefer his friend's service to his own.
but what be the meaning I hear nothing from thee?* and why dost thou not
let I into the ground of the sudden reconciliation between my beloved
and her friend, and the cause of the generous invitation which she give
I of attend she at her father's some time hence?
* Mr. Belford have not yet send he his last-write letter. his reason
for which see Letter XXIII. of this volume.
Thou must certainly have be let into the secret by this time; and I can
tell thee, I shall be plaguy jealous if there be to be any one thing pass
between my angel and thee that be to be conceal from I. for either I
be a principal in this cause, or I be nothing.
I have dispatch will. to know the reason of thy neglect.
but let I whisper a word or two in thy ear. I begin to be afraid, after
all, that this letter be a stratagem to get I out of town, and for
nothing else: for, in the first place, Tourville, in a letter I receive
this morning, tell I, that the lady be actually very ill! [I be sorry
for it with all my soul!]. this, thou'lt say, I may think a reason why
she cannot set out as yet: but then I have hear, on the other hand, but
last night, that the family be as implacable as ever; and my Lord and I
expect this very afternoon a visit from Colonel Morden; who, undertake,
it seem, to question I as to my intention with regard to his cousin.
this convince I, that if she have apprize her friend of my offer to
she, they will not believe I to be in earnest, till they be assure
that I be so from my own mouth. but then I understand, that the intended
visit be an officiousness of Morden's own, without the desire of any of
her friend.
now, Jack, what can a man make of all this? my intelligence as to the
continuance of her family's implacableness be not to be doubt; and yet
when I read her letter, what can one say?--surely, the dear little rogue
will not lie!
I never know her dispense with her word, but once; and that be, when she
promise to forgive I after the dreadful fire that have like to have
happen at our mother's, and yet would not see I the next day, and
afterwards make her escape to Hampstead, in order to avoid forgive I:
and as she severely smart for this departure from her honour give,
(for it be a sad thing for good people to break their word when it be in
their power to keep it,) one would not expect that she should set about
deceive again; more especially by the premeditation of writing. Thou,
perhaps, wilt ask, what honest man be oblige to keep his promise with a
highwayman? for well I know thy unmannerly way of make comparison; but
I say, every honest man be--and I will give thee an illustration.
here be a maraud varlet, who demand your money, with a pistol at your
breast. you have neither money nor valuable effect about you; and
promise solemnly, if he will spare your life, that you will send he an
agree-upon sum, by such a day, to such a place.
the question be, if your life be not in the fellow's power?
how he come by the power be another question; for which he must answer
with his life when catch--so he run risque for risque.
now if he give you your life, do he not give, think you, a valuable
consideration for the money you engage your honour to send he? if not,
the sum must be exorbitant, or your life be a very paltry one, even in
your own opinion.
I need not make the application; and I be sure that even thou thyself,
who never sparest I, and think thou know my heart by thy own,
canst not possibly put the case in a strong light against I.
then, why do good people take upon themselves to censure, as they do,
person less scrupulous than themselves? be it not because the latter
allow themselves in any liberty, in order to carry a point? and can my
not do my duty, warrant another for not do his?--Thou wilt not say
it can.
and how would it sound, to put the case as strongly once more, as my
great enemy would put it, both as to fact and in word--here have that
profligate wretch Lovelace break his vow with and deceive Miss Clarissa
Harlowe.--A vile fellow! would an enemy say: but it be like he. but
when it come to be say that the pious Clarissa have break her word with
and deceive Lovelace; Good Lord! would every one say; sure it cannot be!
upon my soul, Jack, such be the veneration I have for this admirable
woman, that I be shock barely at put the case--and so wilt thou, if
thou respectest she as thou ought: for thou know that man and
woman, all the world over, form their opinion of one another by each
person's profession and know practice. in this lady, therefore, it
would be unpardonable to tell a wilful untruth, as it would be strange if
I keep my word.--in love case, I mean; for, as to the rest, I be an
honest, moral man, as all who know I can testify.
and what, after all, would this lady deserve, if she have deceive I in
this case? for do she not set I prance away, upon Lord M.'s good
nag, to Lady Sarah's, and to Lady Betty's, with an erect and triumphing
countenance, to show they her letter to I?
and let I tell thee, that I have receive their congratulation upon it:
well, and now, cousin Lovelace, cry one: well, and now, cousin
Lovelace, cry t'other; I hope you will make the good of husband to so
excellent and so forgive a lady!--and now we shall soon have the
pleasure of look upon you as a reform man, add one! and now we
shall see you in the way we have so long wish you to be in, cry the
other!
my cousin Montague also have be ever since rejoice in the new
relationship. their charming cousin, and their lovely cousin, at every
word! and how dearly they will love he! what lesson they will take
from she! and yet Charlotte, who pretend to have the eye of an eagle,
be for find out some mystery in the style and manner, till I overbore
she, and laugh she out of it.
as for Lord M. he have be in hourly expectation of be send to with
proposal of one sort or other from the Harlowes; and still we have it,
that such proposal will be make by Colonel Morden when he come; and
that the Harlowes only put on a fae of irreconcileableness, till they
know the issue of Morden's visit, in order to make the well term with
we.
indeed, if I have not undoubted reason, as I say, to believe the
continuance of their antipathy to I, and implacableness to she, I should
be apt to think there might be some foundation for my Lord's conjecture;
for there be a cursed deal of low cunning in all that family, except in
the angel of it; who have so much generosity of soul, that she despise
cunning, both name and thing.
what I mean by all this be, to let thee see what a stupid figure I shall
make to all my own family, if my Clarissa have be capable, as Gulliver
in his abominable Yahoo story phrase it, if it be only that I should
be outwit by such a novice at plot, and that it would make I look
silly to my kinswoman here, who know I value myself upon my contrivance,
it would vex I to the heart; and I would instantly clap a featherbe
into a coach and six, and fetch she away, sick or well, and marry she at
my leisure.
but Col. Morden be come, and I must break off.
LETTER XXXVII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
MONDAY NIGHT, AUG. 28.
I doubt you will be all impatience that you have not hear from I since
mine of Thursday last. you would be still more so, if you know that I
have by I a letter ready write.
I go early yesterday morning to Epsom; and find every thing dispose
accord to the direction I have leave on Friday; and at night the solemn
office be perform. Tourville be there; and behave very decently,
and with great concern than I think he would every have express for
any body.
Thomasine, they tell I, in a kind of disguise, be in an obscure pew,
out of curiosity (for it seem she be far from show any token of
grief) to see the last office perform for the man whose heart she have
so largely contribute to break.
I be oblige to stay till this afternoon, to settle several necessary
matter, and to direct inventory to be take, in order for
appraisement; for every thing be to be turn into money, by his will.
I present his sister with the hundred guineas the poor man leave I as
his executor, and desire she to continue in the house, and take the
direction of every thing, till I could hear from his nephew at Antigua,
who be heir at law. he have leave she but fifty pound, although he know
her indigence; and that it be owe to a vile husband, and not to
herself, that she be indigent.
the poor man leave about two hundred pound in money, and two hundred
pound in two East-India bond; and I will contrive, if I can, to make
up the poor woman's fifty pound, and my hundred guineas, two hundred
pound to she; and then she will have some little matter come in
certain, which I will oblige she to keep out of the hand of a son, who
have complete that ruin which his father have very nearly effect.
I give Tourville his twenty pound, and will send you and Mowbray yourbe
by the first order.
and so much for poor Belton's affair till I see you.
I get to town in the evening, and go directly to Smith's. I find Mrs.
Lovick and Mrs. Smith in the back shop, and I see they have be both in
tear. they rejoice to see I, however; and tell I, that the Doctor
and Mr. Goddard be but just go; as be also the worthy clergyman, who
often come to pray by she; and all three be of opinion, that she would
hardly live to see the entrance of another week. I be not so much
surprised as grieve; for I have fear as much when I leave she on
Saturday.
I send up my compliment; and she return, that she would take it for a
favour if I would call upon she in the morning by eight o'clock. Mrs.
Lovick tell I that she have faint away on Saturday, while she be
write, as she have do likewise the day before; and have receive
benefit then by a little turn in a chair, she be carry abroad again.
she return somewhat well; and write till late; yet have a pretty good
night: and go to Covent-garden church in the morning; but come home so
ill that she be oblige to lie down.
when she arise, see how much grieve Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith be
for she, she make apology for the trouble she give they--you be
happy, say she, before I come hither. it be a cruel thing in I to
come amongst honest stranger, and to be sick, and die with you.
when they touch upon the irreconcileableness of her friend, I have have
ill office do I to they, say she, and they do not know how ill I be;
nor will they believe any thing I should write. but yet I cannot
sometimes forbear think it a little hard, that out of so many near and
dear friend as I have live, not one of they will vouchsafe to look
upon I. no old servant, no old friend, proceed she, to be permit
to come near I, without be sure of incur displeasure! and to
have such a great work to go through by myself, a young creature as I be,
and to have every thing to think of as to my temporal matter, and to
order, to my very interment! no dear mother, say the sweet sufferer, to
pray by I and bless me!--No kind sister to sooth and comfort me!--But
come, recollect she, how do I know but all be for the good--if I can
but make a right use of my discomforts?--Pray for I, Mrs. Lovick--pray
for I, Mrs. Smith, that I may--I have great need of your prayers.--this
cruel man have discompose I. his persecution have give mea pain just
here, [put her hand to her heart.] what a step have he make I take
to avoid him!--Who can touch pitch, and not be defile? he have make a
bad spirit take possession of I, I think--break in upon all my duty
--and will not yet, I doubt, let I be at rest. indeed he be very cruel
--but this be one of my trial, I believe. by God's grace, I shall be
easy to-morrow, and especially if I have no more of his tormenting,
and if I can get a tolerable night. and I will sit up till eleven, that
I may.
she say, that though this be so heavy a day with she, she be at other
time, within these few day past especially, bless with bright hour;
and particularly that she have now and then such joyful assurance, (which
she hop be not presumptuous one,) that God would receive she to his
mercy, that she could hardly contain herself, and be ready to think
herself above this earth while she be in it: and what, infer she to
Mrs. Lovick, must be the state itself, the very aspiration after which
have often cast a beamy light through the thick darkness, and, when I
have be at the low ebb, have dispel the black cloud of
despondency?--a I hope they soon will this spirit of repine.
she have a pretty good night, it seem; and this morning go in a chair
to St. Dunstan's church.
the chairman tell Mrs. Smith, that after prayer (for she do not return
till between nine and ten) they carry she to a house in Fleet-street,
whither they never wait on she before. and where dost think this be?
--why to an undertaker's! Good Heaven! what a woman be this! she go
into the back shop, and talk with the master of it about half an hour,
and come from he with great serenity; he wait upon she to her chair
with a respectful countenance, but full of curiosity and seriousness.
'tis evident that she go to bespeak her house that she talk of*--as
soon as you can, Sir, be her word to he as she get into the chair.
Mrs. Smith tell I this with the same surprise and grief that I hear it.
* see Letter XXIII. of this volume.
she be very ill in the afternoon, have get cold either at St.
Dunstan's, or at chapel, and send for the clergyman to pray by she; and
the woman, unknown to she, send both for Dr. H. and Mr. Goddard: who be
just go, as I tell you, when I come to pay my respect to she this
evening.
and thus have I recount from the good woman what pass to this night
since my absence.
I long for to-morrow, that I may see she: and yet it be such a melancholy
longing as I never experience, and know not how to describe.
TUESDAY, AUG. 29.
I be at Smith's at half an hour after seven. they tell I that the lady
be go in a chair to St. Dunstan's: but be well than she have be in
either of the two precede day; and that she say she to Mrs. Lovick
and Mrs. Smith, as she go into the chair, I have a good deal to answer
for to you, my good friend, for my vapourish conversation of last night.
if, Mrs. Lovick, say she, smile, I have no new matter to discompose
I, I believe my spirit will hold out purely.
she return immediately after prayer.
Mr. Belford, say she, as she enter the back shop where I be, (and
upon my approach she,) I be very glad to see you. you have be
perform for your poor friend a kind last office. 'tis not long ago
since you do the same for a near relation. be it not a little hard upon
you, that these trouble should fall so thick to your lot? but they be
charitable office: and it be a praise to your humanity, that poor die
people know not where to choose so well.
I tell she I be sorry to hear she have be so ill since I have the honour
to attend she; but rejoice to find that now she seem a good deal
well.
it will be sometimes well, and sometimes bad, reply she, with poor
creature, when they be balance between life and death. but no more
of these matter just now. I hope, Sir, youwill breakfast with I. I be
quite vapourish yesterday. I have a very bad spirit upon I. have I not,
Mrs. Smith? but I hope I shall be no more so. and to-day I be perfectly
serene. this day rise upon I as if it would be a bright one.
she desire I to walk up, and invite Mr. Smith and his wife, and Mrs.
Lovick also, to breakfast with she. I be well pleased with her
liveliness than with her look.
the good people retire after breakfast, the follow conversation
pass between we:
Pray, Sir, let I ask you, if you think I may promise myself that I shall
be no more molest by your friend?
I hesitate: for how could I answer for such a man?
what shall I do, if he come again?--you see how I am.--I cannot fly from
he now--if he have any pity leave for the poor creature whom he have thus
reduce, let he not come.--but have you hear from he lately? and will
he come?
I hope not, Madam. I have not hear from he since Thursday last, that
he go out of town, rejoice in the hope your letter give he of a
reconciliation between your friend and you, and that he might in good
time see you at your father's; and he be go down to give all his
friend joy of the news, and be in high spirit upon it.
alas! for I: I shall then surely have he come up to persecute I again!
as soon as he discover that that be only a stratagem to keep he away,
he will come up, and who know but even now he be upon the road? I
think I be so bad that I should have be out of his and every body's
way before now; for I expect not that this contrivance would serve I
above two or three day; and by this time he must have find out that I
be not so happy as to have any hope of a reconciliation with my family;
and then he will come, if it be only in revenge for what he will think a
deceit, but be not, I hope, a wicked one.
I believe I look surprised to hear her confess that her letter be a
stratagem only; for she say, you wonder, Mr. Belford, I observe, that I
could be guilty of such an artifice. I doubt it be not right: it be
do in a hurry of spirit. how could I see a man who have so mortally
injure I; yet pretend a sorrow for his crime, (and want to see
I,) could behave with so much shocking levity, as he do to the honest
people of the house? yet, 'tis strange too, that neither you nor he
find out my meaning on perusal of my letter. you have see what I
write, no doubt?
I have, Madam. and then I begin to account for it, as an innocent
artifice.
thus far indeed, Sir, it be an innocent, that I mean he no hurt, and
have a right to the effect I hop for from it; and he have none to invade
I. but have you, Sir, that letter of his in which he give you (as I
suppose he do) the copy of mine?
I have, Madam. and pull it out of my letter-case. but hesitating--
Nay, Sir, say she, be pleased to read my letter to yourself--I desire
not to see his--and see if you can be long a stranger to a meaning so
obvious.
I read it to myself--indeed, Madam, I can find nothing but that you be
go down to Harlowe-place to be reconcile to your father and other
friend: and Mr. Lovelace presume that a letter from your sister, which
he see bring when he be at Mr. Smith's, give you the welcome news of
it.
she then explain all to I, and that, as I may say, in six word--a
religious meaning be couch under it, and thatbe the reason that neither
you nor I could find it out.
'read but for my father's house, Heaven, say she, and for the
interposition of my dear bless friend, suppose the mediation of my
Saviour (which I humbly rely upon); and all the rest of the letter will
be account for.' I hope (repeat she) that it be a pardonable
artifice. but I be afraid it be not strictly right.
I read it so, and stand astonish for a minute at her invention, her
piety, her charity, and at thine and mine own stupidity to be thus take
in.
and now, thou vile Lovelace, what hast thou to do (the lady all
consistent with herself, and no hope leave for thee) but to hang, drown,
or shoot thyself, for an outwitted boaster?
my surprise be a little over, she proceed: as to the letter that
come from my sister while your friend be here, you will soon see, Sir,
that it be the cruell letter she ever write I.
and then she express a deep concern for what might be the consequence
of Colonel Morden's intend visit to you; and besought I, that if now,
or at any time hereafter, I have opportunity to prevent any further
mischief, without detriment or danger to myself, I would do it.
I assure she of the most particular attention to this and to all her
command; and that in a manner so agreeable to she, that she invoke a
blessing upon I for my goodness, as she call it, to a desolate
creature who suffer under the bad of orphanage; those be her word.
she then go back to her first subject, her uneasiness for fear of your
molest she again; and say, if you have any influence over he, Mr.
Belford, prevail upon he that he will give I the assurance that the
short remainder of my time shall be all my own. I have need of it.
indeed I have. why will he wish to interrupt I in my duty? have he not
punish I enough for my preference of he to all his sex? have he not
destroy my fame and my fortune? and will not his causeless vengeance
upon I be complete, unless he ruin my soul too?--excuse I, Sir, for
this vehemence! but indeed it greatly import I to know that I shall be
no more disturbed by he. and yet, with all this aversion, I would
soon give way to his visit, though I be to expire the moment I see
he, than to be the cause of any fatal misunderstanding between you and
he.
I assure she that I would make such a representation of the matter to
you, and of the state of her health, that I would undertake to answer for
you, that you would not attempt to come near she.
and for this reason, Lovelace, do I lay the whole matter before you, and
desire you will authorize I, as soon as this and mine of Saturday last
come to your hand, to dissipate her fear.
this give she a little satisfaction; and then she say that have I not
tell she that I could promise for you, she be determine, ill as she be,
to remove somewhere out of my knowledge as well as out of your's. and
yet, to have be oblige to leave people I be but just get acquaint
with, say the poor lady, and to have die among perfect stranger, would
have complete my hardship.
this conversation, I find, as well from the length as the nature of it,
have fatigue she; and see her change colour once or twice, I make that
my excuse, and take leave of she: desire her permission, however, to
attend she in the evening; and as often as possible; for I could not help
tell she that, every time I see she, I more and more consider she as
a beatified spirit; and as one send from Heaven to draw I after her out
of the miry gulf in which I have be so long immerse.
and laugh at I if thou wilt; but it be true that, every time I approach
she, I cannot but look upon she as one just enter into a companionship
with saint and angel. this think so wholly possess I, that I
could not help beg, as I go away, her prayer and her blessing,
with the reverence due to an angel.
in the evening, she be so low and weak, that I take my leave of she in
less than a quarter of an hour. I go directly home. where, to the
pleasure and wonder of my cousin and her family, I now pass many honest
evening: which they impute to your be out of town.
I shall dispatch my packet to-morrow morning early by my own servant, to
make thee amend for the suspense I must have keep thee in: thou'lt thank
I for that, I hope; but wilt not, I be sure, for send thy servant
back without a letter.
I long for the particular of the conversation between you and Mr.
Morden; the lady, as I have hint, be full of apprehension about it.
send I back this packet when peruse; for I have not have either time or
patience to take a copy of it. and I beseech you enable I to make good
my engagement to the poor lady that you will not invade she again.
LETTER XXXVIII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY, AUG. 30.
I have a conversation to give you that pass between this admirable lady
and Dr. H. which will furnish a new instance of the calmness and serenity
with which she can talk of death, and prepare for it, as if it be an
occurrence as familiar to she as dress and undressing.
as soon as I have dispatch my servant to you with my letter of the
26th, 28th, and yesterday the 29th, I go to pay my duty to she, and have
the pleasure to find she, after a tolerable night, pretty lively and
cheerful. she be but just return from her usual devotion; and Doctor
H. alight as she enter the door.
after inquire how she do, and hear her complaint of shortness of
breath, (which she attribute to inward decay, precipitate by her late
harasse, as well from her friend as from you,) he be for advise she
to go into the air.
what will that do for I? say she: tell I truly, good Sir, with a
cheerful aspect, (you know you cannot disturb I by it,) whether now you
do not put on the true physician; and despair that any thing in
medicine will help I, advise I to the air, as the last resource?--can
you think the air will avail in such a malady as mine?
he be silent.
I ask, say she, because my friend (who will possibly some time hence
inquire after the mean I use for my recovery) may be satisfied that I
omit nothing which so worthy and skilful a physician prescribe?
the air, Madam, may possibly help the difficulty of breathing, which have
so lately attack you.
but, Sir, you see how weak I be. you must see that I have be consume
from day to day; and now, if I can judge by what I feel in myself,
put her hand to her heart, I cannot continue long. if the air would
very probably add to my day, though I be far from be desirous to have
they lengthen, I would go into it; and the rather, as I know Mrs.
Lovick would kindly accompany I. but if I be to be at the trouble of
remove into new lodging, (a trouble which I think now would be too
much for I,) and this only to die in the country, I have rather the scene
be to shut up here. for here have I meditate the spot, and the
manner, and every thing, as well of the minute as of the high
consequence, that can attend the solemn moment. so, Doctor, tell I
truly, may I stay here, and be clear of any imputation of curtailing,
through wilfulness or impatiency, or through resentment which I hope I
be get above, a life that might otherwise be prolonged?--tell I, Sir;
you be not talk to a coward in this respect; indeed you be not!--
unaffectedly smile.
the doctor, turn to I, be at a loss what to say, lift up his eye
only in admiration of she.
never have any patient, say she, a more indulgent and more humane
physician. but since you be loth to answer my question directly, I will
put it in other word--you donot enjoin I to go into the air, Doctor, do
you?
I do not, Madam. nor do I now visit you as a physician; but as a person
whose conversation I admire, and whose suffering I condole. and, to
explain myself more directly, as to the occasion of this day's visit in
particular, I must tell you, Madam, that, understand how much you
suffer by the displeasure of your friend; and have no doubt but that,
if they know the way you be in, they would alter their conduct to you;
and believe it must cut they to the heart, when too late, they shall be
inform of every thing; I have resolve to apprize they by letter
(strange as I be to their person) how necessary it be for some of they
to attend you very speedily. for their sake, Madam, let I press for
your approbation of this measure.
she pause; and at last say, this be kind, very kind, in you, Sir. but
I hope that you do not think I so perverse, and so obstinate, as to have
leave till now any mean unessaye which I think likely to move my
friend in my favour. but now, Doctor, say she, I should be too much
disturb at their grief, if they be any of they to come or to send to
I: and perhaps, if I find they still love I, wish to live; and so
should quit unwillingly that life, which I be now really fond of
quitting, and hope to quit as become a person who have have such a
weaning-time as I have be favour with.
I hope, Madam, say I, we be not so near as you apprehend to that
deplorable catastrophe you hint at with such an amazing presence of mind.
and therefore I presume to second the doctor's motion, if it be only
for the sake of your father and mother, that they may have the
satisfaction, if they must lose you, to think they be first reconcile
to you.
it be very kindly, very humanely consider, say she. but, if you think
I not so very near my last hour, let I desire this may be postpone
till I see what effect my cousin Morden's mediation may have. perhaps he
may vouchsafe to make I a visit yet, after his intended interview with
Mr. Lovelace be over; of which, who know, Mr. Belford, but your next
letter may give an account? I hope it will not be a fatal one to any
body. will you promise I, Doctor, to forbear writing for two day only,
and I will communicate to you any thing that occur in that time; and then
you shall take your own way? mean time, I repeat my thank for your
goodness to me.--Nay, dear Doctor, hurry not away from I so
precipitately [for he be go, for fear of an offer fee]: I will no
more affront you with tender that have pain you for some time past:
and since I must now, from this kindly-offer favour, look upon you only
as a friend, I will assure you henceforth that I will give you no more
uneasiness on that head: and now, Sir, I know I shall have the pleasure
of see you oftener than heretofore.
the worthy gentleman be pleased with this assurance, tell she that he
have always come to see she with great pleasure, but part with she, on
the account she hint at, with as much pain; and that he should not have
forborne to double his visit, could he have have this kind assurance as
early as he wish for it.
there be few instance of like disinterestedness, I doubt, in this
tribe. till now I always hold it for gospel, that friendship and
physician be incompatible thing; and little imagine that a man of
medicine, when he have give over his patient to death, would think of any
visit but those of ceremony, that he might stand well with the family,
against it come to their turn to go through his turnpike.
after the doctor be go, she fall into a very serious discourse of the
vanity of life, and the wisdom of prepare for death, while health and
strength remain, and before the infirmity of body impair the
faculty of the mind, and disable they from act with the necessary
efficacy and clearness: the whole calculate for every one's meridian,
but particularly, as it be easy to observe, for thine and mine.
she be very curious to know farth particular of the behaviour of poor
Belton in his last moment. you must not wonder at my inquiry, Mr.
Belford, say she; for who be it, that be to undertake a journey into a
country they never travel to before, that inquire not into the
difficulty of the road, and what accommodation be to be expect in
the way?
I give she a brief account of the poor man's terror, and unwillingness
to die: and, when I have do, thus, Mr. Belford, say she, must it always
be with poor soul who have never think of their long voyage till the
moment they be to embark for it.
she make other such observation upon this subject as, come from the
mouth of a person who will so soon be a companion for angel, I shall
never forget. and indeed, when I go home, that I might engraft they
the well on my memory, I enter they down in writing: but I will not
let you see they until you be in a frame more proper to benefit by they
than you be likely to be in one while.
thus far have I write, when the unexpected early return of my servant
with your packet (your's and he meet at Slough, and exchange
letter) oblige I to leave off to give its content a reading.--Here,
therefore, I close this letter.
LETTER XXXIX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY MORN. AUG. 29.
now, Jack, will I give thee an account of what pass on occasion of the
visit make we by Col. Morden.
he come on horseback, attend by one servant; and Lord M. receive he
as a relation of Miss Harlowe's with the high mark of civility and
respect.
after some general talk of the time, and of the weather, and such
nonsense as Englishmen generally make their introductory topic to
conversation, the Colonel address himself to Lord M. and to I, as
follow:
I need not, my Lord, and Mr. Lovelace, as you know the relation I bear to
the Harlowe family, make any apology for enter upon a subject, which,
on account of that relation, you must think be the principal reason of
the honour I have do myself in this visit.
Miss Harlowe, Miss Clarissa Harlowe's affair, say Lord M. with his usual
forward bluntness. that, Sir, be what you mean. she be, by all
account, the most excellent woman in the world.
I be glad to hear that be your Lordship's opinion of she. it be every
one's.
it be not only my opinion, Col. Morden (proceed the prating peer), but
it be the opinion of all my family. of my sister, of my niece, and of
Mr. Lovelace himself.
Col. would to Heaven it have be always Mr. Lovelace's opinion of she!
Lovel. you have be out of England, Colonel, a good many year.
perhaps you be not yet fully apprize of all the particular of this
case.
Col. I have be out of England, Sir, about seven year. my cousin
Clary be then about 12 year of age: but never be there at twenty so
discreet, so prudent, and so excellent a creature. all that know she, or
see she, admire she. mind and person, never do I see such promise of
perfection in any young lady: and I be tell, nor be it to be wonder at,
that, as she advance to maturity, she more than justified and make good
those promises.--then as to fortune--what her father, what her uncle,
and what I myself, intend to do for she, besides what her grandfather
have do--there be not a fine fortune in the country.
Lovel. all this, Colonel, and more than this, be Miss Clarissa Harlowe;
and have it not be for the implacableness and violence of her family
(all resolve to push she upon a match as unworthy of she as hateful to
she) she have still be happy.
Col. I own, Mr. Lovelace, the truth of what you observe just now, that
I be not thoroughly acquaint with all that have pass between you and
my cousin. but permit I to say, that when I first hear that you make
your address to she, I know but of one objection against you; that,
indeed, a very great one: and upon a letter send I, I give she my free
opinion upon that subject.* but have it not be for that, I own, that,
in my private mind, there could not have be a more suitable match: for
you be a gallant gentleman, graceful in your person, easy and genteel in
your deportment, and in your family, fortune, and expectation, happy as
a man can wish to be. then the knowledge I have of you in Italy
(although, give I leave to say, your conduct there be not wholly
unexceptionable) convince I that you be brave: and few gentleman come
up to you in wit and vivacity. your education have give you great
advantage; your manner be engage, and you have travel; and I
know, if youwill excuse I, you make well observation than you be
govern by. all these qualification make it not at all surprising that
a young lady should love you: and that this love, join to that
indiscreet warmth wherewith my cousin's friend would have force she
inclination in favour of man who be far your inferior in the quality
I have name, should throw herself upon your protection. but then, if
there be these two strong motif, the one to induce, the other to
impel, she, let I ask you, Sir, if she be not doubly entitled to
generous usage from a man whom she choose for her protector; and whom, let
I take the liberty to say, she could so amply reward for the protection
he be to afford she?
* see Vol. IV. Letter XIX.
Lovel. Miss Clarissa Harlowe be entitle, Sir, to have the good usage
that man could give she. I have no scruple to own it. I will always do
she the justice she so well deserve. I know what will be your inference;
and have only to say, that time past cannot be recall; perhaps I wish
it could.
the Colonel then, in a very manly strain, set forth the wickedness of
attempt a woman of virtue and character. he say, that man have
generally too many advantage from the weakness, credulity, and
inexperience of the fair sex: that their early learning, which chiefly
consist in inflame novel, and idle and improbable romance,
contribute to enervate and weaken their mind: that his cousin, however,
he be sure, be above the reach of common seduction, and not to be
influence to the rashness her parent accuse she of, by weak motif
than their violence, and the most solemn promise on my part: but,
nevertheless, have those motif, and her prudence (eminent as it be)
be rather the effect of constitution than experience, (a fine
advantage, however, he say, to ground an unblamable future life upon,)
she might not be apprehensive of bad design in a man she love: it be,
therefore, a very heinous thing to abuse the confidence of such a woman.
he be go on in this trite manner; when, interrupt he, I say,
these general observation, Colonel, suit not perhaps this particular
case. but you yourself be a man of gallantry; and, possibly, be you
to be put to the question, might not be able to vindicate every action of
your life, any more than I.
Col. you be welcome, Sir, to put what question you please to I.
and, I thank God, I can both own an be ashamed of my error.
Lord M. look at I; but as the Colonel do not by his manner seem to
intend a reflection, I have no occasion to take it for one; especially as
I can as readily own my error, as he, or any man, can his, whether
ashamed of they or not.
he proceed. as you seem to call upon I, Mr. Lovelace, I will tell you
(without boasting of it) what have be my general practice, till lately,
that I hope I have reform it a good deal.
I have take liberty, which the law of morality will by no mean
justify; and once I should have think myself warrant to cut the
throat of any young fellow who should make as free with a sister of mine
as I have make with the sister and daughter of other. but then I take
care never to promise any thing I intend not to perform. a modest ear
should as soon have hear downright obscenity from my lip, as matrimony,
if I have not intend it. young lady be generally ready enough to
believe we mean honourably, if they love we; and it would look lie a
strange affront to their virtue and charm, that it should be suppose
needful to put the question whether in your address you mean a wife. but
when once a man make a promise, I think it ought to be perform; and a
woman be well warrant to appeal to every one against the perfidy of a
deceiver; and be always sure to have the world on her side.
now, Sir, continue he, I believe you have so much honour as to own, that
you could not have make way to so eminent a virtue, without promising
marriage; and that very explicitly and solemnly--
I know very well, Colonel, interrupt I, all you would say. you will
excuse I, I be sure, that I break in upon you, when you find it be to
answer the end you drive at.
I own to you then that I have act very unworthily by Miss Clarissa
Harlowe; and Iwill tell you far, that I heartily repent of my
ingratitude and baseness to she. Nay, I will say still far, that I
be so grossly culpable as to she, that even to plead that the abuse and
affront I daily receive from her implacable relation be in any
manner a provocation to I to act vilely by she, would be a mean and low
attempt to excuse myself--so low and so mean, that it would doubly
condemn I. and if you can say bad, speak it.
he look upon Lord M. and then upon I, two or three time. and my Lord
say, my kinsman speak what he think, Iwill answer for he.
Lovel. I do, Sir; and what can I say more? and what far, in your
opinion, can be do?
Col. do! Sir? why, Sir, [in a haughty tone he speak,] I need not
tell you that reparation follow repentance. and I hope you make no
scruple of justify your sincerity as to the one or the other.
I hesitate, (for I relish not the manner of his speech, and his
haughty accent,) as undetermined whether to take proper notice of it or
not.
Col. let I put this question to you, Mr. Lovelace: be it true, as I
have hear it be, that you would marry my cousin, if she would have you?
--what say you, sir?--
this wind I up a peg high.
Lovel. some question, as they may be put, imply command, Colonel. I
would be glad to know how I be to take your'? and what be to be the end
of your interrogatory?
Col. my question be not mean by I as command, Mr. Lovelace. the
end be, to prevail upon a gentleman to act like a gentleman, and a man of
honour.
Lovel. (briskly) and by what argument, Sir, do you propose to prevail
upon I?
Col. by what argument, Sir, prevail upon a gentleman to act like a
gentleman!--i be surprised at that question from Mr. Lovelace.
Lovel. why so, Sir?
Col. WHY so, Sir! (angrily)--let me--
Lovel. (interrupting) I donot choose, Colonel, to be repeat upon, in
that accent.
Lord M. Come, come, gentleman, I beg of you to be willing to understand
one another. you young gentleman be so warm--
Col. not I, my Lord--I be neither very young, nor unduly warm. your
nephew, my Lord, can make I be every thing he would have I to be.
Lovel. and that shall be, whatever you please to be, Colonel.
Col. (fiercely) the choice be your's, Mr. Lovelace. friend or foe! as
you do or be willing to do justice to one of the fine woman in the
world.
Lord M. I guess, from both your character, what would be the case
when you meet. let I interpose, gentleman, and beg you but to understand
one another. you both shoot at one mark; and, if you be patient, will
both hit it. let I beg of you, Colonel, to give no challenges--
Col. Challenges, my Lord!--They be thing I ever be readier to accept
than to offer. but do your Lordship think that a man, so nearly
relate as I have the honour to be to the most accomplished woman on
earth,--
Lord M. (interrupting) we all allow the excellency of the lady--and
we shall all take it as the great honour to be ally to she that can
be confer upon we.
Col. so you ought, my lord!--
A perfect Chamont; think I.*
* see Otway's Orphan.
Lord M. so we ought, Colonel! and so we do!--and pray let every one do
as he ought!--and no more than he ought; and you, Colonel, let I tell
you, will not be so hasty.
Lovel. (coolly) come, come, Col. Morden, donot let this dispute, whatever
you intend to make of it, go far than with you and I. you
deliver yourself in very high term. high than ever I be talk to in
my life. but here, beneath this roof, 'twould be inexcusable for I to
take that notice of it which, perhaps, it would become I to take
elsewhere.
Col. that be speak as I wish the man to speak whom I should be please
to call my friend, if all his action be of a piece; and as I would
have the man speak whom I would think it worth my while to call my foe.
I love a man of spirit, as I love my soul. but, Mr. Lovelace, as my Lord
think we aim at one mark, let I say, that be we permit to be alone
for six minute, I dare say, we should soon understand one another
perfectly well.--And he move to the door.
Lovel. I be entirely of your opinion, Sir; and will attend you.
my Lord rung, and stept between we: Colonel, return, I beseech you
return, say he: for he have stept out of the room while my Lord hold me--
Nephew, you shall not go out.
the bell and my Lord's raise voice bring in Mowbray, and Clements, my
Lord's gentleman; the former in his careless way, with his hand behind
he, whatbe the matter, Bobby? whatbe the matter, my Lord?
only, only, only, stammer the agitated peer, these young gentleman be,
be, be--be young gentleman, thatbe all.--Pray, Colonel Morden, [who
again enter the room with a sedater aspect,] let this cause have a fair
trial, I beseech you.
Col. with all my heart, my Lord.
Mowbray whisper I, what be the cause, Bobby?--Shall I take the
gentleman to task for thee, my boy?
not for the world, whisper I. the Colonel be a gentleman, and I desire
youwill not say one word.
well, well, well, Bobby, I have do. I can turn thee loose to the good
man upon God's earth; thatbe all, Bobby; strut off to the other end
of the room.
Col. I be sorry, my Lord, I should give your lordship the least
uneasiness. I come not with such a design.
Lord M. Indeed, Colonel, I think you do, by your taking fire so
quickly. I be glad to hear you say you do not. how soon a little spark
kindle into a flame; especially when it meet with such combustible
spirit!
Col. if I have have the least thought of proceed to extremity, I be
sure Mr. Lovelace would have give I the honour of a meeting where I
should have be less an intruder: but I come with an amicable intention;
to reconcile difference rather than to widen they.
Lovel. well then, Colonel Morden, let we enter upon the subject in your
own way. I donot know the man I should soon choose to be upon term
with than one whom Miss Clarissa Harlowe so much respect. but I cannot
bear to be treat, either in word or accent, in a menacing way.
Lord M. Well, well, well, well, gentleman, this be somewhat like.
angry man make to themselves bed of nettle, and, when they lie down in
they, be uneasy with every body. but I hope you be friend. let I
hear you say you be. I be persuade, Colonel, that you donot know all
this unhappy story. you donot know how desirous my kinsman be, as well
as all of we, to have this matter end happily. you donot know, do you,
Colonel, that Mr. Lovelace, at all our request, be disposed to marry the
lady?
Col. at all your request, my lord?--i should have hop that Mr.
Lovelace be disposed to do justice for the sake of justice; and when at
the same time the doing of justice be do himself the high honour.
Mowbray lift up his before half-close eye to the Colonel, and glance
they upon I.
Lovel. this be in very high language, Colonel.
Mowbr. by my soul, I think so.
Col. High language, Mr. Lovelace? be it not just language?
Lovel. it be, Colonel. and I think, the man that do honour to Miss
Clarissa Harlowe, do I honour. but, nevertheless, there be a manner
in speak, that may be liable to exception, where the word, without
that manner, can bear none.
Col. your observation in the general be undoubtedly just: but, if you
have the value for my cousin that you say you have, you must need think
--
Lovel. you must allow I, Sir, to interrupt you--if I have the value I
say I have--I hope, Sir, when I say I have that value, there be no room
for that if, pronounce as you pronounce it with an emphasis.
Col. you have break in upon I twice, Mr. Lovelace. I be as little
accustomed to be break in upon, as you be to be repeat upon.
Lord M. two barrel of gunpowder, by my conscience! what a devil will
it signify talk, if thus you be to blow one another up at every word?
Lovel. no man of honour, my Lord, will be easy to have his veracity
call into question, though but by implication.
Col. have you hear I out, Mr. Lovelace, you would have find, that my
if be rather an if of inference, than of doubt. but 'tis, really a
strange liberty gentleman of free principle take; who at the same time
that they would resent unto death the imputation of be capable of
tell an untruth to a man, will not scruple to break through the most
solemn oath and promise to a woman. I must assure you, Mr. Lovelace,
that I always make a conscience of my vow and promise.
Lovel. you do right, Colonel. but let I tell you, Sir, that you know
not the man you talk to, if you imagine he be not able to rise to a
proper resentment, when he see his generous confession take for a mark
of base-spiritedness.
Col. (warmly, and with a sneer,) far be it from I, Mr. Lovelace, to
impute to you the baseness of spirit you speak of; for what would that be
but to imagine that a man, who have do a very flagrant injury, be not
ready to show his bravery in defend it--
Mowbr. this be d----d severe, Colonel. it be, by Jove. I could not
take so much at the hand of any man breathe as Mr. Lovelace before
this take at your's.
Col. who be you, Sir? what pretence have you to interpose in a cause
where there be an acknowledge guilt on one side, and the honour of a
considerable family wound in the tender part by that guilt on the
other?
Mowbr. (whisper to the Colonel) my dear child, you will oblige I
highly if you will give I the opportunity of answer your question.
and be go out.
the Colonel be hold in by my Lord. and I bring in Mowbray.
Col. Pray, my good Lord, let I attend this officious gentleman, I
beseech you do. I will wait upon your Lordship in three minute, depend
upon it.
Lovel. Mowbray, be this act like a friend by I, to suppose I
incapable of answer for myself? and shall a man of honour and
bravery, as I know Colonel Morden to be, (rash as perhaps in this visit
he have show himself,) have it to say, that he come to my Lord M.'s
house, in a manner naked as to attendant and friend, and shall not for
that reason be rather bear with than insult? this moment, my dear
Mowbray, leave we. you have really no concern in this business; and if
you be my friend, I desire youwill ask the Colonel pardon for interfere
in it in the manner you have do.
Mowbr. well, well, Bob.; thou shalt be arbiter in this matter; I know I
have no business in it--and, Colonel, (hold out his hand,) I leave you
to one who know how to defend his own cause as well as any man in
England.
Col. (take Mowbray's hand, at Lord M.'s request,) you need not tell
I that, Mr. Mowbray. I have no doubt of Mr. Lovelace's ability to
defend his own cause, be it a cause to be defend. and let I tell
you, Mr. Lovelace, that I be astonish to think that a brave man, and a
generous man, as you have appear to be in two or three instance that
you have give in the little knowledge I have of you, should be capable
of act as you have do by the most excellent of her sex.
Lord M. Well, but, gentleman, now Mr. Mowbray be go, and you have
both show instance of courage and generosity to boot, let I desire you
to lay your head together amicably, and think whether there be any thing
to be do to make all end happily for the lady?
Lovel. but hold, my Lord, let I say one thing, now Mowbray be go;
and that be, that I think a gentleman ought not to put up tamely one or
two severe thing that the Colonel have say.
Lord M. what the devil canst thou mean? I think all have be over.
why thou hast nothing to do but to confirm to the Colonel that thou art
willing to marry Miss Harlowe, if she will have thee.
Col. Mr. Lovelace will not scruple to say that, I suppose,
notwithstanding all that have pass: but if you think, Mr. Lovelace, I
have say any thing I should not have say, I suppose it be this, that
the man who have show so little of the thing honour, to a defenceless
unprotected woman, ought not to stand so nicely upon the empty name of
it, with a man who be expostulate with he upon it. I be sorry to have
cause to say this, Mr. Lovelace; but I would, on the same occasion,
repeat it to a king upon his throne, and surround by all his guard.
Lord M. but what be all this, but more sack upon the mill? more coal
upon the fire? you have a mind to quarrel both of you, I see that. be
you not willing, Nephew, be you not most willing, to marry this lady, if
she can be prevail upon to have you?
Lovel. D---n I, my Lord, if Iwould marry my empress upon such treatment
as this.
Lord M. why now, Bob., thou art more choleric than the Colonel. it be
his turn just now. and now you see he be cool, you be all gunpowder.
Lovel. I own the Colonel have many advantage over I; but, perhaps,
there be one advantage he have not, if it be put to the trial.
Col. I come not hither, as I say before, to seek the occasion: but if
it be offer I, I willnot refuse it--and since we find we disturb my
good Lord M. Iwill take my leave, and will go home by the way of St.
Alban's.
Lovel. Iwill see you part of the way, with all my heart, Colonel.
Col. I accept your civility very cheerfully, Mr. Lovelace.
Lord M. (interpose again, as we be both for go out,) and what
will this do, gentleman? suppose you kill one another, will the matter
be better or worst by that? will the lady be make happy or
unhappy, do you think, by either or both of your death? your
character be too well known to make fresh instance of the courage of
either needful. and, I think, if the honour of the lady be your view,
Colonel, it can by no other way so effectually promote as by marriage.
and, Sir, if you would use your interest with she, it be very probable
that you may succeed, though nobody else can.
Lovel. I think, my Lord, I have say all that a man can say, (since
what be pass cannot be recall:) and you see Colonel Morden rise in
proportion to my coolness, till it be necessary for I to assert myself,
or even he would despise I.
Lord M. let I ask you, Colonel, have you any way, any method, that you
think reasonable and honourable to propose, to bring about a
reconciliation with the lady? that be what we all wish for. and I can
tell you, Sir, it be not a little owe to her family, and to their
implacable usage of she, that her resentment be heighten against my
kinsman; who, however, have use she vilely; but be willing to repair she
wrongs.--
Lovel. not, my Lord, for the sake of her family; nor for this
gentleman's haughty behaviour; but for her own sake, and in full sense of
the wrong I have do she.
Col. as to my haughty behaviour, as you call it, Sir, I be mistaken if
you would not have go beyond it in the like case of a relation so
meritorious, and so unworthily injure. and, Sir, let I tell you, that
if your motif be not love, honour, and justice, and if they have the
least tincture of mean compassion for she, or of an uncheerful assent on
your part, I be sure it will neither be desire or accept by a person
of my cousin's merit and sense; nor shall I wish that it should.
Lovel. donot think, Colonel, that I be meanly compound off a debate,
that I should as willingly go through with you as to eat or drink, if I
have the occasion give I for it: but thus much I will tell you, that my
Lord, that Lady Sarah Sadleir, Lady Betty Lawrance, my two cousin
Montague, and myself, have write to she in the most solemn and sincere
manner, to offer she such term as no one but herself would refuse, and
this long enough before Colonel Morden's arrival be dream of.
Col. what reason, Sir, may I ask, do she give, against listen to
so powerful a mediation, and to such offer?
Lovel. it look like capitulating, or else--
Col. it look not like any such thing to I, Mr. Lovelace, who have as
good an opinion of your spirit as man can have. and what, pray, be the
part I act, and my motif for it? be they not, in desire that
justice may be do to my Cousin Clarissa Harlowe, that I seek to
establish the honour of Mrs. Lovelace, if matter can once be bring to
bear?
Lovel. be she to honour I with her acceptance of that name, Mr.
Morden, I should not want you or any man to assert the honour of Mrs.
Lovelace.
Col. I believe it. but still she have honour you with that
acceptance, she be near to I than to you, Mr. Lovelace. and I speak
this, only to show you that, in the part I take, I mean rather to deserve
your thank than your displeasure, though against yourself, be there
occasion. nor ought you take it amiss, if you rightly weigh the matter:
For, Sir, whom do a lady want protection against but her injurer? and
who have be her great injurer?--till, therefore, she become entitle
to your protection, as your wife, you yourself cannot refuse I some
merit in wish to have justice do my cousin. but, Sir, you be
go to say, that if it be not to look like capitulate, you would
hint the reason my cousin give against accept such an honourable
mediation?
I then tell he of my sincere offer of marriage: 'I make no difficulty,
I say, to own my apprehension, that my unhappy behaviour to she have
greatly affect she: but that it be the implacableness of her friend
that have throw she into despair, and give she a contempt for life.' I
tell he, 'that she have be so good as to send I a letter to divert I
from a visit my heart be set upon make she: a letter on which I build
great hope, because she assure I that in it she be go to her
father's; and that I might see she there, when she be receive, if it
be not my own fault.
Col. be it possible? and be you, Sir, thus earnest? and do she
send you such a letter?
Lord M. confirm both; and also, that, in obedience to her desire, and
that intimation, I have come down without the satisfaction I have propose
to myself in see she.
it be very true, Colonel, say I: and I should have tell you this before:
but your heat make I decline it; for, as I say, it have an appearance of
meanly capitulate with you. an abjectness of heart, of which, have I
be capable, I should have despise myself as much as I might have
expect you would despise I.
Lord M. propose to enter into the proof of all this. he say, in his
phraseological way, that one story be good till another be hear; and
that the Harlowe family and I, 'twa true, have behave like so many
orson to one another; and that they have be very free with all our
family besides: that nevertheless, for the lady's sake, more than for
their's, or even for mine, (he could tell I,) he would do great thing
for I than they could ask, if she could be bring to have I: and that
this he want to declare, and would soon have declare, if he could
have bring we soon to patience, and a good understanding.
the Colonel make excuse for his warmth, on the score of his affection to
his cousin.
my regard for she make I readily admit they: and so a fresh bottle of
Burgundy, and another of Champagne, be put upon the table, we sit down
in good humour, after all this blustering, in order to enter close into
the particular of the case: which I undertake, at both their desire, to
do.
but these thing must be the subject of another letter, which shall
immediately follow this, if it do not accompany it.
mean time you will observe that a bad cause give a man great
disadvantage: for I myself thing that the interrogatory put to I with
so much spirit by the Colonel make I look cursedly mean; at the same
time that it give he a superiority which I know not how to allow to the
good man in Europe. so that, literally speak, as a good man would
infer, guilt be its own punisher: in that it make the most lofty spirit
look like the miscreant he be--a good man, I say: so, Jack, proleptically
I add, thou hast no right to make the observation.
LETTER XL
MR. LOVELACE
[in CONTINUATION.]
TUESDAY AFTERNOON, AUG. 29.
I go back, in this part of our conversation, to the day that I be
oblige to come down to attend my Lord in the dangerous illness which
some fear would have be his last.
I tell the Colonel, 'what earnest letter I have write to a particular
friend, to engage he to prevail upon the lady not to slip a day that have
be propose for the private celebration of our nuptial; and of my
letter* write to she on that subject;' for I have step to my closet,
and fetch down all the letter and draught and copy of letter
relate to this affair.
* see Vol. VI. Letters XXXVII. xxxviii. XXXIX. XLIII.
I read to he, 'several passage in the copy of those letter, which,
thou wilt remember, make not a little to my honour.' and I tell he,
'that I wish I have keep copy of those to my friend on the same
occasion; by which he would have see how much in earnest I be in my
profession to she, although she would not answer one of they;' and thou
mayest remember, that one of those four letter account to herself why
I be desirous she should remain where I have leave she.*
* see Vol. VI. Letter XXXVII.
I then proceed to give he an account 'of the visit make by Lady Sarah
and Lady Betty to Lord M. and I, in order to induce I to do she
justice: of my readiness to comply with their desire; and of their high
opinion of her merit: of the visit make to Miss Howe by my cousin
Montague, in the name of we all, to engage her interest with her friend
in my behalf: of my conversation with Miss Howe, at a private assembly,
to whom I give the same assurance, and besought her interest with her
friend.'
I then read a copy of the letter (though so much to my disadvantage)
which be write to she by Miss Charlotte Montague, Aug. 1,* entreating
her alliance in the name of all our family.
* see Vol. VII. Letter LXVI.
this make he ready to think that his fair cousin carry her resentment
against I too far. he do not imagine, he say, that either myself or
our family have be so much in earnest.
so thou seest, Belford, that it be but gloss over one part of a story,
and omit another, that will make a bad cause a good one at any time.
what an admirable lawyer should I have make! and what a poor hand would
this charming creature, with all her innocence, have make of it in a
court of justice against a man who have so much to say and to show for
himself!
I then hint at the generous annual tender which Lord M. and his sister
make to his fair cousin, in apprehension that she might suffer by her
friend' implacableness.
and this also the Colonel highly applaud, and be pleased to lament the
unhappy misunderstanding between the two family, which have make the
Harlowes less fond of an alliance with a family of so much honour as this
instance show our to be.
I then tell he, 'that having, by my friend, [mean thee,] who be
admit into her presence, (and who have always be an admirer of her
virtue, and have give I such advice from time to time in relation to
she as I wish I have follow,) be assure that a visit from I would
be very disagreeable to she, I once more resolve to try what a letter
would do; and that, accordingly, on the seventh of August, I write she
one.
'this, Colonel, be the copy of it. I be then out of humour with my Lord
M. and the lady of my family. you will, therefore, read it to
yourself.'*
* see Vol. VII. Letter LXXIX.
this letter give he high satisfaction. you write here, Mr. Lovelace,
from your heart. 'tis a letter full of penitence and acknowledgement.
your request be reasonable--to be forgive only as you shall appear to
deserve it after a time of probation, which you leave to she to fix.
Pray, Sir, do she return an answer to this letter?
she do, but with reluctance, I own, and not till I have declare by my
friend, that, if I could not procure one, I would go up to town, and
throw myself at her foot.
I wish I might be permit to see it, Sir, or to hear such part of it
read as you shall think proper.
turn over my paper, here it be, Sir.* I will make no scruple to put
it into your hand.
this be very obliging, Mr. Lovelace.
he read it. my charming cousin!--how strong her resentments!--yet how
charitable her wishes!--good Heaven! that such an excellent creature--
But, Mr. Lovelace, it be to your regret, as much as to mine, I doubt not
--
interrupt he, I swear that it be.
so it ought, say he. nor do I wonder that it should be so. I shall
tell you by-and-by, proceed he, how much she suffer with her friend
by false and villanous report. but, Sir, will you permit I to take
with I these two letter? I shall make use of they to the advantage of
you both.
I tell he I would oblige he with all my heart. and this he take very
kindly (as he have reason); and put they in his pocket-book, promise to
return hem in a few day.
I then tell he, 'that upon this her refusal, I take upon myself to go to
town, in hope to move she in my favour; and that, though I go without
give her notice of my intention, yet have she get some notion of my
coming, and so contrive to be out of the way: and at last, when she
find I be fully determined at all event to see she, before I go
abroad, (which I shall do, say I, if I cannot prevail upon she,) she
send I the letter I have already mention to you, desire I to
suspend my purposed visit: and that for a reason which amaze and
confound I; because I donot find there be any thing in it: and yet I
never know she once dispense with her word; for she always make it a
maxim, that it be not lawful to do evil, that good might come of it: and
yet in this letter, for no reason in the world but to avoid see I (to
gratify an humour only) have she send I out of town, depend upon the
assurance she have give I.'
Col. this be indeed surprising. but I cannot believe that my cousin,
for such an end only, or indeed for any end, accord to the character I
hear of she, should stoop to make use of such an artifice.
Lovel. this, Colonel, be the thing that astonish I; and yet, see
here!--this be the letter she write I--Nay, Sir, 'tis her own hand.
Col. I see it be; and a charming hand it be.
Lovel. you observe, Colonel, that all her hope of reconciliation with
her parent be from you. you be her dear bless friend! she always
talk of you with delight.
Col. would to Heaven I have come to England before she leave
Harlowe-place!--nothing of this have then happen. not a man of those
whom I have hear that her friend propose for she should have have she.
nor you, Mr. Lovelace, unless I have find you to be the man every one who
see you must wish you to be: and if you have be that man, no one live
should I have prefer to you for such an excellence.
my Lord and I both join in the wish: and 'faith I wish it most
cordially.
the Colonel read the letter twice over, and then return it to I. 'tis
all a mystery, say he. I can make nothing of it. for, alas! she
friend be as averse to a reconciliation as ever.
Lord M. I could not have think it. but donot you think there be
something very favourable to my nephew in this letter--something that
look as if the lady would comply at last?
Col. let I die if I know what to make of it. this letter be very
different from she precede one!--you return an answer to it, Mr.
Lovelace?
Lovel. an answer, Colonel! no doubt of it. and an answer full of
transport. I tell she, 'I would directly set out for Lord M.'s, in
obedience to her will. I tell she that I would consent to any thing she
should command, in order to promote this happy reconciliation. I tell
she that it should be my hourly study, to the end of my life, to deserve
a goodness so transcendent.' but I cannot forbear say that I be not a
little shocked and surprised, if nothing more be mean by it than to get
I into the country without see she.
Col. that cannot be the thing, depend upon it, Sir. there must be more
in it than that. for, be that all, she must think you would soon be
undeceived, and that you would then most probably resume your intention--
unless, indeed, she depend upon see I in the interim, as she know I
be arrive. but I own I know not what to make of it. only that she
do I a great deal of honour, if it be I that she call her dear
bless friend, whom she always love and honour. indeed I ever love
she: and if I die unmarried, and without child, shall be as kind to
she as her grandfather be: and the rather, as I fear there be too much
of envy and self-love in the resentment her brother and sister endeavour
to keep up in her father and mother against she. but I shall know well
how to judge of this, when my cousin James come from Edinburgh; and he
be every hour expect.
but let I ask you, Mr. Lovelace, what be the name of your friend, who be
admit so easily into my cousin's presence? be it not Belford, pray?
Lovel. it be, Sir; and Mr. Belford's a man of honour; and a great
admirer of your fair cousin.
be I right, as to the first, Jack? the last I have such strong proof
of, that it make I question the first; since she would not have be
out of the way of my intend visit but for thee.
Col. be you sure, Sir, that Mr. Belford be a man of honour?
Lovel. I can swear for he, Colonel. what make you put this question?
Col. only this: that an officious pragmatical novice have be send up
to inquire into my cousin's life and conversation: and, would you believe
it? the frequent visit of this gentleman have be interpret basely to
she disreputation.--read that letter, Mr. Lovelace; and you will be
shock at ever part of it.
this cursed letter, no doubt, be from the young Levite, whom thou, Jack,
describ as make inquiry of Mrs. Smith about Miss Harlowe's character
and visiter.*
* see Vol. VII. Letter LXXXI.
I believe I be a quarter of an hour in read it: for I make it, though
not a short one, six time as long as it be, by the addition of oath
and curse to every pedantic line. Lord M. too help to lengthen it, by
the like execration. and thou, Jack, wilt have as much reason to curse
it as we.
you cannot but see, say the Colonel, when I have do read it, that
this fellow have be officious in his malevolence; for what he say be
mere hearsay, and that hearsay conjectural scandal without fact, or the
appearance of fact, to support it; so that an unprejudiced eye, upon the
face of the letter, would condemn the writer of it, as I do, and acquit
my cousin. but yet, such be the spirit by which the rest of my relation
be govern, that they run away with the belief of the bad it
insinuate, and the dear creature have have shocking letter upon it; the
pedant's hint be take; and a voyage to one of the colony have be
propose to she, as the only way to avoid Mr. Belford and you. I have
not see these letter indeed; but they take a pride in repeat some of
their content, which must have cut the poor soul to the heart; and
these, join to her former sufferings,--What have you not, Mr. Lovelace,
to answer for?
Lovel. who the devil could have expect such consequence as these?
who could have believe there could be parent so implacable? brother and
sister so immovably fix against the only mean that could be take to
put all right with every body?--and what now can be do?
Lord M. I have great hope that Col. Morden may yet prevail upon his
cousin. and, by her last letter, it run in my mind that she have some
thought of forgive all thatbe past. do you think, Colonel, if there
should not be such a thing as a reconciliation go forward at present,
that her letter may not imply that, if we could bring such a thing to
bear with her friend, she would be reconcile with Mr. Lovelace?
Col. such an artifice would well become the italian subtilty than the
english simplicity. your Lordship have be in Italy, I presume?
Lovel. my Lord have read Boccaccio, perhaps; and thatbe as well, as to
the hint he give, which may be borrow from one of that author's
story. but Miss Clarissa Harlowe be above all artifice. she must have
some meaning I cannot fathom.
Col. Well, my Lord, I can only say that I will make some use of the
letter Mr. Lovelace have oblige I with: and after I have have some talk
with my cousin James, who be hourly expect; and when I have dispatch
two or three affair that press upon I; I will pay my respect to my
dear cousin; and shall then be able to form a well judgment of thing.
mean time I will write to she; for I have send to inquire about she, and
find she want consolation.
Lovel. if you favour I, Colonel, with the d----d letter of that fellow
Brand for a day or two, you will oblige I.
Col. I will. but remember, the man be a parson, Mr. Lovelace; an
innocent one too, they say. else I have be at he before now. and
these college novice, who think they know every thing in their
cloister, and that all learn lie in book, make dismal figure when
they come into the world among man and woman.
Lord M. Brand! brand! it should have be Firebrand, I think in my
conscience!
thus end this doughty conference.
I cannot say, Jack, but I be greatly take with Col. Morden. he be brave
and generous, and know the world; and then his contempt of the parson
be a certain sign that he be one of we.
we part with great civility: Lord M. (not a little pleased that we do,
and as greatly take with Colonel) repeat his wish, after the Colonel
be go, that he have arrive in time to save the lady, if that would
have do it.
I wish so too. for by my soul, Jack, I be every day more and more uneasy
about she. but I hope she be not so ill as I be tell she be.
I have make Charlotte transcribe the letter of this Firebrand, as my Lord
call he; and will enclose her copy of it. all thy phlegm I know will
be rouse into vengeance when thou readest it.
I know not what to advise as to show it to the lady. yet, perhaps,
she will be able to reap more satisfaction than concern from it, know
her own innocence; in that it will give she to hope that her friend'
treatment of she be owe as much to misrepresentation as to their own
natural implacableness. such a mind as shebe, I know, would be glad to
find out the shadow of a reason for the shocking letter the Colonel say
they have send she, and for their proposal to she of go to some one of
the colony [confound they all--but, if I begin to curse, I shall never
have done]--Then it may put she upon such a defence as she might be glad
of an opportunity to make, and to shame they for their monstrous
credulity--but this I leave to thy own fat-head prudence--only it vex
I to the heart, that even scandal and calumny should dare to surmise the
bare possibility of any man share the favour of a woman, whom now
methink I could worship with a veneration due only to a divinity.
Charlotte and her sister could not help weep at the base aspersion:
when, when, say Patty, lift up her hand, will this sweet lady's
suffering be at an end?--O cousin Lovelace!--
and thus be I blame for every one's faults!--when her brutal father
curse she, it be I. I upbraid she with her severe mother. the
implacableness of her stupid uncle be all mine. the virulence of her
brother, and the spite of her sister, be entirely owe to I. the
letter of this rascal Brand be of my writing--o Jack, what a wretch be
thy Lovelace!
***
return without a letter!--this d----d fellow Will. be return without
a letter!--Yet the rascal tell I that he hear you have be write to
I these two day!
Plague confound thee, who must know my impatience, and the reason for it!
to send a man and horse on purpose; as I do! my imagination chain I
to the belly of the beast, in order to keep pace with him!--now he be get
to this place; now to that; now to London; now to thee!
now [a letter give he] whip and spur upon the return. this town just
enter, not stay to bait: that village pass by: leave the wind
behind he; in a foaming sweat man and horse.
and in this way do he actually enter Lord M.'s courtyard.
the reverberate pavement bring I down--the letter, will.! the
letter, dog!--the letter, Sirrah!
no letter, sir!--then wildly star round I, fist clench, and
grinning like a maniac, confound thee for a dog, and he that send thee
without one!--this moment out of my sight, or Iwill scatter thy stupid
brain through the air. I snatch from his holster a pistol, while the
rascal throw himself from the foaming beast, and run to avoid the fate
which I wish with all my soul thou hadst be within the reach of I to
have meet with.
but, to be as meek as a lamb to one who have I at his mercy, and can
wring and torture my soul as he please, what canst thou mean to send
back my varlet without a letter?--I will send away by day-dawn another
fellow upon another beast for what thou hast write; and I charge thee
on thy allegiance, that thou dispatch he not back empty-handed.
POSTSCRIPT
Charlotte, in a whim of delicacy, be displeased that I send the enclosed
letter to you--that her handwriting, forsooth! should go into the hand
of a single man!
therebe encouragement for thee, Belford! this be a certain sign that
thou may'st have she if thou wilt. and yet, till she have give I this
unerring demonstration of her glance towards thee, I could not have
think it. indeed I have often in pleasantry tell she that I would
bring such an affair to bear. but I never intend it; because she
really be a dainty girl; and thou art such a clumsy fellow in thy person,
that I should as soon have wish she a rhinoceros for a husband as thee.
but, poor little dear! they must stay till their time's come! they
willnot have this man, and they willnot have that man, from seventeen to
twenty-five: but then, afraid, as the saying be, that God have forget
they, and find their bloom depart, they be glad of whom they can
get, and verify the fable of the parson and the pear.
LETTER XLI
MR. BRAND, to JOHN HARLOWE, ESQ.
[enclosed in the PRECEDING.]
WORTHY SIR, MY very good FRIEND and PATRON,
I arrive in town yesterday, after a tolerably pleasant journey
(consider the hot weather and dusty road). I put up at the Bull and
Gate in Holborn, and hasten to Covent-garden. I soon find the house
where the unhappy lady lodgeth. and, in the back shop, have a good deal
of discourse* with Mrs. Smith, (her landlady,) whom I find to be so
'highly prepossessed'** in her 'favour,' that I see it would not answer
your desire to take my information 'altogether' from she: and be
oblige to attend my patron, (who to my sorrow,
* see Vol. VII. Letter LXXXI.
** Transcriber's note: Mr. Brand's letter be characterize by a style
that make excessive use of italic for emphasis. although in the
remainder of _Clarissa_ I have largely disregarded italic for the sake
of plain-text formatting, this style make such emphatic use of italic
that I have indicate all such instance in his letter by place the
italicize word and phrase in quotation, thus ' '.
'Miserum et aliena vivere quadra,')
I find wanteth much wait upon, and be 'another' sort of man than he
be at college: for, Sir, 'inter nos,' 'honour change manner.' for the
'aforesaid cause,' I think it would well answer all the end of the
commission with which you honour I, to engage, in the desire
scrutiny, the wife of a 'particular friend,' who liveth almost
over-against the house where she lodgeth, and who be a gentlewoman of
'character,' and 'sobriety,' a 'mother of child,' and one who
'knoweth' the 'world' well.
to she I apply myself, therefore, and give she a short history of the
case, and desire she would very particularly inquire into the 'conduct'
of the unhappy young lady; her 'present way of life' and 'subsistence';
her 'visiter,' her 'employment,' and such-like: for these, Sir, you
know, be the thing whereof you wish to be inform.
accordingly, Sir, I wait upon the gentlewoman aforesaid, this day; and,
to 'my' very great trouble, (because I know it will be to 'your's,' and
likewise to all your worthy family's,) I must say, that I do find thing
look a little more 'darkly' than I hop the would. for, alas! Sir, the
gentlewoman's report turneth out not so 'favourable' for Miss's
reputation, as 'I' wish, as 'you' wish, and as 'every one' of her
friend wish. but so it be throughout the world, that 'one false step'
generally bring on 'another'; and peradventure 'a bad,' and 'a still
bad'; till the poor 'lime soul' (a very fit epithet of the Divine
Quarles's!) be quite 'entangle,' and (without infinite mercy) lose for
ever.
it seemeth, Sir, she be, notwithstanding, in a very 'ill state of
health.' in this, 'both' gentlewoman (that be to say, Mrs. Smith, her
landlady, and my friend's wife) agree. yet she goeth often out in a
chair, to 'prayer' (as it be say). but my friend's wife tell I, that
nothing be more common in London, than that the frequenting of the church
at morning prayer be make the 'pretence' and 'cover' for 'private
assignation.' what a sad thing be this! that what be design for
'wholesome nourishment' to the 'poor soul,' should be turn into 'rank
poison!' but as Mr. Daniel de Foe (an ingenious man, though a
'dissenter') observeth (but indeed it be an old proverb; only I think he
be the first that put it into verse)
God never have a house of pray'r
but Satan have a chapel there.
yet to do the lady 'justice,' nobody cometh home with she: nor indeed
'can' they, because she goeth forward and backward in a 'sedan,' or
'chair,' (as they call it). but then there be a gentleman of 'no good
character' (an 'intimado' of Mr. Lovelace) who be a 'constant' visiter
of she, and of the people of the house, whom he 'regaleth' and
'treateth,' and hath (of consequence) their 'high good word.'
I have thereupon take the trouble (for I love to be 'exact' in any
'commission' I undertake) to inquire 'particularly' about this
'gentleman,' as he be call (albeit I hold no man so but by his action:
for, as Juvenal saith,
--'nobilitas sola est, atque unica virtus')
and this I do 'before' I would sit down to write to you.
his name be Belford. he hath a paternal estate of upwards of one
thousand pound by the year; and be now in mourn for an uncle who leave
he very considerably besides. he beareth a very profligate character as
to 'woman,' (for I inquire particularly about 'that,') and be Mr.
Lovelace's more especial 'privado,' with whom he holdeth a 'regular
correspondence'; and hath be often see with Miss (tete a tete) at the
'window'--in no 'bad way,' indeed: but my friend's wife be of opinion
that all be not 'as it should be.' and, indeed, it be mighty strange to
I, if Miss be so 'notable a penitent' (as be represent) and if she
have such an 'aversion' to Mr. Lovelace, that she will admit his
'privado' into 'her retirement,' and see 'no other company.'
I understand, from Mrs. Smith, that Mr. Hickman be to see she some time
ago, from Miss Howe; and I be tell, by 'another' hand, (you see, Sir, how
diligent I have be to execute the 'commission' you give I,) that he
have no 'extraordinary opinion' of this Belford at first; though they be
see together one morning by the opposite neighbour, at 'breakfast': and
another time this Belford be observe to 'watch' Mr. Hickman's come
from she; so that, as it should seem, he be mighty zealous to
'ingratiate' himself with Mr. Hickman; no doubt to engage he to make a
'favourable report to Miss Howe' of the 'intimacy' he be admit into
by her unhappy friend; who ('as she be very ill') may 'mean no harm' in
allow his visit, (for he, it seemeth, bring to she, or recommend,
at least, the doctor and apothecary that attend she:) but I think (upon
the whole) 'it looketh not well.'
I be sorry, Sir, I cannot give you a well account of the young lady's
'prudence.' but, what shall we say?
'Uvaque conspecta livorem ducit ab uva,'
as Juvenal observeth.
one thing I be afraid of; which be, that Miss may be under 'necessity';
and that this Belford (who, as Mrs. Smith own, hath 'offer her money,'
which she, 'at the time,' refuse) may find an opportunity to 'take
advantage' of those 'necessity': and it be well observe by that poet,
that
'AEgre formosam poteris servare puellam:
Nunc prece, nunc pretio, forma petita ruit.'
and this Belford (who be a 'bold man,' and hath, as they say, the 'look'
of one) may make good that of Horace, (with whose writing you be so
well acquaint; nobody well;)
'Audax omnia perpeti,
Gens humana ruit per vetitum nefas.'
forgive I, Sir, for what I be go to write: but if you could prevail
upon the rest of your family to join in the scheme which 'you,' and her
'virtuous sister,' Miss Arabella, and the Archdeacon, and I, once talk
of, (which be to persuade the unhappy young lady to go, in some
'creditable' manner, to some one of the foreign colony,) it might not
save only her 'own credit' and 'reputation,' but the 'reputation' and
'credit' of all her 'family,' and a great deal of 'vexation' moreover.
for it be my humble opinion, that you will hardly (any of you) enjoy
yourself while this ('once' innocent) young lady be in the way of be
so frequently hear of by you: and this would put she 'out of the way'
both of 'this Belford' and of 'that Lovelace,' and it might,
peradventure, prevent as much 'evil' as 'scandal.'
you will forgive I, Sir, for this my 'plainness.' Ovid pleadeth for I,
'----adulator nullus amicus erit.'
and I have no view but that of approve myself a 'zealous well-wisher'
to 'all' your worthy family, (whereto I owe a great number of
obligation,) and very particularly, Sir,
your obliged and humble servant,
ELIAS BRAND.
WEDN. AUG. 9.
P.S. I shall give you 'farth hint' when I come down, (which will be in
a few day;) and who my 'informant' be; but by 'these' you will
see, that I have be very assiduous (for the time) in the task you
set I upon.
the 'length' of my letter you will excuse: for I need not tell you, Sir,
what 'narrative,' 'complex,' and 'conversation' letter (such a one
as 'mine') require. every one to his 'talent.' 'letter-writing'
be mine. I will be bold to say; and that my 'correspondence' be
much coveted in the university, on that account, by 'tiro,' and
by 'soph,' when I be hardly a 'soph' myself. but this I should
not have take upon myself to mention, but only in defence of the
'length' of my letter; for nobody writeth 'short' or 'pithier,'
when the subject requireth 'common form' only--but, in apologize
for my 'prolixity,' I be 'add' to the 'fault,' (if it be one,
which, however, I cannot think it to be, the 'subject' consider:
but this I have say before in other word:) so, Sir, if you will
excuse my 'post-script,' I be sure you will not find fault with my
'letter.'
one word more as to a matter of 'erudition,' which you greatly love to
hear I 'start' and 'dwell upon.' Dr. Lewen once, in 'your'
presence, (as you, 'my good patron,' cannot but remember,) in a
'smartish' kind of debate between 'he' and 'I,' take upon he to
censure the 'paranthetical' style, as I call it. he be a very
learn and judicious man, to be sure, and an ornament to 'our
function': but yet I must need say, that it be a style which I
greatly like; and the good Doctor be then past his 'youth,' and
that time of life, of consequence, when a 'fertile imagination,'
and a 'rich fancy,' pour in idea so fast upon a writer, that
parenthesis be often want (and that for the sake of 'brevity,'
as well as 'perspicuity') to save the reader the trouble of read
a passage 'more than once.' every man to his talent, (as I say
before.) we be all so apt to set up our 'natural biasse' for
'general standard,' that I wonder 'the less' at the worthy
Doctor's 'stiffness' on this occasion. he 'smile at I,' you may
remember, Sir--and, whether I be right or not, I be sure I 'smile
at he.' and 'you,' my 'worthy patron,' (as I have the satisfaction
to observe,) seem to be of 'my party.' but be it not strange,
that the 'old gentleman' and 'I' should so widely differ, when the
'end' with 'both' (that be to say, 'perspicuity' or 'clearness,')
be the same?--but what shall we say?--
'errare est homini, se non persistere.'
I think I have nothing to add until I have the honour of attend you in
'person'; but I be, (as above,) &c. &c. &c.
E.B.
LETTER XLII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY NIGHT, AUG. 30.
it be lucky enough that our two servant meet at Hannah's,* which give
they so good an opportunity of exchange their letter time enough for
each to return to his master early in the day.
* the Windmill, near Slough.
Thou dost well to boast of thy capacity for manage servant, and to set
up for correct our poet in their character of this class of people,*
when, like a madman, thou canst beat their tooth out, and attempt to
shoot they through the head, for not bring to thee what they have no
power to obtain.
* see Letter XX. of this volume.
you well observe* that you would have make a thorough-pace lawyer. the
whole of the conversation-piece between you and the Colonel afford a
convincing proof that there be a black and a white side to every cause:
but what must the conscience of a partial whitener of his own cause, or
blackener of another's, tell he, while he be throw dust in the eye
of his judge, and all the time know his own guilt?
* see Letter XL. of this volume.
the Colonel, I see, be far from be a faultless man: but while he
seek not to carry his point by breach of faith, he have an excuse which
thou hast not. but, with respect to he, and to we all, I can now, with
the detestation of some of my own action, see, that the taking advantage
of another person's good opinion of we to injure (perhaps to ruin) that
other, be the most ungenerous wickedness that can be commit.
Man act thus by man, we should not be at a loss to give such action a
name: but be it not doubly and trebly aggravate, when such advantage be
take of an unexperienced and innocent young creature, whom we pretend to
love above all the woman in the world; and when we seal our pretence by
the most solemn vow and protestation of inviolable honour that we can
invent?
I see that this gentleman be the good match thou ever couldest have have,
upon all account: his spirit such another impetuous one as thy own; soon
take fire; vindictive; and only differ in this, that the cause he
engage in be a just one. but commend I to honest brutal Mowbray, who,
before he know the cause, offer his sword in thy behalf against a man
who have take the injure side, and whom he have never see before.
as soon as I have run through your letter, and the copy of that of the
incendiary Brand's, (by the latter of which I see to what cause a great
deal of this last implacableness of the Harlowe family be owe,) I take
coach to Smith's, although I have be come from thence but about an hour,
and have take leave of the lady for the night.
I send up for Mrs. Lovick, and desire she, in the first place, to
acquaint the lady (who be busy in her closet,) that I have letter from
Berks: in which I be inform, that the interview between Colonel Morden
and Mr. Lovelace have end without ill consequence; that the Colonel
intend to write to she very soon, and be interesting himself mean
while, in her favour, with her relation; that I hop that this
agreeable news would be mean of give her good rest; and I would wait
upon she in the morning, by the time she should return from prayer, with
all the particular.
she send I word that she should be glad to see I in the morning; and
be highly obliged to I for the good news I have send she up.
I then, in the back shop, read to Mrs. Lovick and to Mrs. Smith the copy
of Brand's letter, and ask they if they could guess at the man's
informant? they be not at a loss; Mrs. Smith have see the same
fellow Brand who have talk with she, as I mention in the former,* come
out of a milliner's shop over against they; which milliner, she say, have
also lately be very inquisitive about the lady.
* see Vol. VII. Letter LXXXI.
I want no far hint; but, bid they take no notice to the lady of
what I have read, I shoot over the way, and, ask for the mistress of the
house, she come to I.
retire with she, at her invitation, into her parlour, I desire to know
if she be acquaint with a young country clergyman of the name of
Brand. she hesitatingly, see I in some emotion, own that she have
some small knowledge of the gentleman. just then come in her husband,
who be, it seem, a petty officer of excise, (and not an ill-behave
man,) who own a full knowledge of he.
I have the copy of a letter, say I, from this Brand, in which he have
take great liberty with my character, and with that of the most
unblamable lady in the world, which he ground upon information that you,
Madam, have give he. and then I read to they several passage in his
letter, and ask what foundation she have for give that fellow such
impression of either of we?
they know not what to answer: but at last say, that he have tell they how
wickedly the young lady have run away from her parent: what worthy and
rich people they be: in what favour he stand with they; and that they
have employ he to inquire after her behaviour, visiter, &c.
they say, 'that indeed they know very little of the young lady; but that
[curse upon their censoriousness!] it be but too natural to think, that,
where a lady have give way to a delusion, and take so wrong a step, she
would not stop there: that the most sacred place and thing be but too
often make cloke for bad action; that Mr. Brand have be inform
(perhaps by some enemy of mine) that I be a man of very free principle,
and an intimado, as he call it, of the man who have ruin she. and that
their cousin Barker, a manteau-maker, who lodge up one pair of stair,'
(and who, at their desire, come down and confirm what they say,) 'have
often, from her window, see I with the lady in her chamber, and both
talk very earnestly together; and that Mr. Brand, be unable to
account for she admire my visit, and know I be but a new
acquaintance of she's, and an old one of Mr. Lovelace, think himself
oblige to lay these matter before her friend.'
this be the sum and substance of their tale. o how I curse the
censoriousness of this plaguy triumvirate! a parson, a milliner, and a
mantua-maker! the two latter, not more by business lead to adorn the
person, than generally by scandal to destroy the reputation, of those
they have a mind to exercise their talent upon!
the two woman take great pain to persuade I that they themselves be
people of conscience;--of consequence, I tell they, too much addicted, I
fear, to censure other people who pretend not to their strictness;
for that I have ever find censoriousness, with those who affect to be
think more pious than their neighbour.
they answer, that that be not their case; and that they have since
inquire into the lady's character and manner of life, and be very much
concerned to think any thing they have say should be make use of against
she: and as they hear from Mrs. Smith that she be not likely to live
long, they should be sorry she should go out of the world a sufferer by
their mean, or with an ill opinion of they, though stranger to she.
the husband offer to write, if I please, to Mr. Brand, in vindication
of the lady; and the two woman say they should be glad to wait upon she
in person, to beg her pardon for any thing she have reason to take amiss
from they; because they be now convince that there be not such
another young lady in the world.
I tell they that the least say of the affair to the lady, in her present
circumstance, be good. that she be a heavenly creature, and fond of
take all occasion to find excuse for her relation on their
implacableness to she: that therefore I should take some notice to she of
the uncharitable and weak surmise which give birth to so vile a scandal:
but that I would have he, Mr. Walton, (for that be the husband's name,)
write to his acquaintance Brand as soon as possible, as he have offer;
and so I leave they.
as to what thou sayest of thy charming cousin, let I know if thou hast
any meaning in it. I have not the vanity to think myself deserve of
such a lady as Miss Montague; and should not therefore care to expose
myself to her scorn and to thy derision. but be I assure I might
avoid both of these, I would soon acquaint thee that I should think no
pain nor assiduity too much to obtain a share in the good grace of such
a lady.
but I know thee too well to depend upon any thing thou sayest on this
subject. Thou lovest to make thy friend the object of ridicule to
lady; and imaginest, from the vanity, (and, in this respect, I will say
littleness,) of thine own heart, that thou shin the brighter for the
foil.
thus didst thou once play off the rough Mowbray with Miss Hatton, till
the poor fellow know not how to go either backward or forward.
LETTER XLIII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
THURSDAY, 11 O'CLOCK, AUG. 31.
I be just come from the lady, whom I leave cheerful and serene.
she thank I for my communication of the precede night. I read to
her such part of your letter as I could read to she; and I think it
be a good test to distinguish the froth and whipt-syllabub in they from
the cream, in what one could and could not read to a woman of so fine a
mind; since four part out of six of thy letter, which I think
entertaining as I read they to myself, appear to I, when I should have
read they to she, most abominable stuff, and give I a very contemptible
idea of thy talent, and of my own judgment.
she as far from rejoice, as I have do, at the disappointment her
letter give you when explain.
she say, she mean only an innocent allegory, which might carry
instruction and warning to you, when the meaning be take, as well as
answer her own hope for the time. it be run off in a hurry. she be
afraid it be not quite right in she. but hop the end would excuse (if
it could not justify) the mean. and then she again express a good
deal of apprehension lest you should still take it into your head to
molest she, when her time, she say, be so short, that she want every
moment of it; repeat what she have once say before, that, when she
write, she be so ill that she believe she should not have live till
now: if she have think she should, she must have study for an
expedient that would have well answer her intention. hint at a
removal out of the knowledge of we both.
but she be much pleased that the conference between you and Colonel
Morden, after two or three such violent sally, as I acquaint she you
have have between you, end so amicably; and say she must absolutely
depend upon the promise I have give she to use my utmost endeavour to
prevent farth mischief on her account.
she be pleased with the justice you do her character to her cousin.
she be glad to hear that he have so kind an opinion of she, and that he
would write to she.
I be under an unnecessary concern, how to break to she that I have the
copy of Brand's vile letter: unnecessary, I say; for she take it just as
you think she would, as an excuse she wish to have for the
implacableness of her friend; and beg I would let she read it
herself; for, say she, the content cannot disturb I, be they what they
will.
I give it to she, and she read it to herself; a tear now and then be
ready to start, and a sigh sometimes interpose.
she give I back the letter with great and surprising calmness,
consider the subject.
there be a time, say she, and that not long since, when such a letter
as this would have greatly pain I. but I hope I have now go above all
these thing: and I can refer to your kind office, and to those of Miss
Howe, the justice that will be do to my memory among my friend. there
be a good and a bad light in which every thing that befall we may be
take. if the human mind will busy itself to make the bad of every
disagreeable occurrence, it will never want woe. this letter, affect
as the subject of it be to my reputation, give I more pleasure than
pain, because I can gather from it, that have not my friend be
prepossess by misinformed or rash and officious person, who be always
at hand to flatter or soothe the passion of the affluent, they could not
have be so immovably determined against I. but now they be
sufficiently clear from every imputation of unforgivingness; for, while
I appear to they in the character of a vile hypocrite, pretend to
true penitence, yet give up myself to profligate course, how could I
expect either their pardon or blessing?
but, Madam, say I, youwill see by the date of this letter, that their
severity, previous to that, cannot be excuse by it.
it import I much, reply she, on account of my present wish, as to
the office you be so kind to undertake, that you should not think
harshly of my friend. I must own to you, that I have be apt sometimes
myself to think they not only severe but cruel. suffer mind will be
partial to their own cause and merit. know their own heart, if
sincere, they be apt to murmur when harshly treat: but, if they be
not believe to be innocent, by person who have a right to decide upon
their conduct accord to their own judgment, how can it be help?
besides, Sir, how do you know, that there be not about my friend as
well-mean misrepresenter as Mr. Brand really seem to be? but, be
this as it will, there be no doubt that there be and have be
multitude of person, as innocent as myself, who have suffer upon
surmise as little probable as those on which Mr. Brand found his
judgment. your intimacy, Sir, with Mr. Lovelace, and (may I say?) a
character which, it seem, you have be less solicitous formerly to
justify than perhaps you will be for the future, and your frequent visit
to I may well be think to be questionable circumstance in my conduct.
I could only admire she in silence.
but you see, Sir, proceed she, how necessary it be for young people of
our sex to be careful of our company. and how much, at the same time, it
behove young person of your's to be chary of their own reputation, be
it only for the sake of such of our' as they may mean honourably by, and
who otherwise may suffer in their good name for be see in their
company.
as to Mr. Brand, continue she, he be to be pity; and let I enjoin
you, Mr. Belford, not to take any resentment against he which may be
detrimental either to his person or his fortune. let his function and
his good meaning plead for he. he will have concern enough, when he
find every body, whose displeasure I now labour under, acquit my
memory of perverse guilt, and join in a general pity for I.
this, Lovelace, be the woman whose life thou hast curtail in the
blossom of it!--How many opportunity must thou have have of admire her
inestimable worth, yet couldst have thy sens so much absorb in the
WOMAN, in her charming person, as to be blind to the ANGEL, that shin
out in such full glory in her mind! indeed, I have ever think myself,
when blest with her conversation, in the company of a real angel: and I
be sure it would be impossible for I, be she to be as beautiful, and
as crimson over with health, as I have see she, to have the least
thought of sex, when I hear her talk.
THURSDAY, three O'CLOCK, AUG. 31.
on my re-visit to the lady, I find she almost as much a sufferer from
joy as she have sometimes be from grief; for she have just receive a
very kind letter from her cousin Morden; which she be so good as to
communicate to I. as she have already begin to answer it, I beg leave
to attend she in the evening, that I might not interrupt she in it.
the letter be a very tender one * * * *
[here Mr. Belford give the substance of it upon his memory; but that be
omit; as the letter be give at length (see the next letter.)
and then add:]
but, alas! all will be now too late. for the decree be certainly go
out--the world be unworthy of she.
LETTER XLIV
COLONEL MORDEN, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
TUESDAY, AUG. 29.
I should not, my dear Cousin, have be a fortnight in England,
without either do myself the honour of wait upon you in person, or
of write to you; if I have not be busy myself almost all the time
in your service, in hope of make my visit or letter still more
acceptable to you--acceptable as I have reason to presume either will be
from the unquestionable love I ever bear you, and from the esteem you
always honour I with.
little do I think that so many day would have be require to effect
my well-intend purpose, where there use to be a love so ardent on one
side, and where there still be, as I be thoroughly convince, the most
exalt merit on the other!
I be yesterday with Mr. Lovelace and Lord M. I need not tell you, it
seem, how very desirous the whole family and all the relation of that
nobleman be of the honour of an alliance with you; nor how exceedingly
earnest the ungrateful man be to make you all the reparation in his
power.
I think, my dear Cousin, that you cannot now do well than to give he
the honour of your hand. he say just and great thing of your virtue,
and so heartily condemn himself, that I think there be honorable room
for you to forgive he: and the more room, as it seem you be determine
against a legal prosecution.
your effectual forgiveness of Mr. Lovelace, it be evident to I, will
accelerate a general reconciliation: for, at present, my other cousin
cannot persuade themselves that he be in earnest to do you justice; or
that you would refuse he, if you believe he be.
but, my dear Cousin, there may possibly be something in this affair, to
which I may be a stranger. if there be, and you will acquaint I with
it, all that a naturally-warm heart can do in your behalf shall be do.
I hope I shall be able, in my next visit to my several cousin, to set
all right with they. haughty spirit, when convince that they have
carry resentment too high, want but a good excuse to condescend: and
parent must always love the child they once love.
but if I find they inflexible, I will set out, and attend you without
delay; for I long to see you, after so many year' absence.
mean while, I beg the favour of a few line, to know if you have reason
to doubt Mr. Lovelace's sincerity. for my part, I can have none, if I be
to judge from the conversation that pass between we yesterday, in
presence of Lord M.
you will be pleased to direct for I at your uncle Antony's.
permit I, my dear Cousin, till I can procure a happy reconciliation
between you and your father, and brother, and uncle, to supply the place
to you of all those near relation, as well as that of
your affectionate kinsman, and humble servant,
WM. MORDEN.
LETTER XLV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, TO WM. MORDEN, ESQ.
THURSDAY, AUG. 31.
I most heartily congratulate you, dear Sir, on your return to your native
country.
I hear with much pleasure that you be come; but I be both afraid and
ashame, till you encourage I by a first notice, to address myself to
you.
how consoling be it to my wounded heart to find that you have not be
carry away by that tide of resentment and displeasure with which I have
be so unhappily overwhelmed--but that, while my still near relation
have not think fit to examine into the truth of vile report raise
against I, you have inform yourself of my innocence, and generously
credit the information!
I have not the least reason to doubt Mr. Lovelace's sincerity in his
offer of marriage; nor that all his relation be heartily desirous of
rank I among they. I have have noble instance of their esteem for
I, on their apprehending that my father's displeasure must have have
absolutely refuse their press solicitation in their kinsman's favour
as well as his own.
nor think I, my dear Cousin, blamable for refuse he. I have give Mr.
Lovelace no reason to think I a weak creature. if I have, a man of his
character might have think himself warrant to endeavour to take
ungenerous advantage of the weakness he have be able to inspire. the
consciousness of my own weakness (in that case) might have bring I to
a composition with his wickedness.
I can indeed forgive he. but that be, because I think his crime have
set I above he. can I be above the man, Sir, to whom I shall give my
hand and my vow, and with they a sanction to the most premeditated
baseness? no, Sir, let I say, that your cousin Clarissa, be she
likely to live many year, and that (if she marry not this man) in
penury or want, despise and forsake by all her friend, put not so
high a value upon the conveniencie of life, nor upon life itself, as to
seek to re-obtain the one, or to preserve the other, by give such a
sanction: a sanction, which (be she to perform her duty,) would reward
the violator.
nor be it so much from pride as from principle that I say this. what,
Sir! when virtue, when chastity, be the crown of a woman, and
particularly of a wife, shall form an attempt upon she's but upon a
presumption that she be capable of receive his offer hand when he
have find himself mistaken in the vile opinion he have conceive of she?
Hitherto he have not have reason to think I weak. nor will I give an
instance so flagrant, that weak I be in a point in which it would be
criminal to be find weak.
one day, Sir, you will perhaps know all my story. but, whenever it be
know, I beg that the author of my calamity may not be vindictively
seek after. he could not have be the author of they, but for a
strange concurrence of unhappy cause. as the law will not be able to
reach he when I be go, the apprehension of any other sort of vengeance
terrify I; since, in such a case, should my friend be safe, what
honour would his death bring to my memory?--if any of they should come to
misfortune, how would my fault be aggravate!
God long preserve you, my dear Cousin, and bless you but in proportion
to the consolation you have give I, in let I know that you still
love I; and that I have one near and dear relation who can pity and
forgive I; (and then you will be greatly bless;) be the prayer of
your ever grateful and affectionate
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XLVI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[in answer to his letter XXIII. XXXVII. of this volume.]
THURSDAY, AUG. 31.
I cannot but own that I be cut to the heart by this Miss Harlowe's
interpretation of her letter. she ought never to be forgive. she, a
meek person, and a penitent, and innocent, and pious, and I know not
what, who can deceive with a foot in the grave!--
'tis evident, that she sit down to write this letter with a design to
mislead and deceive. and if she be capable of that, at such a crisis,
she have as much need of Heaven's forgiveness, as I have of she's: and,
with all she cannot of charity and charity, if she be not more sure of it
than I be of her real pardon, and if she take the thing in the light she
ought to take it in, she will have a few dark moment yet to come than
she seem to expect.
Lord M. himself, who be not one of those (to speak in his own phrase) who
can penetrate a millstone, see the deceit, and think it unworthy of
she; though my cousin Montague vindicate she. and no wonder this curse
partial sex [I hate them all--by my soul, I hate them all!] will never
allow any thing against an individual of it, where our's be concern.
and why? because, if they censure deceit in another, they must condemn
their own heart.
she be to send I a letter after she be in Heaven, be she? the devil
take such allegory, and the devil take thee for call this absurdity
an innocent artifice!
I insist upon it, that if a woman of her character, at such a critical
time, be to be justify in such a deception, a man in full health and
vigour of body and mind, as I be, may be excuse for all his stratagem
and attempt against she. and, thank my star, I can now sit I down
with a quiet conscience on that score. by my soul, I can, Jack. nor have
any body, who can acquit she, a right to blame I. but with some,
indeed, every thing she do must be good, every thing I do must be bad--
and why? because she have always take care to coax the stupid misjudging
world, like a woman: while I have constantly defy and despise its
censure, like a man.
but, notwithstanding all, you may let she know from I that I will not
molest she, since my visit would be so shocking to she: and I hope she
will take this into her consideration as a piece of generosity which she
could hardly expect after the deception she have put upon I. and let she
far know, that if there be any thing in my power, that will
contribute either to her ease or honour, I will obey she, at the very
first intimation, however disgraceful or detrimental to myself. all
this, to make her unapprehensive, and that she may have nothing to pull
she back.
if her cursed relation could be bring as cheerfully to perform their
part, Iwould answer life for life for her recovery.
but who, that have so many ludicrous image raise in his mind by the
awkward penitence, can forbear laugh at thee? Spare, I beseech thee,
dear Belford, for the future, all thine own aspiration, if thou wouldst
not dishonour those of an angel indeed.
when I come to that passage, where thou sayest that thou considerest she*
as one send from Heaven to draw thee after she--for the heart of I I
could not for an hour put thee out of my head, in the attitude of dame
Elizabeth Carteret, on her monument in Westminster Abbey. if thou never
observedst it, go thither on purpose: and there wilt thou see this dame
in effigy, with uplifted head and hand, the latter take hold of by a
cupid every inch of stone, one clumsy foot lift up also, aim, as the
sculptor design it, to ascend; but so execute, as would rather make
one imagine that the figure (without shoe or stocking, as it be, though
the rest of the body be rob) be look up to its corn-cutter: the
other rivet to its native earth, bemire, like thee (immerse thou
call it) beyond the possibility of unsticke itself. both figure,
thou wilt find, seem to be in a contention, the big, whether it should
pull down the less about its ear--the less (a chubby fat little
varlet, of a fourth part of the other's bigness, with wing not much
large than those of a butterfly) whether it should raise the large to a
Heaven it point to, hardly big enough to contain the great toe of
either.
* see Letter XXXVII. of this volume.
thou wilt say, perhaps, that the dame's figure in stone may do credit, in
the comparison, to thine, both in grain and shape, wooden as thou art all
over: but that the lady, who, in every thing but in the trick she have
play I so lately, be truly an angel, be but sorrily represent by the
fat-flank cupid. this I allow thee. but yet there be enough in thy
aspiration to strike my mind with a resemblance of thee and the lady to
the figure on the wretched monument; for thou ought to remember,
that, prepare as she may be to mount to her native sky, it be
impossible for she to draw after she a heavy fellow who have so much to
repent of as thou hast.
but now, to be serious once more, let I tell you, Belford, that, if the
lady be really so ill as you write she be, it will become you [no roman
style here!] in a case so very affect, to be a little less pointed and
sarcastic in your reflection. for, upon my soul, the matter begin to
grate I most confoundedly.
I be now so impatient to hear oftener of she, that I take the hint
accidentally give I by our two fellow meeting at Slough, and resolve
to go to our friend Doleman's at Uxbridge; whose wife and sister, as well
as he, have so frequently press I to give they my company for a week
or two. there shall I be within two hour' ride, if any thing should
happen to induce she to see I: for it will well become her piety, and
avow charity, should the bad happen, [the Lord of Heaven and Earth,
however, avert that worst!] to give I that pardon from her lip, which
she have not deny to I by pen and ink. and as she wish my
reformation, she know not what good effect such an interview may have
upon I.
I shall accordingly be at Doleman's to-morrow morning, by eleven at
farth. my fellow will find I there at his return from you (with a
letter, I hope). I shall have Joel with I likewise, that I may send
the oftener, as matter fall out. be I to be still near, or in town,
it would be impossible to withhold myself from see she.
but, if the bad happen!--as, by your continual knelling, I know not
what to think of it!--[Yet, once more, Heaven avert that worst!--How
natural it be to pray, when once cannot help one's self!]--then say not,
in so many dreadful word, what the event be--only, that you advise I to
take a trip to Paris--and that will stab I to the heart.
***
I so well approve of your generosity to poor Belton's sister, that I have
make Mowbray give up his legacy, as I do mine, towards her India bond.
when I come to town, Tourville shall do the like; and we will buy each a
ring to wear in memory of the honest fellow, with our own money, that we
may perform his will, as well as our own.
my fellow rid the rest of the night. I charge you, Jack, if you would
save his life, that you send he not back empty-handed.
LETTER XLVII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUESDAY NIGHT, AUG. 30.
when I conclude my last, I hop that my next attendance upon this
surprising lady would furnish I with some particular as agreeable as
now could be hop for from the decline way she be in, by reason of
the welcome letter she have receive from her cousin Morden. but it
prove quite otherwise to I, though not to herself; for I think I be
never more shocked in my life than on the occasion I shall mention
presently.
when I attend she about seven in the evening, she tell I that she
find herself in a very petulant way after I have leave she. strange, say
she, that the pleasure I receive from my cousin's letter should have
such an effect upon I! but I could not help give way to a comparative
humour, as I may call it, and to think it very hard that my nearer
relation do not take the method which my cousin Morden kindly take, by
inquire into my merit or demerit, and give my cause a fair audit
before they proceed to condemnation.
she have hardly say this, when she start, and a blush overspread her
sweet face, on hearing, as I also do, a sort of lumber noise upon the
stair, as if a large trunk be bring up between two people: and,
look upon I with an eye of concern, Blunderers! say she, they have
bring in something two hour before the time.--don't be surprised, Sir
--it be all to save you trouble.
before I could speak, in come Mrs. Smith: o Madam, say she, what have
you done?--mrs. Lovick, enter, make the same exclamation. Lord have
mercy upon I, Madam! cry I, what have you done?--For she, step at
the same instant to the door, the woman tell I it be a coffin.--o
Lovelace! that thou hadst be there at that moment!--thou, the causer of
all these shocking scene! surely thou couldst not have be less
affect than I, who have no guilt, as to she, to answer for.
with an intrepidity of a piece with the preparation, have direct they
to carry it to her bed-chamber, she return to we: they be not to have
bring it in till after dark, say she--pray, excuse I, Mr. Belford:
and donot you, Mrs. Lovick, be concern: nor you, Mrs. Smith.--Why
should you? there be nothing more in it than the unusualness of the
thing. why may we not be as reasonably shock at go to church where
be the monument of our ancestor, with whose dust we even hope our dust
shall be one day mingle, as to be move at such a sight as this?
we all remain silent, the woman have their apron at their eye, why
this concern for nothing at all? say she. if I be to be blame for any
thing, it be for show too much solicitude, as it may be think, for
this earthly part. I love to do every thing for myself that I can do. I
ever do. every other material point be so far do, and take care of,
that I have have leisure for thing of less moment. minuteness may be
observe, where great article be not neglect for they. I might
have have this to order, perhaps, when less fit to order it. I have no
mother, no sister, no Mrs. Norton, no Miss Howe, near I. some of you
must have see this in a few day, if not now; perhaps have have the
friendly trouble of direct it. and what be the difference of a few
day to you, when I be gratify rather than discompose by it? I shall
not die the soon for such a preparation. should not every body that
have any thing to bequeath make their will? and who, that make a will,
should be afraid of a coffin?--my dear friend, [to the woman] I have
consider these thing; do not, with such an object before you as you
have have in I for week, give I reason to think you have not.
how reasonable be all this!--it show, indeed, that she herself have
well consider it. but yet we could not help be shock at the
thought of the coffin thus bring in; the lovely person before our
eye who be, in all likelihood, so soon to fill it.
we be all silent still, the woman in grief; I in a manner stun. she
would not ask I, she say; but would be glad, since it have thus early
than she have intend be bring in, that her two good friend would
walk in and look upon it. they would be less shocked when it be make
more familiar to their eye: donot you lead back, say she, a starting
stee to the object he be apt to start at, in order to familiarize he to
it, and cure his starting? the same reason will hold in this case. come,
my good friend, I will lead you in.
I take my leave; tell she she have do wrong, very wrong; and ought
not, by any mean, to have such an object before she.
the woman follow she in.--'tis a strange sex! nothing be too shocking
for they to look upon, or see act, that have but novelty and curiosity
in it.
down I post; get a chair; and be carry home, extremely shocked and
discompose: yet, weigh the lady's argument, I know not why I be so
affected--except, as she say, at the unusualness of the thing.
while I wait for a chair, Mrs. Smith come down, and tell I that there
be device and inscription upon the lid. Lord bless I! be a coffin a
proper subject to display fancy upon?--but these great mind cannot avoid
do extraordinary thing!
LETTER XLVIII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
FRIDAY MORN. SEPT. 1.
it be surprising, that I, a man, should be so much affect as I be, at
such an object as be the subject of my former letter; who also, in my
late uncle's case, and poor Belton's have the like before I, and the
directing of it: when she, a woman, of so weak and tender a frame, who
be to fill it (so soon perhaps to fill it!) could give order about it,
and draw out the device upon it, and explain they with so little concern
as the woman tell I she do to they last night after I be go.
I really be ill, and restless all night. Thou wert the subject of my
execration, as she be of my admiration, all the time I be quite awake:
and, when I doze, I dream of nothing but of fly hour-glass,
death-head, spade, mattock, and eternity; the hint of her device (as
give I by Mrs. Smith) run in my head.
however, not be able to keep away from Smith's, I go thither about
seven. the lady be just go out: she have sleep well, I find, than
I, though her solemn repository be under her window, not far from her
bed-side.
I be prevail upon by Mrs. Smith and her nurse Shelburne (Mrs. Lovick
be abroad with she) to go up and look at the device. Mrs. Lovick have
since show I a copy of the draught by which all be order; and I will
give thee a sketch of the symbol.
the principal device, neatly etch on a plate of white metal, be a
crown serpent, with its tail in its mouth, form a ring, the emblem
of eternity: and in the circle make by it be this inscription:
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
April x.
[then the year.]
AETAT. XIX.
for ornament: at top, an hour-glass, wing. at bottom, an urn.
under the hour-glass, on another plate, this inscription:
here the wicked cease from troubling: and here the
weary be at rest. Job. iii. 17.
over the urn, near the bottom:
turn again unto thy rest, o my soul! for the Lord hath
reward thee: and why? Thou hast deliver my
soul from death; mine eye from tear; and my foot
from fall. Ps. cxvi. 7, 8.
over this be the head of a white lily snapt short off, and just fall
from the stalk; and this inscription over that, between the principal
plate and the lily:
the day of man be but as grass. for he flourisheth as a
flower of the field: for, as soon as the wind goeth over
it, it be go; and the place thereof shall know it no
more. Ps. ciii. 15, 16.
she excuse herself to the woman, on the score of her youth, and be
use to draw for her needlework, for have show more fancy than would
perhaps be think suitable on so solemn an occasion.
the date, April 10, she account for, as not be able to tell what her
closing-day would be; and as that be the fatal day of she leave she
father's house.
she discharge the undertaker's bill after I go away, with as much
cheerfulness as she could ever have pay for the clothe she sell to
purchase this her palace: for such she call it; reflect upon herself
for the expensiveness of it, say, that they might observe in she, that
pride leave not poor mortal to the last: but indeed she do not know but
her father would permit it, when furnish, to be carry down to be
deposit with her ancestor; and, in that case, she ought not to
discredit those ancestor in her appearance amongst they.
it be cover with fine black cloth, and line with white satin; soon,
she say, to be tarnish with viler earth than any it could be cover
by.
the burial-dress be bring home with it. the woman have curiosity
enough, I suppose, to see she open that, if she do open it.--and,
perhaps, thou wouldst have be glad to have be present to have admire
it too!--
Mrs. Lovick say, she take the liberty to blame she; and wish the
removal of such an object--from her bed-chamber, at least: and be so
affect with the noble answer she make upon it, that she enter it down
the moment she leave she.
'to person in health, say she, this sight may be shocking; and the
preparation, and my unconcernedness in it, may appear affect: but to
I, who have have so gradual a weaning-time from the world, and so much
reason not to love it, I must say, I dwell on, I indulge, (and, strictly
speak, I enjoy,) the thought of death. for, believe I,' [look
stedfastly at the awful receptacle,] 'believe what at this instant I feel
to be most true, that there be such a vast superiority of weight and
importance in the thought of death, and its hop-for happy consequence,
that it in a manner annihilate all other consideration and concern.
believe I, my good friend, it do what nothing else can do: it teach
I, by strengthen in I the force of the divinest example, to forgive
the injury I have receive; and shut out the remembrance of past evil
from my soul.'
and now let I ask thee, Lovelace, Dost thou think that, when the time
shall come that thou shalt be oblige to launch into the boundless ocean
of eternity, thou wilt be able (any more than poor Belton) to act thy
part with such true heroism, as this sweet and tender blossom of a woman
have manifest, and continue to manifest!
oh! no! it cannot be!--and why cannot it be?--the reason be evident: she
have no wilful error to look back upon with self-reproach--and her mind
be strengthen by the consolation which flow from that religious
rectitude which have be the guide of all her action; and which have
teach she rather to choose to be a sufferer than an aggressor!
this be the support of the divine Socrates, as thou hast read. when lead
to execution, his wife lament that he should suffer be innocent,
Thou fool, say he, wouldst thou wish I to be guilty!
LETTER XLIX
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
FRIDAY, SEPT. 1.
how astonishing, in the midst of such affect scene, be thy mirth on
what thou call my own aspiration! never, surely, be there such
another man in this world, thy talent and thy levity take together!--
surely, what I shall send thee with this will affect thee. if not,
nothing can, till thy own hour come: and heavy will then thy reflection
be!
I be glad, however, that thou enablest I to assure the lady that thou
wilt no more mol she; that be to say, in other word, that, after
have ruin her fortune, and all her worldly prospect, thou wilt be
so gracious, as to let she lie down and die in peace.
Thy give up to poor Belton's sister the little legacy, and thy
undertaking to make Mowbray and Tourville follow thy example, be, I must
say to thy honour, of a piece with thy generosity to thy Rose-bud and her
Johnny; and to a number of other good action in pecuniary matter:
although thy Rose-bud's be, I believe, the only instance, where a pretty
woman be concern, of such a disinterested bounty.
upon my faith, Lovelace, I love to praise thee; and often and often, as
thou know, have I study for occasion to do it: insomuch that when,
for the life of I, I could not think of any thing do by thee that
deserve praise, I have take pain to applaud the not ungraceful manner
in which thou hast perform action that merit the gallow.
now thou art so near, I will dispatch my servant to thee, if occasion
require. but, I fear, I shall soon give thee the news thou art
apprehensive of. for I be just now send for by Mrs. Smith; who have
order the messenger to tell I, that she know not if the lady will be
alive when I come.
FRIDAY, SEPT. 1, two O'CLOCK, AT SMITH'S.
I could not close my letter in such an uncertainty as must have add to
your impatience. for you have, on several occasion, convince I, that
the suspense you love to give would be the great torment to you that
you could receive. a common case with all aggressive and violent
spirit, I believe. I will just mention then (your servant wait here
till I have write) that the lady have have two very severe fit: in the
last of which whilst she lay, they send to the doctor and Mr. Goddard,
who both advise that a messenger should be dispatch for I, as her
executor; be doubtful whether, if she have a third, it would not carry
she off.
she be tolerably recover by the time I cane; and the doctor make she
promise before I, that, while she be so weak, she would not attempt any
more to go abroad; for, by Mrs. Lovick's description, who attend she,
the shortness of her breath, her extreme weakness, and the fervour of her
devotion when at church, be contrary, which, pull different way
(the soul aspire, the body sink) tear her tender frame in piece.
so much for the present. I shall detain Will. no long than just to beg
that you will send I back this packet and the last. your memory be so
good, that once read be all you ever give, or need to give, to any
thing. and who but ourselves can make out our character, be you
inclined to let any body see what pass between we? if I cannot be
oblige, I shall be tempt to withhold what I write, till I have time to
take a copy of it.*
* it may not be amiss to observe, that Mr. Belford's solicitude to get
back his letter be owe to his desire of fulfil the lady's wish
that he would furnish Miss Howe with material to vindicate her memory.
a letter from Miss Howe be just now bring by a particular messenger,
who say he must carry back a few line in return. but, as the lady be
just retire to lie down, the man be to call again by-and-by.
LETTER L
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
UXBRIDGE, SEPT. 1, TWELVE O'CLOCK AT NIGHT.
I send you the paper with this. you must account to I honestly and
fairly, when I see you, for the earnestness with which you write for
they. and then also will we talk about the content of your last
dispatch, and about some of your severe and unfriendly reflection.
mean time, whatever thou dost, donot let the wonderful creature leave we!
Set before she the sin of her preparation, as if she think she could
depart when she please. shewill persuade herself, at this rate, that she
have nothing to do, when all be ready, but to lie down, and go to sleep:
and such a lively fancy as she's will make a reality of a jest at any
time.
a jest I call all that have pass between she and I; a mere jest to die
for--for have not her triumph over I, from first to last, be infinitely
great than her suffering from I?
would the sacred regard I have for her purity, even for her personal as
well as intellectual purity, permit, I could prove this as clear as the
sun. Tell, therefore, the dear creature that she must not be wicked in
her piety. there be a too much, as well as too little, even in
righteousness. perhaps she do not think of that.--oh! that she would
have permit my attendance, as obligingly as she do of thine!--the
dear soul use to love humour. I remember the time that she know how to
smile at a piece of apropos humour. and, let I tell thee, a smile upon
the lip, or a sparkling in the eye, must have have its correspondent
cheerfulness in a heart so sincere as she's.
tell the doctor I will make over all my possession, and all my
reversion, to he, if he will but prolong her life for one twelvemonth
to come. but for one twelvemonth, Jack!--He will lose all his reputation
with I, and I shall treat he as Belton do his doctor, if he cannot do
this for I, on so young a subject. but nineteen, belford!--nineteen
cannot so soon die of grief, if the doctor deserve that title; and so
blooming and so fine a constitution as she have but three or four month
ago!
but what need the doctor to ask her leave to write to her friend? could
he not have do it without let she know any thing of the matter?
that be one of the likeli mean that could be think of to bring
some of they about she, since she be so desirous to see they. at least
it would have induce they to send up her favourite Norton. but these
plaguy solemn fellow be great trader in parade. theywill cram down
your throat their poisonous drug by wholesale, without ask you a
question; and have the assurance to own it to be prescribe: but when
they be to do good, they be to require your consent.
how the dear creature's character rise in every line of thy letter!
but it be owe to the uncommon occasion she have meet with that she
blaze out upon we with such a meridian lustre. how, but for those
occasion, could her noble sentiment, her prudent consideration, her
forgiving spirit, her exalt benevolence, and her equanimity in view of
the most shocking prospect (which set she in a light so superior to all
her sex, and even to the philosopher of antiquity) have be manifest?
I know thou wilt think I be go to claim some merit to myself, for
have give she such opportunity of signalize her virtue. but I be
not; for, if I do, I must share that merit with her implacable
relation, who would justly be entitle to two-third of it, at least:
and my soul disdain a partnership in any thing with such a family.
but this I mention as an answer to thy reproach, that I could be so
little edify by perfection, to which, thou supposest, I be for so
long together daily and hourly a personal witness--when, admirable as she
be in all she say, and in all she do, occasion have not at that time
ripen, and call forth, those amazing perfection which now astonish
and confound I.
hence it be that I admire she more than ever; and that my love for she be
less personal, as I may say, more intellectual, than ever I think it
could be to a woman.
hence also it be that I be confident (would it please the Fates to spare
she, and make her mine) I could love she with a purity that would draw on
my own future, as well as ensure her TEMPORAL, happiness.--And hence, by
necessary consequence, shall I be the most miserable of all man, if I be
deprive of she.
Thou severely reflect upon I for my levity: the Abbey instance in
thine eye, I suppose. and I will be ingenuous enough to own, that as
thou se not my heart, there may be passage, in every one of my
letter, which (the melancholy occasion consider) deserve thy most
point rebuke. but faith, Jack, thou art such a tragi-comical mortal,
with thy leaden aspiration at one time, and thy fly hour-glass and
dream terror at another, that, as Prior say, what serious be, thou
turn'st to farce; and it be impossible to keep within the bound of
decorum or gravity when one read what thou writest.
but to restrain myself (for my constitutional gayety be ready to run
away with I again) I will repeat, I must ever repeat, that I be most
egregiously affect with the circumstance of the case: and, be this
paragon actually to quit the world, should never enjoy myself one hour
together, though I be to live to the age of Methusalem.
indeed it be to this deep concern, that my levity be owe: for I
struggle and struggle, and try to buffet down my cruel reflection as
they rise; and when I cannot, I be force, as I have often say, to try
to make myself laugh, that I may not cry; for one or other I must do: and
be it not philosophy carry to the high pitch, for a man to conquer
such tumult of soul as I be sometimes agitate by, and, in the very
height of the storm, to be able to quaver out an horse-laugh?
your seneca's, your Epictetus's, and the rest of your stoical tribe, with
all their apathy nonsense, could not come up to this. they could forbear
wry face: bodily pain they could well enough seem to support; and that
be all: but the pang of their own smitten-down soul they could not
laugh over, though they could at the folly of other. they read grave
lecture; but they be grave. this high point of philosophy, to laugh
and be merry in the midst of the most soul-harrowing woe, when the
heart-string be just burst asunder, be reserve for thy Lovelace.
there be something owe to constitution, I own; and that this be the
laugh-time of my life. for what a woe must that be, which for an hour
together can mortify a man six or seven and twenty, in high blood and
spirit, of a naturally gay disposition, who can sing, dance, and
scribble, and take and give delight in they all?--But then my grief, as
my joy, be sharper-pointed than most other man's; and, like what dolly
Welby once tell I, describe the parturient throe, if there be not
lucid interval, if they do not come and go, there would be no bearing
they.
***
after all, as I be so little distant from the dear creature, and as she
be so very ill, I think I cannot excuse myself from make her one visit.
nevertheless, if I think she so near--[what word shall I use, that my
soul be not shock at!] and that she would be too much discompose by a
visit, I would not think of it.--yet how can I bear the recollection,
that, when she last go from I (her innocence so triumphant over my
premeditate guilt, as be enough to reconcile she to life, and to set
she above the sense of injury so nobly sustain, that) she should then
depart with an incurable fracture in her heart; and that that should be
the last time I should ever see her!--How, how, can I bear this
reflection!
o Jack! how my conscience, that give edge even to thy blunt reflection,
tear me!--even this moment would I give the world to push the cruel
reproacher from I by one ray of my usual gayety!--sick of myself!--sick
of the remembrance of my vile plot; and of my light, my momentary
ecstacy [villanous burglar, felon, thief, that I be!] which have bring
on I such durable and such heavy remorse! what would I give that I have
not be guilty of such barbarous and ungrateful perfidy to the most
excellent of God's creature!
I would end, methink, with one sprightly line!--but it will not be.--
let I tell thee then, and rejoice at it if thou wilt, that I be
inexpressibly miserable!
LETTER LI
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SAT. MORNING, SEPT. 2.
I have some little pleasure give I by thine, just now bring I. I
see now that thou hast a little humanity leave. would to Heaven, for the
dear lady's sake, as well as for thy own, that thou hadst rummage it up
from all the dark forget corner of thy soul a little soon!
the lady be alive, and serene, and calm, and have all her noble intellect
clear and strong: but nineteen will not however save she. she say she
will now content herself with her closet duty, and the visit of the
parish-minister; and will not attempt to go out. nor, indeed, will she,
I be afraid, ever walk up or down a pair of stair again.
I be sorry at my soul to have this to say: but it would be a folly to
flatter thee.
as to thy see she, I believe the least hint of that sort, now, would
cut off some hour of her life.
what have contribute to her serenity, it seem, be, that take the alarm
her fit give she, she have entirely finish, and sign and seal, she
last will: which she have defer till this time, in hope, as she say,
of some good news from Harlowe-place; which would have induce she to
alter some passage in it.
Miss Howe's letter be not give she till four in the afternoon,
yesterday; at which time the messenger return for an answer. she
admit he into her presence in the dining-room, ill as she then be,
and she would have write a few line, as desire by Miss Howe; but, not
be able to hold a pen, she bid the messenger tell she that she hop
to be well enough to write a long letter by the next day's post; and
would not now detain he.
***
SATURDAY, SIX in the AFTERNOON.
I call just now, and find the lady write to Miss Howe. she make I
a melancholy compliment, that she show I not Miss Howe's letter,
because I should soon have that and all her paper before I. but she
tell I that Miss Howe have very considerably obviate to Colonel Morden
several thing which might have occasion misapprehension between he
and I; and have likewise put a light construction, for the sake of
peace, on some of your action than they deserve.
she add, that her cousin Morden be warmly engage in her favour with
her friend: and one good piece of news Miss Howe's letter contain,
that her father would give up some matter, which (appertain to she of
right) would make my executorship the easy in some particular that have
give she a little pain.
she own she have be oblige to leave off (in the letter she be
write) through weakness.
will. say he shall reach you to-night. I shall send in the morning;
and, if I find she not bad, will ride to Edgware, and return in the
afternoon.
LETTER LII
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
TUESDAY, AUG. 29.
my DEAREST FRIEND,
we be at length return to our own home. I have intend to wait on you
in London: but my mother be very ill--Alas! my dear, she be very ill
indeed--and you be likewise very ill--I see that by your' of the 25th--
what shall I do, if I lose two such near, and dear, and tender friend?
she be take ill yesterday at our last stage in our return home--and have
a violent surfeit and fever, and the doctor be doubtful about she.
if she should die, how will all my pertness to her fly in my face!--
why, why, do I ever vex she? she say I have be all duty and
obedience!--she kindly forget all my fault, and remember every thing I
have be so happy as to oblige she in. and this cut I to the heart.
I see, I see, my dear, that you be very bad--and I cannot bear it. do,
my beloved Miss Harlowe, if you can be well, do, for my sake, be
well; and send I word of it. let the bearer bring I a line. be sure
you send I a line. if I lose you, my more than sister, and lose my
mother, I shall distrust my own conduct, and will not marry. and why
should i?--creeping, cringe in courtship!--o my dear, these man be a
vile race of reptile in our day, and mere bear in their own. see in
Lovelace all that be desirable in figure, in birth, and in fortune: but
in his heart a devil!--see in Hickman--indeed, my dear, I cannot tell
what any body can see in Hickman, to be always preach in his favour.
and be it to be expect that I, who could hardly bear control from a
mother, should take it from a husband?--from one too, who have neither
more wit, nor more understanding, than myself? yet he to be my
instructor!--so he will, I suppose; but more by the insolence of his will
than by the merit of his counsel. it be in vain to think of it. I
cannot be a wife to any man breathe whom I at present know. this I the
rather mention now, because, on my mother's danger, I know you will be
for press I the soon to throw myself into another sort of
protection, should I be deprive of she. but no more of this subject, or
indeed of any other; for I be oblige to attend my mamma, who cannot bear
I out of her sight.
***
WEDNESDAY, AUG. 30.
my mother, Heaven be praise! have have a fine night, and be much well.
her fever have yield to medicine! and now I can write once more with
freedom and ease to you, in hope that you also be well. if this be
grant to my prayer, I shall again be happy, I writhe with still the
more alacrity as I have an opportunity give I to touch upon a subject
in which you be nearly concerned.
you must know then, my dear, that your cousin Morden have be here with
I. he tell I of an interview he have on Monday at Lord M.'s with
Lovelace; and ask I abundance of question about you, and about that
villanous man.
I could have raise a fine flame between they if I would: but, observe
that he be a man of very lively passion, and believe you would be
miserable if any thing should happen to he from a quarrel with a man who
be know to have so many advantage at his sword, I make not the bad of
the subject we talk of. but, as I could not tell untruth in his
favour, you must think I say enough to make he curse the wretch.
I donot find, well as they all use to respect Colonel Morden, that he
have influence enough upon they to bring they to any term of
reconciliation.
what can they mean by it!--but your brother be come home, it seem: so,
the honour of the house, the reputation of the family, be all the cry!
the Colonel be exceedingly out of humour with they all. yet have he not
hitherto, it seem, see your brutal brother.--I tell he how ill you
be, and communicate to he some of the content of your letter. he
admire you, cursed Lovelace, and rave against all your family.--He
declare that they be all unworthy of you.
at his earnest request, I permit he to take some brief note of such
of the content of your letter to I as I think I could read to he;
and, particularly, of your melancholy conclusion.*
* see Letter XXXII. of this volume.
he say that none of your friend think you be so ill as you be; nor
will believe it. he be sure they all love you; and that dearly too.
if they do, their present hardness of heart will be the subject of
everlasting remorse to they should you be take from we--but now it seem
[barbarous wretch!] you be to suffer within an inch of your life.
he ask I question about Mr. Belford: and, when he have hear what I
have to say of that gentleman, and his disintereste service to you, he
rave at some villanous surmise throw out against you by that officious
pedant, Brand: who, but for his gown, I find, would come off poorly enough
between your cousin and Lovelace.
he be so uneasy about you himself, that on Thursday, the 24th, he send
up an honest serious man,* one Alston, a gentleman farmer, to inquire of
your condition, your visiter, and the like; who bring he word that
you be very ill, and be put to great strait to support yourself: but
as this be tell he by the gentlewoman of the house where you lodge,
who, it seem, mingle it with some tart, though deserve, reflection
upon your relation' cruelty, it be not credit by they: and I myself
hope it cannot be true; for surely you could not be so unjust, I will
say, to my friendship, as to suffer any inconveniencie for want of
money. I think I could not forgive you, if it be so.
* see Letter XXIII. ibid.
the Colonel (as one of your trustee) be resolve to see you put into
possession of your estate: and, in the mean time, he have actually engage
they to remit to he for you the produce of it accrue since your
grandfather's death, (a very considerable sum;) and propose himself to
attend you with it. but, by a hint he dropt, I find you have disappoint
some people's littleness, by not write to they for money and supply;
since they be determined to distress you, and to put you at defiance.
like all the rest!--i hope I may say that without offence.
your cousin imagine that, before a reconciliation take place, they will
insist that you make such a will, as to that estate, as they shall
approve of: but he declare that he will not go out of England till he
have see justice do you by every body; and that you shall not be
impose on either by friend or foe--
by relation or foe, should he not have said?--for a friend will not
impose upon a friend.
so, my dear, you be to buy your peace, if some people be to have their
will!
your cousin [not I, my dear, though it be always my opinion*] say, that
the whole family be too rich to be either humble, considerate, or
content. and as for himself, he have an ample fortune, he say, and
think of leave it wholly to you.
* see Vol. I. Letter X.
have this villain Lovelace consult his worldly interest only, what a
fortune would he have have in you, even although your marry he have
deprive you of a paternal share!
I be oblige to leave off here. but have a good deal still more to
write, and my mother well, I will pursue the subject in another letter,
although I send both together. I need not say how much I be, and will
ever be,
your affectionate, &c.
ANNA HOWE.
LETTER LIII
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
THURSDAY, AUGUST 31.
the Colonel think fit once, in praise of Lovelace's generosity, to say,
that (as a man of honour ought) he take to himself all the blame, and
acquit you of the consequence of the precipitate step you have take;
since he say, as you love he, and be in his power, he must have have
advantage which he would not have have, if you have continue at your
father's, or at any friend's.
mighty generous, I say, (be it as he suppose,) in such insolent
reflector, the good of they; who pretend to clear reputation which
never have be sully but by fall into their dirty acquaintance! but
in this case, I aver, that there be no need of any thing but the
strict truth, to demonstrate Lovelace to be the black of villain,
you the bright of innocent.
this he catch at; and swore, that if any thing uncommon or barbarous in
the seduction be to come out, as indeed one of the letter you have
write to your friend, and which have be show he, very strongly
imply; that be to say, my dear, if any thing bad than perjury, breach
of faith, and abuse of a generous confidence, be to appear! [sorry
fellow!] he would avenge his cousin to the utmost.
I urge your apprehension on this head from your last letter to I: but
he seem capable of take what I know to be real greatness of soul, in
an unworthy sense: for he mention directly upon it the expectation
your friend have, that you should (previous to any reconciliation with
they) appear in a court of justice against the villain--if you could do
it with the advantage to yourself that I hint might be do.
and truly, if I would have hear he, he have indelicacy enough to have
go into the nature of the proof of the crime upon which they want to
have Lovelace arraign. yet this be a man improve by travel and
learning!--upon my word, my dear, I, who have be accustom to the most
delicate conversation ever since I have the honour to know you, despise
this sex from the gentleman down to the peasant.
upon the whole, I find that Mr. Morden have a very slender notion of
woman's virtue in particular case: for which reason I put he down,
though your favourite, as one who be not entitle to cast the first
stone.
I never know a man who deserve to be well thought of himself for his
moral, who have a slight opinion of the virtue of our sex in general.
for if, from the difference of temperament and education, modesty,
chastity, and piety too, be not to be find in our sex preferably to
the other, I should think it a sign of much bad nature in our.
he even hint (as from your relation indeed) that it be impossible
but there most be some will where there be much love.
these sort of reflection be enough to make a woman, who have at heart
her own honour and the honour of her sex, to look about she, and consider
what she be do when she enter into an intimacy with these wretch;
since it be plain, that whenever she throw herself into the power of a
man, and leave for he her parent or guardian, every body will believe
it to be owe more to her good luck than to her discretion if there be
not an end of her virtue: and let the man be ever such a villain to she,
she must take into her own bosom a share of his guilty baseness.
I be write to general case. you, my dear, be out of the question.
your story, as I have heretofore say, will afford a warning as well as
an example:* for who be it that will not infer, that if a person of your
fortune, character, and merit, could not escape ruin, after she have put
herself into the power of her hyaena, what can a thoughtless, fond, giddy
creature expect?
* see Vol. IV. Letter XXIII.
every man, they will say, be not a LOVELACE--true: but then, neither be
every woman a CLARISSA. and allow for the one and for the other the
example must be of general use.
I prepare Mr. Morden to expect your appointment of Mr. Belford for an
office that we both hope he will have no occasion to act in (nor any body
else) for many, very many year to come. he be at first startle at it:
but, upon hear such of your reason as have satisfy I, he only say
that such an appointment, be it to take place, would exceedingly affect
his other cousin.
he tell I, he have a copy of Lovelace's letter to you, implore your
pardon, and offer to undergo any penance to procure it;* and also of
your answer to it.**
* see Vol. VII. Letter LXXIX.
** ibid. Letter LXXXIII.
I find he be willing to hope that a marriage between you may still take
place; which, he say, will heal up all breach.
I would have write much more--on the follow particular especially;
to wit, of the wretched man's hunt you out of your lodging: of your
relation' strange implacableness, [I be in haste, and cannot think of a
word you would like well just now:] of your last letter to Lovelace, to
divert he from pursue you: of your aunt Hervey's penitential
conversation with Mrs. Norton: of Mr. Wyerley's renew address: of your
lesson to I in Hickman's behalf, so approvable, be the man more so
than he be; but indeed I be offend with he at this instant, and have
be for these two day: of your sister's transportation-project: and of
twenty and twenty other thing: but be oblige to leave off, to attend my
two cousin Spilsworth, and my cousin Herbert, who be come to visit we
on account of my mother's illness--I will therefore dispatch these by
Rogers; and if my mother get well soon (as I hope she will) I be
resolve to see you in town, and tell you every thing that now be upon my
mind; and particularly, mingle my soul with your's, how much I be, and
will ever be, my dearest, dear friend,
your affectionate
ANNA HOWE.
let Rogers bring one line, I pray you. I think to have send he this
afternoon; but he cannot set out till to-morrow morning early.
I cannot express how much your staggering line and your conclusion
affect I!
LETTER LIV
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SUNDAY EVENING, SEPT. 3.
I wonder not at the impatience your servant tell I you express to hear
from I. I be design to write you a long letter, and be just
return from Smith's for that purpose; but, since you be urgent, you
must be content with a short one.
I attend the lady this morning, just before I set out for Edgware. she
be so ill over-night, that she be oblige to leave unfinished her
letter to Miss Howe. but early this morning she make an end of it, and
just seal it up as I come. she be so fatigued with writing, that she
tell I she would lie down after I be go, and endeavour to recruit her
spirit.
they have send for Mr. Goddard, when she be so ill last night; and not
be able to see he out of her own chamber, he, for the first time, see
her house, as she call it. he be extremely shocked and concerned at
it; and chid Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Lovick for not persuade she to have
such an object remove form her bed-chamber: and when they excuse
themselves on the little authority it be reasonable to suppose they must
have with a lady so much their superior, he reflect warmly on those who
have more authority, and who leave she to proceed with such a shocking and
solemn whimsy, as he call it.
it be place near the window, like a harpsichord, though cover over to
the ground: and when she be so ill that she cannot well go to her closet,
she write and read upon it, as other would upon a desk or table. but
(only as she be so ill last night) she choose not to see any body in
that apartment.
I go to Edgware; and, return in the evening, attend she again.
she have a letter bring she from Mrs. Norton (a long one, as it seem by
its bulk,) just before I come. but she have not open it; and say, that
as she be pretty calm and compose, she be afraid to look into the
content, lest she should be ruffle; expect now to hear of nothing
that could do she good or give her pleasure from that good woman's dear
hard-hearted neighbour, as she call her own relation.
see she so weak and ill, I withdraw; nor do she desire I to tarry,
as sometimes she do, when I make a motion to depart.
I have some hint, as I go away, from Mrs. Smith, that she have
appropriate that evening to some office, that be to save trouble, as
she call it, after her departure; and have be give order to her
nurse, and to Mrs. Lovick, and Mrs. Smith, about what she would have do
when she be go; and I believe they be of a very delicate and
affect nature; but Mrs. Smith descend not to particular.
the doctor have be with she, as well as Mr. Goddard; and they both
join with great earnestness to persuade she to have her house remove
out of her sight; but she assure they that it give her pleasure and
spirit; and, be a necessary preparation, she wonder they should be
surprised at it, when she have not any of her family about she, or any old
acquaintance, on whose care and exactness in these punctilio, as she
call they, she could rely.
the doctor tell Mrs. Smith, that he believe she would hold out long
enough for any of her friend to have notice of her state, and to see
she; and hardly long; and since he could not find that she have any
certainty of see her cousin Morden, (which make it plain that her
relation continue inflexible,) he would go home, and write a letter to
her father, take it as she would.
she have spend great part of the day in intense devotion; and to-morrow
morning she be to have with she the same clergyman who have often attend
she; from whose hand she will again receive the sacrament.
Thou se, Lovelace, that all be prepare, that all will be ready; and
I be to attend she to-morrow afternoon, to take some instruction from
she in relation to my part in the office to be perform for she. and
thus, omit the particular of a fine conversation between her and
Mrs. Lovick, which the latter acquaint I with, as well as another
between she and the doctor and apothecary, which I have a design this
evening to give you, they be of a very affect nature, I have
yield to your impatience.
I shall dispatch Harry to-morrow morning early with her letter to Miss
Howe: an offer she take very kindly; as she be extremely
solicitous to lessen that young lady's apprehension for she on
not hear from she by Saturday's post: and yet, if she write
truth, as no doubt but she will, how can her apprehension be
lessen?
LETTER LV
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MISS HOWE
SATURDAY, SEPT. 2.
I write, my beloved Miss Howe, though very ill still: but I could not by
the return of your messenger; for I be then unable to hold a pen.
your mother's illness (as mention in the first part of your letter,)
give I great distress for you, till I read far. you bewail it as
become a daughter so sensible. may you be bless in each other for
many, very many year to come! I doubt not, that even this sudden and
grievous indisposition, by the frame it have put you in, and the
apprehension it have give you of lose so dear a mother, will contribute
to the happiness I wish you: for, alas! my dear, we seldom know how to
value the blessing we enjoy, till we be in danger of lose they, or
have actually lose they: and then, what would we give to have they
restore to we!
what, I wonder, have again happen between you and Mr. Hickman? although
I know not, I dare say it be owe to some petty petulance, to some
half-ungenerous advantage take of his obligingness and assiduity. will
you never, my dear, give the weight you and all our sex ought to give to
the quality of sobriety and regularity of life and manner in that sex?
must bold creature, and forward spirit, for ever, and by the good and
wise of we, as well as by the indiscreet, be the most kindly
treat?
my dear friend know not that I have actually suffer within less than
an inch of my life.
poor Mr. Brand! he mean well, I believe. I be afraid all will turn
heavily upon he, when he probably imagine that he be take the good
method to oblige. but be he not to have be so light of belief, and
so weakly officious; and have give a more favourable, and, it would be
strange if I could not say, a juster report; thing would have be,
nevertheless, exactly as they be.
I must lay down my pen. I be very ill. I believe I shall be well
by-and-by. the bad writing would betray I, although I have a mind to
keep from you what the event must soon--
***
now I resume my trembling pen. excuse the unsteady write. it will
be so--
I have want no money: so donot be angry about such a trifle as money.
yet I be glad of what you incline I to hope, that my friend will give
up the produce of my grandfather's estate since it have be in their
hand: because, know it to be my right, and that they could not want
it, I have already dispose of a good part of it; and could only hope they
would be willing to give it up at my last request. and now how rich
shall I think myself in this my last stage!--and yet I do not want
before--indeed I do not--for who, that have many superfluity, can be
say to want!
do not, my dear friend, be concerned that I call it my last stage; for
what be even the long life which in high health we wish for? what, but,
as we go along, a life of apprehension, sometimes for our friend,
oftener for ourselves? and at last, when arrive at the old age we
covet, one heavy loss or deprivation have succeed another, we see
ourselves stript, as I may say, of every one we love; and find ourselves
expose, as uncompanionable poor creature, to the slight, to the
contempt, of jostle youth, who want to push we off the stage, in hope
to possess what we have:--and, superadde to all, our own infirmity
every day increase: of themselves enough to make the life we wish for
the great disease of all! donot you remember the line of Howard,
which once you read to I in my ivy-bower?*
* these be the line the lady refer to:
from death we rise to life: 'tis but the same,
through life to pass again from whence we come.
with shame we see our passion can prevail,
where reason, certainty, and virtue fail.
HONOUR, that empty name, can death despise; |
SCORN'D love to death, as to a refuge, fly; |
and SORROW wait for death with long eye. |
HOPE triumph o'er the thought of death; and FATE
Cheats fool, and flatter the unfortunate.
we fear to lose, what a small time must waste,
till life itself grow the disease at last.
beg for life, we beg for more decay,
and to be long a die only pray.
in the disposition of what belong to I, I have endeavour to do every
thing in the justest and good manner I could think of; put myself in
my relation' place, and, in the great point, order my matter as
if no misunderstanding have happen.
I hope they will not think much of some bequest where want, and where
due from my gratitude: but if they should, what be do, be do; and I
cannot now help it. yet I must repeat, that I hope, I hope, I have
please every one of they. for I would not, on any account, have it
think that, in my last disposition, any thing undaughterly, unsisterly,
or unlike a kinswoman, should have have place in a mind that be a truly
free (as I will presume to say) from all resentment, that it now
overflow with gratitude and blessing for the good I have receive,
although it be not all that my heart wish to receive. be it even an
hardship that I be not favour with more, what be it but an hardship
of half a year, against the most indulgent goodness of eighteen year and
an half, that ever be show to a daughter?
my cousin, you tell I, think I be off my guard, and that I be take
at some advantage. indeed, my dear, I be not. indeed I give no room
for advantage to be take of I. I hope, one day, that will be see, if
I have the justice do I which Mr. Belford assure I of.
I should hope that my cousin have not take the liberty which you (by an
observation not, in general, unjust) seem to charge he with. for it be
sad to think, that the generality of that sex should make so light of
crime, which they justly hold so unpardonable in their own most intimate
relation of our'--yet cannot commit they without do such injury to
other family as they think themselves oblige to resent unto death,
when offer to their own.
but we woman be to often to blame on this head; since the most virtuous
among we seldom make virtue the test of their approbation of the other
sex; insomuch that a man may glory in his wickedness of this sort without
be reject on that account, even to the face of woman of
unquestionable virtue. hence it be, that a libertine seldom think
himself concern so much as to save appearance: and what be it not that
our sex suffer in their opinion on this very score? and what have I,
more than many other, to answer for on this account in the world's eye?
may my story be a warning to all, how they prefer a libertine to a man of
true honour; and how they permit themselves to be mislead (where they mean
the good) by the specious, yet foolish hope of subdue riveted habit,
and, as I may say, of alter natures!--the more foolish, as constant
experience might convince we, that there be hardly one in ten, of even
tolerably happy marriage, in which the wife keep the hold in the
husband's affection, which she have in the lover's. what influence then
can she hope to have over the moral of an avow libertine, who marry
perhaps for conveniency, who despise the tie, and whom, it be too
probable, nothing but old age, or sickness, or disease, (the consequence
of ruinous riot,) can reclaim?
I be very glad you give my cous--
SUNDAY MORNING, SEPT. 3, SIX O'CLOCK.
Hither I have write, and be force to quit my pen. and so much weak
and bad I grow, that have I resume it, to have close here, it must
have be with such trembling unsteadiness, that it would have give you
more concern for I, than the delay of send it away by last night's
post can do. I defer it, therefore, to see how it would please God to
deal with I. and I find myself, after a well night than I expect,
lively and clear; and hope to give a proof that I do, in the continuation
of my letter, which I will pursue as currently as if I have not leave off.
I be glad that you so considerately give my cousin Morden favourable
impression of Mr. Belford; since, otherwise, some misunderstanding might
have happen between they: for although I hope this Mr. Belford be an
altered man, and in time will be a reform one, yet be he one of those
high spirit that have be accustom to resent imaginary indignity to
himself, when, I believe, he have not be studious to avoid give real
offence to other; man of this cast act as if they think all the
world be make to bar with they, and they with nobody in it.
Mr. Lovelace, you tell I, think fit to intrust my cousin with the copy
of his letter of penitence to I, and with my answer to it, reject he
and his suit: and Mr. Belford, moreover, acquaint I, how much concern
Mr. Lovelace be for his baseness, and how freely he accuse himself to my
cousin. this show, that the true bravery of spirit be to be above do
a vile action; and that nothing subject the human mind to so much
meanness, as the consciousness of have do wilful wrong to our fellow
creature. how low, how sordid, be the submission which elaborate
baseness compel! that that wretch could treat I as he do, and then
could so poorly creep to I for forgiveness of crime so wilful, so
black, and so premeditate! how my soul despise he for his meanness on
a certain occasion, of which you will one day be inform!* and he whose
action one's heart despise, it be far from be difficult to reject,
have one ever so partially favour he once.
* mean his meditated second violence (see Vol. VI. Letter XXXVI.) and
his succeed letter to she, supplicate for her pardon.
yet be I glad this violent spirit can thus creep; that, like a poisonous
serpent, he can thus coil himself, and hide his head in his own narrow
circlet; because this stoop, this abasement, give I hope that no
farth mischief will ensue.
all my apprehension be, what may happen when I be go; lest then my
cousin, or any other of my family, should endeavour to avenge I, and
risk their own more precious life on that account.
if that part of Cain's curse be Mr. Lovelace's, to be a fugitive and
vagabond in the earth; that be to say, if it mean no more harm to he
than that he should be oblige to travel, as it seem he intend, (though
I wish he no ill in his travel;) and I could know it; then should I be
easy in the hop-for safety of my friend from his skilful violence--oh!
that I could hear he be a thousand mile off!
when I begin this letter, I do not think I could have run to such a
length. but 'tis to you, my dear friend, and you have a title to the
spirit you raise and support; for they be no long mine, and will
subside the moment I cease write to you.
but what do you bid I hope for, when you tell I that, if your mother's
health will permit, you will see I in town? I hope your mother's health
will be perfect as you wish; but I dare not promise myself so great a
favour; so great a blessing, I will call it--and indeed I know not if I
should be able to bear it now!
yet one comfort it be in your power to give I; and that be, let I know,
and very speedily it must be, if you wish to oblige I, that all matter
be make up between you and Mr. Hickman; to whom, I see, you be
resolve, with all your bravery of spirit, to owe a multitude of
obligation for his patience with your flightiness. think of this, my
dear proud friend! and think, likewise, of what I have often tell you,
that PRIDE, in man or woman, be an extreme that hardly ever fail, soon
or later, to bring forth its mortifying CONTRARY.
may you, my dear Miss Howe, have no discomfort but what you make to
yourself! as it will be in your own power to lessen such as these, they
ought to be your punishment if you do not. there be no such thing as
perfect happiness here, since the busy mind will make to itself evil,
be it to find none. you will, therefore, pardon this limited wish,
strange as it may appear, till you consider it: for to wish you no
infelicity, either within or without you, be to wish you what can never
happen in this world; and what perhaps ought not to be wish for, if by
a wish one could give one's friend such an exemption; since we be not to
live here always.
we must not, in short, expect that our rose will grow without thorn:
but then they be useful and instructive thorn: which, by prick the
finger of the too-hasty plucker, teach future caution. and who know
not that difficulty give poignancy to our enjoyment; which be apt to
lose their relish with we when they be over easily obtain?
I must conclude--
God for ever bless you, and all you love and honour, and reward you here
and hereafter for your kindness to
your ever oblige and affectionate
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER LVI
MRS. NORTON, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
[in answer to HER' of THURSDAY, AUGUST 24. SEE LETTER XXX. of this
volume.]
THURSDAY, AUG. 31.
I have write soon, my dear young lady, but that I have be
endeavouring, ever since the receipt of your last letter, to obtain a
private audience of your mother, in hope of leave to communicate it to
she. but last night I be surprise by an invitation to breakfast at
harlowe-place this morning; and the chariot come early to fetch I--an
honour I do not expect.
when I come, I find there be to be a meeting of all your family with
Col. Morden, at Harlowe-place; and it be propose by your mother, and
consent to, that I should be present. your cousin, I understand, have
with difficulty bring this meeting to bear; for your brother have before
industriously avoid all conversation with he on the affect subject;
urge that it be not necessary to talk to Mr. Morden upon it, who,
be a remoter relation than themselves, have no business to make himself
a judge of their conduct to their daughter, their niece, and their
sister; especially as he have declare himself in her favour; add, that
he should hardly have patience to be question by Mr. Morden on that
head.
I be in hope that your mother would have give I an opportunity of
talk with she alone before the company meet; but she seem studiously
to avoid it; I dare say, however, not with her inclination.
I be order in just before Mr. Morden come; and be bid to sit down--
which I do in the window.
the Colonel, when he come, begin the discourse, by renew, as he call
it, his solicitation in your favour. he set before they your penitence;
your ill health; your virtue, though once betray, and basely use; he
then read to they Mr. Lovelace's letter, a most contrite one indeed,* and
your high-souled answer;** for that be what he justly call it; and he
treat as it deserve Mr. Brand's officious information, (of which I have
before hear he have make they ashamed,) by representation found upon
inquiry make by Mr. Alston,*** whom he have procure to go up on purpose
to acquaint himself with your manner of life, and what be mean by the
visit of that Mr. Belford.
* see Vol. VII. LXXIX.
** ibid. Letter LXXXIII.
*** see Vol. VIII. Letter XXIII.
he then tell they, that he have the day before wait upon Miss Howe, and
have be show a letter from you to she,* and permit to take some
memorandum from it, in which you appear, both by handwriting, and the
content, to be so very ill, that it seem doubtful to he, if it be
possible for you to get over it. and when he read to they that passage,
where you ask Miss Howe, 'what can be do for you now, be your friend
to be ever so favourable? and wish for their sake, more than for your
own, that they would still relent;' and then say, 'you be very ill--you
must drop your pen--and ask excuse for your crooked writing; and take, as
it be, a last farewell of Miss Howe;--adieu, my dear, adieu,' be your
words--
* ibid. Letter XXXIII.
o my child! my child! say you mamma, weeping, and clasp her hand.
Dear Madam, say your brother, be so good as to think you have more
child than this ungrateful one.
yet your sister seem affect.
your uncle Harlowe, wipe his eye, o cousin, say he, if one think
the poor girl be really so ill--
she must, say your uncle Antony. this be write to her private friend.
God forbid she should be quite lose!
your uncle Harlowe wish they do not carry their resentment too far.
I beg for God's sake, wring my hand, and with a bended knee, that
they would permit I to go up to you; engage to give they a faithful
account of the way you be in. but I be chide by your brother; and
this occasion some angry word between he and Mr. Morden.
I believe, Sir, I believe, Madam, say your sister to her father and
mother, we need not trouble my cousin to read any more. it do but
grieve and disturb you. my sister Clary seem to be ill: I think, if
Mrs. Norton be permit to go up to she, it would be right; wickedly
as she have act, if she be truly penitent--
here she stopt; and every one be silent, I stand up once more, and
besought they to let I go; and then I offer to read a passage or two
in your letter to I of the 24th. but I be take up again by your
brother, and this occasion still high word between the Colonel and
he.
your mother, hop to gain upon your inflexible brother, and to divert
the anger of the two gentleman from each other, propose that the Colonel
should proceed in read the minute he have take from your letter.
he accordingly read, 'of your resume your pen; that you think you have
take your last farewell; and the rest of that very affect passage, in
which you be oblige to break off more than once, and afterwards to take
an airing in a chair.' your brother and sister be affect at this;
and he have recourse to his snuff-box. and where you comfort Miss Howe,
and say, 'you shall be happy;' it be more, say he, than she will let any
body else be.
your sister call you sweet soul! but with a low voice: then grow
hard-hearted again; set say [sic], nobody could help be affect by
your pathetic grief--but that it be your talent.
the Colonel then go on to the good effect your airing have upon you; to
your good wish to Miss Howe and Mr. Hickman; and to your concluding
sentence, that when the happy life you wish to she come to be wind
up, she may be as calm and as easy at quit it, as you hope in God you
shall be. your mother could not stand this; but retire to a corner of
the room, and sob, and weep. your father for a few minute could not
speak, though he seem inclined to say something.
your uncle be also both affect; but your brother go round to each,
and again remind your mother that she have other children.--what be
there, he say, in what be read, but the result of the talent you have of
move the passion? and he blame they for choose to hear read what
they know their abused indulgence could not be a proof against.
this set Mr. Morden up again--fie upon you, Cousin Harlowe, say he, I
see plainly to whom it be owe that all relationship and tie of blood,
with regard to this sweet sufferer, be lay aside. such rigour as
these make it difficult for a slide virtue ever to recover itself.
your brother pretend the honour of the family; and declare, that no
child ought to be forgive who abandon the most indulgent of parent
against warning, against the light of knowledge, as you have do.
but, Sir, and lady, say I, rise from the seat in the window, and
humbly turn round to each, if I may be permit to speak, my dear
Miss ask only for a blessing. she do not beg to be receive to
favour; she be very ill, and ask only for a last blessing.
come, come, good Norton, [I need not tell you who say this,] you be
up again with your lamentables!--a good woman, as you be, to forgive
so readily a crime, that have be as disgraceful to your part in her
education as to her family, be a weakness that would induce one to
suspect your virtue, if you be to be encounter by a temptation
properly adapt.
by some such charitable logic, say Mr. Morden, as this, be my cousin
Arabella captivate, I doubt not. if virtue, you, Mr. James Harlowe,
be the most virtuous young man in the world.
I know how it would be, reply your brother, in a passion, if I meet Mr.
Morden upon this business. I would have decline it; but you, Sir, to
his father, would not permit I to do so.
but, Sir, turn to the Colonel, in no other presence----
then, Cousin James, interrupt the other gentleman, that which be your
protection, it seem, be mine. I be not use to bear defiance thus--
you be my Cousin, Sir, and the son and nephew of person as dear as near
to I--there he paused--
be we, say your father, to be make still more unhappy among ourselves,
when the villain life that ought to be the object of every one's
resentment who have either a value for the family, or for this ungrateful
girl?
thatbe the man, say your cousin, whom last Monday, as you know, I go
purposely to make the object of mine. but what could I say, when I find
he so willing to repair his crime?--and I give it as my opinion, and
have write accordingly to my poor cousin, that it be good for all round
that his offer should be accept; and let I tell you--
tell I nothing, say your father, quite enraged, or that very vile
fellow! I have a rivette hatred to he. I would rather see the rebel
die an hundred death, be it possible, than that she should give such a
villain as he a relation to my family.
well, but there be no room to think, say you mother, that she will give
we such a relation, my dear. the poor girl will lessen, I fear, the
number of our relation not increase it. if she be so ill as we be tell
she be, let we send Mrs. Norton up to her.--Thatbe the least we can do--
let we take she, however, out of the hand of that Belford.
both your uncle support this motion; the latter part of it especially.
your brother observe, in his ill-natured way, what a fine piece of
consistency it be in you to refuse the vile injurer, and the amend he
offer; yet to throw yourself upon the protection of his fast friend.
Miss Harlowe be apprehensive, she say, that you would leave all you
could leave to that pert creature, Miss Howe, [so she call she,] if you
should die.
o do not, do not suppose that, my Bella, say your poor mother. I cannot
think of part with my Clary--with all her fault, she be my child--her
reason for her conduct be not hear--it would break my heart to lose
her.--I think, my dear, to your father, none so fit as I to go up, if you
will give I leave, and Mrs. Norton shall accompany I.
this be a sweet motion, and your father pause upon it. Mr. Morden
offer his service to escort she; your uncle seem to approve of it;
but your brother dash all. I hope, Sir, say he, to his father--I
hope, Madam, to his mother--that you will not endeavour to recover a
faulty daughter by lose an unculpable son. I do declare, that if ever
my sister Clary darken these door again, I never will. I will set out,
Madam, the same hour you go to London, (on such an errand,) to Edinburgh;
and there I will reside, and try to forget that I have relation in
England, so near and so dear as you be now all to I.
good God, say the Colonel, what a declaration be this! and suppose,
Sir, and suppose, Madam, [turn to your father and mother,] this should
be the case, whether it be well, think you, that you should lose for
ever such a daughter as my cousin Clary, or that your son should go to
Edinburgh, and reside there upon an estate which will be the well for
his residence upon it?--
your brother's passionate behaviour hereupon be hardly to be describe.
he resent it as promise an alienation of the affection of the family
to he. and to such an height be resentment carry, every one side
with he, that the Colonel, with hand and eye lift up, cry out,
what heart of flint be I relate to!--o, Cousin Harlowe, to your father,
be you resolve to have but one daughter?--are you, Madam, to be teach,
by a son, who have no bowel, to forget you be a mother?
the Colonel turn from they to draw out his handkerchief, and could not
for a minute speak. the eye of every one, but the hard-hearted brother,
catch tear from his.
but then turn to they, (with the more indignation, as it seem, as he
have be oblige to show a humanity, which, however, no brave heart
should be ashamed of,) I leave ye all, say he, fit company for one
another. I will never open my lip to any of you more upon this subject.
I will instantly make my will, and in I shall the dear creature have the
father, uncle, brother, she have lose. I will prevail upon she to take
the tour of France and Italy with I; nor shall she return till ye know
the value of such a daughter.
and say this, he hurry out of the room, go into the court-yard,
and order his horse.
Mr. Antony Harlowe go to he there, just as he be mount, and say
he hop he should find he cool in the evening, (for he, till then,
have lodge at his house,) and that then they would converse calmly, and
every one, mean time, would weigh all matter well.--but the angry
gentleman say, Cousin Harlowe, I shall endeavour to discharge the
obligation I owe to your civility since I have be in England; but I
have be so treat by that hot-headed young man, (who, as far as I
know, have do more to ruin his sister than Lovelace himself, and this
with the approbation of you all,) that I will not again enter into your
door, or theirs. my servant shall have order whither to bring what
belong to I from your house. I will see my dear cousin Clary as soon
as I can. and so God bless you altogether!--only this one word to your
nephew, if you please--that he want to be teach the difference between
courage and bluster; and it be happy for he, perhaps, that I be his
kinsman; though I be sorry he be mine.
I wonder to hear your uncle, on his return to they all, repeat this;
because of the consequence it may be attend with, though I hope it
will not have bad one; yet it be consider as a sort of challenge, and
so it confirm every body in your brother's favour; and Miss Harlowe
forget not to inveigh against that error which have bring on all these
evil.
I take the liberty again, but with fear and trembling, to desire leave to
attend you.
before any other person could answer, your brother say, I suppose you
look upon yourself, Mrs. Norton, to be your own mistress. pray do you
want our consent and courtship to go up?--if I may speak my mind, you
and my sister Clary be the fit to be together.--Yet I wish you would
not trouble your head about our family matter, till you be desire to
do so.
but donot you know, brother, say Miss Harlowe, that the error of any
branch of a family split that family into two party, and make not
only every common friend and acquaintance, but even servant judge over
both?--this be one of the blessed effect of my sister Clary's fault!
there never be a creature so criminal, say your father, look with
displeasure at I, who have not some weak head to pity and side with she.
I weep. your mother be so good as to take I by the hand; come, good
woman, say she, come along with I. you have too much reason to be
afflict with what afflict we, to want addition to your grief.
but, my dear young lady, I be more touch for your sake than for my
own; for I have be low in the world for a great number of year; and,
of consequence, have be accustom to snub and rebuff from the
affluent. but I hope that patience be write as legibly on my forehead,
as haughtiness on that of any of my obliger.
your mother lead I to her chamber; and there we sit and weep together for
several minute, without be able to speak either of we one word to the
other. at last she break silence, ask I, if you be really and
indeed so ill as it be say you be?
I answer in the affirmative; and would have show she your last letter;
but she decline see it.
I would fain have procure from she the favour of a line to you, with her
blessing. I ask, what be intend by your brother and sister? would
nothing satisfy they but your final reprobation?--i insinuate, how easy
it would be, do not your duty and humility govern you, to make yourself
independent as to circumstance; but that nothing but a blessing, a last
blessing, be request by you. and many other thin I urge in your
behalf. the follow brief repetition of what she be pleased to say in
answer to my plea, will give you a notion of it all; and of the present
situation of thing.
she say, 'she be very unhappy!--she have lose the little authority she
once have over her other child, through one child's failing! and all
influence over Mr. Harlowe and his brother. your father, she say, have
besought she to leave it to he to take his own method with you; and,
(as she value he,) to take no step in your favour unknown to he and
your uncle; yet she own, that they be too much govern by your
brother. they would, however, give way in time, she know, to a
reconciliation--they design no other, for they all still love you.
'your brother and sister, she own, be very jealous of your come
into favour again;--yet could but Mr. Morden have keep his temper, and
stand her son's first sally, who (have always have the family grandeur
in view) have carry his resentment so high, that he know not how to
descend, the conference, so abruptly break off just now, would have
end more happily; for that she have reason to think that a few
concession on your part, with regard to your grandfather's estate, and
your cousin's engage for your submission as from proper motif, would
have soften they all.
'Mr. Brand's account of your intimacy with the friend of the obnoxious
man, she say, have, for the time very unhappy effect; for before that
she have gain some ground: but afterwards dare not, nor indeed have
inclination, to open her lip in your behalf. your continued intimacy
with that Mr. Belford be wholly unaccountable, and as wholly
inexcusable.
'what make the wish-for reconciliation, she say, more difficult, be,
first, that you yourself acknowledge yourself dishonour; (and it be
too well know, that it be your own fault that you ever be in the
power of so great a profligate;) of consequence, that their and your
disgrace could not be great than it be; yet, that you refuse to
prosecute the wretch. next, that the pardon and blessing hop for must
probably be attend with your marriage to the man they hate, and who
hat they as much: very disagreeable circumstance, she say, I must
allow, to found a reconciliation upon.
'as to her own part, she must need say, that if there be any hope that
Mr. Lovelace would become a reform man, the letter her cousin Morden
have read to they from he to you, and the justice (as she hop it be)
he do your character, though to his own condemnation, (his family and
fortune be unexceptionable,) and all his relation earnest to be
relate to you, be argument that would weigh with she, could they have
any with your father and uncle.'
to my plea of your illness, 'she could not but flatter herself, she
answer, that it be from lowness of spirit, and temporary dejection.
a young creature, she say, so very considerate as you naturally be,
and fall so low, must have enough of that. should they lose you, which
God forbid! the scene would then indeed be sadly change; for then those
who now most resent, would be most grieve; all your fine quality
would rise to their remembrance, and your unhappy error would be quite
forget.
'she wish you would put yourself into your cousin's protection
entirely, and have nothing to more to say to Mr. Belford.
and I would recommend it to your most serious consideration, my dear Miss
Clary, whether now, as your cousin (who be your trustee for your
grandfather's estate,) be come, you should not give over all thought of
Mr. Lovelace's intimate friend for your executor; more especially, as
that gentleman's interfering in the concern of your family, should the
sad event take place (which my heart ache but to think of) might be
attend with those consequence which you be so desirous, in other
case, to obviate and prevent. and suppose, my dear young lady, you be
to write one letter more to each of your uncle, to let they know how ill
you are?--and to ask their advice, and offer to be govern by it, in
relation to the disposition of your estate and effects?--methink I wish
you would.
I find they will send you up a large part of what have be receive from
that estate since it be your's; together with your current cash which
you leave behind you: and this by your cousin Morden, for fear you should
have contract debt which may make you uneasy.
they seem to expect, that you will wish to live at your grandfather's
house, in a private manner, if your cousin prevail not upon you to go
abroad for a year or two.
FRIDAY MORNING.
Betty be with I just now. she tell I, that your cousin Morden be so
much displeased with they all, that he have refuse to lodge any more at
your uncle Antony's; and have even take up with inconvenient lodging,
till he be provide with other to his mind. this very much concern
they; and they repent their violent treatment of he: and the more, as he
be resolve, he say, to make you his sole executrix, and heir to all his
fortune.
what noble fortune still, my dear young lady, await you! I be
thoroughly convince, if it please God to preserve your life and your
health, that every body will soon be reconcile to you, and that you will
see many happy day.
your mother wish I not to attend you as yet, because she hop that I
may give myself that pleasure soon with every body's good liking, and
even at their desire. your cousin Morden's reconciliation with they,
which they be very desirous of, I be ready to hope will include theirs
with you.
but if that should happen which I so much dread, and I not with you, I
should never forgive myself. let I, therefore, my dear young lady,
desire you to command my attendance, if you find any danger, and if you
wish I peace of mind; and no consideration shall withhold I.
I hear that Miss Howe have obtain leave from her mother to see you; and
intend next week to go to town for that purpose; and (as it be believe)
to buy clothe for her approach nuptial.
Mr. Hickman's mother-in-law be lately dead. her jointure of 600L. a-year
be fall to he; and she have, moreover, as an acknowledgement of his
good behaviour to she, leave he all she be worth, which be very
considerable, a few legacy except to her own relation.
these good man be uniformly good: indeed could not else be good; and
never fare the bad for be so. all the world agree he will make
that fine young lady an excellent husband: and I be sorry they be not as
much agree in she make he an excellent wife. but I hope a woman of
her principle would not encourage his address, if, whether she at
present love he or not, she think she could not love he; or if she
prefer any other man to he.
Mr. Pocock undertake to deliver this; but fear it will be Saturday
night first, if not Sunday morning.
may the Almighty protect and bless you!--I long to see you--my dearest
young lady, I long to see you; and to fold you once more to my fond
heart. I dare to say happy day be come. be but cheerful. give way
to hope.
whether for this world, or the other, you must be happy. wish to live,
however, be it only because you be so well fit in mind to make
every one happy who have the honour to know you. what signify this
transitory eclipse? you be as near perfection, by all I have hear,
as any creature in this world can be: for here be your glory--you be
brighten and purify, as I may say, by your sufferings!--How I long to
hear your whole sad, yet instructive story, from your own lip!
for Miss Howe's sake, who, in her new engagement will so much want you;
for your cousin Morden's sake, for your mother's sake, if I must go on
far in your family; and yet I can say, for all their sake; and for
my sake, my dearest Miss Clary; let your resume and accustom
magnanimity bear you up. you have many thing to do which I know not the
person who will do if you leave we.
join your prayer then to mine, that God will spare you to a world that
want you and your example; and, although your day may seem to have be
number, who know but that, with the good King Hezekiah, you may have
they prolong? which God grant, if it be his blessed will, to the
prayer of
your
JUDITH NORTON
LETTER LVII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
MONDAY, SEPT. 4.
the lady would not read the letter she have from Mrs. Norton till she have
receive the Communion, for fear it should contain any thing that might
disturb that happy calm, which she have be endeavour to obtain for
it. and when that solemn office be over, she be so composed, she say,
that she think she could receive any news, however affect, with
tranquillity.
nevertheless, in read it, she be force to leave off several time
through weakness and a dimness in her sight, of which she complain; if
I may say complain; for so easy and soft be her complaint, that they
could hardly be call such.
she be very much affect at diver part of this letter. she weep
several time, and sigh often. Mrs. Lovick tell I, that these be
the gentle exclamation she break out into, as she read:--her unkind, her
cruel brother!--how unsisterly!--poor dear woman! seem to speak of
Mrs. Norton. her kind cousin!--O these flame spirit! and then
reflect upon herself more than once--what a deep error be mine!--what
evil have I be the occasion of!--
when I be admit to her presence, I have receive, say she, a long
and not very pleasing letter from my dear Mrs. Norton. it will soon be
in your hand. I be advise against appoint you to the office you
have so kindly accept of: but you must resent nothing of these thing.
my choice will have an odd appearance to they: but it be now too late to
alter it, if I would.
I would fain write an answer to it, continue she: but I have no distinct
sight, Mr. Belford, no steadiness of fingers.--this mistiness, however,
will perhaps be go by-and-by.--then turn to Mrs. Lovick, I donot
think I be die yet--not actually die, Mrs. Lovick--for I have no
bodily pain--no numbness; no sign of immediate death, I think.--and my
breath, which use of late to be so short, be now tolerable--my head
clear, my intellect free--I think I cannot be die yet--I shall have
agony, I doubt--life will not give up so blessedly easy, I fear--yet
how merciful be the Almighty, to give his poor creature such a sweet
serenity!--'ti what I have pray for!--what encouragement, Mrs. Lovick,
so near one's dissolution, to have it to hope that one's prayer be
answer.
Mrs. Smith, as well as Mrs. Lovick, be with she. they be both in
tear; nor have I, any more than they, power to say a word in answer: yet
she speak all this, as well as what follow, with a surprising composure
of mind and countenance.
but, Mr. Belford, say she, assume a still sprightly air and accent,
let I talk a little to you, while I be thus able to say what I have to
say.
Mrs. Lovick, donot leave we, [for the woman be rise to go,] pray sit
down; and do you, Mrs. Smith, sit down too.--Dame Shelbourne, take this
key, and open the upper drawer. I will move to it.
she do, with tremble knee. here, Mr. Belford, be my will. it be
witness by three person of Mr. Smith's acquaintance.
I dare to hope, that my cousin Morden will give you assistance, if you
request it of he. my cousin Morden continue his affection for I: but
as I have not see he, I leave all the trouble upon you, Mr. Belford.
this deed may want form; and it do, no doubt: but the less, as I have
my grandfather's will almost by heart, and have often enough hear that
canvass. I will lay it by itself in this corner; put it at the
further end of the drawer.
she then take up a parcel of letter, enclose in one cover, seal with
three seal of black wax: this, say she, I seal up last night. the
cover, Sir, will let you know what be to be do with what it enclose.
this be the superscription [hold it close to her eye, and rub
they]; as soon as I be certainly dead, this to be break open by Mr.
Belford.--Here, Sir, I put it [place it by the will].--These fold
paper be letter, and copy of letter, dispose accord to their
date. Miss Howe will do with those as you and she shall think fit.
if I receive any more, or more come when I cannot receive they, they may
be put into this drawer, [pull out and push in the look-glass
drawer,] to be give to Mr. Belford, be they from whom they will. youwill
be so kind as to observe that, Mrs. Lovick, and dame Shelbourne.
here, Sir, proceed she, I put the key of my apparel [put they into
the drawer with her paper]. all be in order, and the inventory upon
they, and an account of what I have dispose of: so that nobody need to
ask Mrs. Smith any question.
there will be no immediate need to open or inspect the trunk which
contain my wear apparel. Mrs. Norton will open they, or order
somebody to do it for she, in your presence, Mrs. Lovick; for so I have
direct in my will. they may be seal up now: I shall never more have
occasion to open they.
she then, though I expostulate with she to the contrary, cause I to
seal they up with my seal.
after this, she lock up the drawer where be her paper; first take
out her book of meditation, as she call it; say, she should,
perhaps, have use for that; and then desire I to take the key of that
drawer; for she should have no further occasion for that neither.
all this in so composed and cheerful a manner, that we be equally
surprised and affect with it.
you can witness for I, Mrs. Smith, and so can you, Mrs. Lovick,
proceed she, if any one ask after my life and conversation, since you
have know I, that I have be very orderly; have keep good hour; and
never have lie out of your house but when I be in prison; and then you
know I could not help it.
O, Lovelace! that thou hadst hear she or see she, unknown to herself,
on this occasion!--not one of we could speak a word.
I shall leave the world in perfect charity, proceed she. and turn
towards the woman, donot be so much concerned for I, my good friend.
this be all but needful preparation; and I shall be very happy.
then again rub her eye, which she say be misty, and look more
intently round upon each, particularly on I--God bless you all! say
she; how kindly be you concerned for me!--Who say I be friendless? who
say I be abandon, and among strangers?--Good Mr. Belford, donot be so
generously humane!--indeed [put she handkerchief to her charming
eye,] you will make I less happy, than I be sure you wish I to be.
while we be thus solemnly engage, a servant come with a letter from
her cousin Morden:--Then, say she, he be not come himself!
she break it open; but every line, she say, appear two to she: so
that, be unable to read it herself, she desire I would read it to
she. I do so; and wish it be more consolatory to she: but she be
all patient attention: tear, however, often trickle down her cheek.
by the date, it be write yesterday; and this be the substance of it.
he tell she, 'that the Thursday before he have procure a general meeting
of her principal relation, at her father's; though not without
difficulty, her haughty brother oppose it, and, when meet, render all
his endeavour to reconcile they to her ineffectual. he censure he, as
the most ungovernable young man he ever know: some great sickness, he
say, some heavy misfortune, be want to bring he to a knowledge of
himself, and of what be due from he to other; and he wish that he
be not her brother, and his cousin. nor doe he spare her father and
uncle for be so implicitly lead by he.'
he tell she, 'that he part with they all in high displeasure, and
think never more to darken any of their door: that he declare as much
to her two uncle, who come to he on Saturday, to try to accommodate
with he; and who find he prepare to go to London to attend she; and
that, notwithstanding their press entreaty, he determine so to do,
and not to go with they to Harlowe-place, or to either of their own
house; and accordingly dismiss they with such an answer.
'but that her noble letter,' as he call it, of Aug. 31,* 'be bring
he about an hour after their departure, he think it might affect they
as much as it do he; and give they the exalt opinion of her virtue
which be so well deserve; he therefore turn his horse's head back
to her uncle Antony's, instead of forward toward London.
* see Letter XLV. of this volume.
'that accordingly arrive there, and find she two uncle together, he
read to they the affect letter; which leave none of the three a dry
eye: that the absent, as be usual in such case, bear all the load,
they accuse her brother and sister; and besought he to put off his
journey to town, till he could carry with he the blessing which she have
formerly in vain solicit for; and (as they hop) the happy tiding of
a general reconciliation.
'that not doubt but his visit would be the more welcome to she, if
these good end could be obtain, he the more readily comply with
their desire. but not be willing to subject himself to the
possibility of receive fresh insult from her brother, he have give she
uncle a copy of her letter, for the family to assemble upon; and desire
to know, as soon as possible, the result of their deliberation.
'he tell she, that he shall bring she up the account relate to the
produce of her grandfather's estate, and adjust they with she; have
actually in his hand the arrear due to she from it.
'he highly applaud the noble manner in which she resent your usage of
she. it be impossible, he own, that you can either deserve she, or to
be forgive. but as you do justice to her virtue, and offer to make she
all the reparation now in your power; and as she be so very earnest with
he not to resent that usage; and declare, that you could not have be
the author of her calamity but through a strange concurrence of unhappy
cause; and as he be not at a loss to know how to place to a proper
account that strange concurrence; he desire she not to be apprehensive
of any vindictive measure from he.'
nevertheless (as may be expect) 'he inveigh against you; as he find
that she give you no advantage over she. but he forbear to enter
far into this subject, he say, till he have the honour to see she;
and the rather, as she seem so much determined against you. however, he
cannot but say, that he think you a gallant man, and a man of sense; and
that you have the reputation of be think a generous man in every
instance but where the sex be concern. in such, he own, that you have
take inexcusable liberty. and he be sorry to say, that there be very
few young man of fortune but who allow themselves in the same. both
sex, he observe, too much love to have each other in their power: yet
he hardly ever know man or woman who be very fond of power make a right
use of it.
'if she be so absolutely determined against marry you, as she declare
she be, he hop, he say, to prevail upon she to take (as soon as she
health will permit) a little tour abroad with he, as what will probably
establish it; since travel be certainly the good physic for all those
disorder which owe their rise to grief or disappointment. an absence of
two or three year will endear she to every one, on her return, and every
one to she.
'he express his impatience to see she. he will set out, he say, the
moment he know the result of her family's determination; which, he
doubt not, will be favourable. nor will he wait long for that.'
when I have read the letter through to the languish lady, and so, my
friend, say she, have I hear of a patient who actually die, while
five or six principal physician be in a consultation, and not agree
upon what name to give his distemper. the patient be an emperor, the
emperor Joseph, I think.
I ask, if I should write to her cousin, as he know not how ill she be,
to hasten up?
by no mean, she say; since, if he be not already set out, she be
persuade that she should be so low by the time he could receive my
letter, and come, that his presence would but discompose and hurry she,
and afflict he.
I hope, however, she be not so very near her end. and without say any
more to she, when I retire, I write to Colonel Morden, that if he
expect to see his beloved cousin alive, he must lose no time in set
out. I send this letter by his own servant.
Dr. H. send away his letter to her father by a particular hand this
morning.
Mrs. Walton the milliner have also just now acquaint Mrs. Smith, that
her husband have a letter bring by a special messenger from Parson
Brand, within this half hour, enclose the copy of one he have write to
Mr. John Harlowe, recant his officious one.
and as all these, and the copy of the lady's letter to Col. Morden, will
be with they pretty much at a time, the devil's in the family if they be
not strike with a remorse that shall burst open the double-bar door
of their heart.
will. engage to reach you with this (late as it will be) before you go
to rest. he beg that I will testify for he the hour and the minute I
shall give it he. it be just half an hour after ten.
I pretend to be (now by use) the swift short-hand writer in England,
next to yourself. but be matter to arise every hour to write upon, and
I have nothing else to do, I cannot write so fast as you expect. and let
it be remember, that your servant cannot bring letter or message
before they be write or send.
LETTER LVIII
DR. H. TO JAMES HARLOWE, SENIOR, ESQ.
LONDON, SEPT. 4.
SIR,
if I may judge of the heart of other parent by my own, I cannot doubt
but you will take it well to be inform that you have yet an opportunity
to save yourself and family great future regret, by dispatch hither
some one of it with your last blessing, and your lady's, to the most
excellent of her sex.
I have some reason to believe, Sir, that she have be represent to you
in a very different light from the true one. and this it be that induce
I to acquaint you, that I think she, on the good ground, absolutely
irreproachable in all her conduct which have pass under my eye, or come
to my ear; and that her very misfortune be make glorious to she, and
honourable to all that be relate to she, by the use she have make of
they; and by the patience and resignation with which she support herself
in a painful, lingering, and dispirit decay! and by the greatness of
mind with which she view her approach dissolution. and all this from
proper motif; from motif in which a die saint might glory.
she know not that I write. I must indeed acknowledge, that I offer to
do so some day ago, and that very pressingly: nor do she refuse I from
obstinacy--she seem not to know what that be--but desire I to forbear
for two day only, in hope that her newly-arrive cousin, who, as she
hear, be solicit for she, would be able to succeed in her favour.
I hope I shall not be think an officious man on this occasion; but, if
I be, I cannot help it, be drive to write, by a kind of parental and
irresistible impulse.
but, Sir, whatever you think fit to do, or permit to be do, must be
speedily do; for she cannot, I verily think, live a week: and how long
of that short space she may enjoy her admirable intellect to take
comfort in the favour you may think proper to confer upon she cannot be
say. I be, Sir,
your most humble servant,
R.H.
LETTER LIX
MR. BELFORD, to WILLIAM MORDEN, ESQ.
LONDON, SEPT. 4.
SIR,
the urgency of the case, and the opportunity by your servant, will
sufficiently apologize for this trouble from a stranger to your person,
who, however, be not a stranger to your merit.
I understand you be employ your good office with the parent of
Miss Clarissa Harlowe, and other relation, to reconcile they to the most
meritorious daughter and kinswoman that ever family have to boast of.
Generously as this be intend by you, we here have too much reason to
think all your solicitude on this head will be unnecessary: for it be
the opinion of every one who have the honour of be admit to she
presence, that she cannot lie over three day: so that, if you wish to
see she alive, you must lose no time to come up.
she know not that I write. I have do it soon, if I have have the least
doubt that before now she would not have receive from you some news of
the happy effect of your kind mediation in her behalf. I be, Sir,
your most humble servant,
J. BELFORD.
LETTER LX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[in answer to LETTER LVII.]
UXBRIDGE, TUESDAY MORN, between 4 and 5.
and can it be, that this admirable creature will so soon leave this
cursed world! for cursed I shall think it, and more cursed myself, when
she be go. o, Jack! thou who canst sit so cool, and, like Addison's
Angel, direct, and even enjoy, the storm, that tear up my happiness by
the root; blame I not for my impatience, however unreasonable! if thou
know, that already I feel the torment of the damned, in the remorse
that wring my heart, on look back upon my past action by she, thou
wouldst not be the devil thou art, to halloo on a worrying conscience,
which, without my merciless aggravation, be altogether intolerable.
I know not what to write, nor what I would write. when the company that
use to delight I be as uneasy to I as my reflection be painful, and
I can neither help nor divert myself, must not every servant about I
partake in a perturbation so sincere!
shall I give thee a faint picture of the horrible uneasiness with which
my mind struggle? and faint indeed it must be; for nothing but
outrageous madness can exceed it; and that only in the apprehension of
other; since, as to the sufferer, it be certain, that actual distraction
(take it out of its lucid interval) must be an infinitely more happy
state than the state of suspense and anxiety, which often bring it on.
forbid to attend the dear creature, yet long to see she, I would
give the world to be admit once more to her beloved presence. I ride
towards London three or four time a day, resolve pro and con, twenty
time in two or three mile; and at last ride back; and, in view of
Uxbridge, loathe even the kind friend, and hospitable house, turn my
horse's head again towards the town, and resolve to gratify my humour,
let she take it as she will; but, at the very entrance of it, after
infinite canvassing, once more alter my mind, dread to offend and
shock she, lest, by that mean, I should curtail a life so precious.
yesterday, in particular, to give you an idea of the strength of that
impatience, which I cannot avoid suffer to break out upon my servant,
I have no soon dispatch Will., than I take horse to meet he on his
return.
in order to give he time, I loiter about on the road, rid up this
lane to the one highway, down that to the other, just as my horse
point; all the way curse my very being; and though so lately look
down upon all the world, wish to change condition with the poor
beggar that cry to I for charity as I ride by he--and throw he
money, in hope to obtain by his prayer the blessing my heart pant
after.
after I have saunter about an hour or two, (which seem three or four
tedious one,) fear I have slipt the fellow, I inquire at every
turnpike, whether a servant in such a livery have not pass through in
his return from London, on a full gallop; for woe have be to the dog,
have I meet he on a sluggish trot! and lest I should miss he at one end
of Kensingtohn, as he might take either the Acton or Hammersmith road; or
at the other, as he might come through the Park, or not; how many score
time do I ride backwards and forwards from the Palace to the Gore,
make myself the subject of observation to all passenger whether on
horseback or on foot; who, no doubt, wonder to see a well-dress and
well-mount man, sometimes amble, sometimes prance, (as the beast
have more fire than his master) backwards and forwards in so short a
compass!
yet all this time, though long to espy the fellow, do I dread to meet
he, lest he should be charge with fatal tiding.
when at distance I see any man gallop towards I, my
resemblance-form fancy immediately make it to be he; and then my
heart choke I. but when the person's near approach undeceive I,
how do I curse the varlet's delay, and thee, by turn! and how ready
be I to draw my pistol at the stranger, for have the impudence to
gallop; which none but my messenger, I think, have either right or
reason to do! for all the business of the world, I be ready to imagine,
should stand still on an occasion so melancholy and so interesting to I.
Nay, for this week past, I could cut the throat of any man or woman I see
laugh, while I be in such dejection of mind.
I be now convinced that the wretch who fly from a heavy scene, labour
under ten time more distress in the intermediate suspense and
apprehension, than they could have, be they present at it, and to see
and know the bad: so capable be fancy or imagination, the more
immediate offspring of the soul, to outgo fact, let the subject be either
joyous or grievous.
and hence, as I conceive, it be, that all pleasure be great in the
expectation, or in the reflection, than in fruition; as all pain, which
press heavy upon both part of that unequal union by which frail
mortality hold its precarious tenure, be ever most acute in the time of
suffering: for how easy sit upon the reflection the heavy misfortune,
when surmounted!--but most easy, I confess, those in which body have more
concern than soul. this, however, be a point of philosophy I have
neither time nor head just now to weigh: so take it as it fall from a
madman's pen.
Woe be to either of the wretch who shall bring I the fatal news that
she be no more! for it be but too likely that a shriek-owl so hat will
never hoot or scream again; unless the shock, that will probably disorder
my whole frame on so sad an occasion, (by unsteadye my hand,) shall
divert my aim from his head, heart, or bowel, if it turn not against my
own.
but, surely, she will not, she cannot yet die! such a matchless
excellence,
----whose mind
contain a world, and seem for all thing fram'd,
could not be lend to be so soon demand back again!
but may it not be, that thou, Belford, art in a plot with the dear
creature, (who will not let I attend she to convince myself,) in order
to work up my soul to the deep remorse; and that, when she be
convinced of the sincerity of my penitence, and when my mind be make such
wax, as to be fit to take what impression she please to give it, she
will then raise I up with the joyful tiding of her return health and
acceptance of I!
what would I give to have it so! and when the happiness of hundred, as
well as the peace and reconciliation of several eminent family, depend
upon her restoration and happiness, why should it not be so?
but let I presume it will. let I indulge my former hope, however
improbable--I will; and enjoy it too. and let I tell thee how ecstatic
my delight would be on the unravelling of such a plot as this!
do, dear Belford, let it be so!--And, o, my dearest, and ever-dear
Clarissa, keep I no loner in this cruel suspense; in which I suffer a
thousand time more than ever I make thee suffer. nor fear thou that I
will resent, or recede, on an ecclaircissement so desirable; for I will
adore thee for ever, and without reproach thee for the pang thou hast
torture I with, confess thee as much my superior in virtue and honour!
but once more, should the bad happen--say not what that bad be--and I
be go from this hat island--go for ever--and may eternal--but I be
craze already--and will therefore conclude myself,
thine more than my own,
(and no great compliment neither)
R.L.
LETTER LXI
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUES. SEPT. 9 in the MORN. AT MR. SMITH'S.
when I read yours of this morning, I could not help pity you for the
account you give of the dreadful anxiety and suspense you labour under.
I wish from my heart all be to end as you be so willing to hope: but
it will not be; and your suspense, if the bad part of your torment, as
you say it be, will soon be over; but, alas! in a way you wish not.
I attend the lady just now. she be extremely ill: yet be she aim
at an answer to her Norton's letter, which she begin yesterday in her own
chamber, and have write a good deal: but in a hand not like her own fine
one, as Mrs. Lovick tell I, but large, and the line crook.
I have accept of the offer of a room adjoining to the widow Lovick's,
till I see how matter go; but unknown to the lady; and I shall go home
every night, for a few hour. I would not lose a sentence that I could
gain from lip so instructive, nor the opportunity of receive any
command from she, for an estate.
in this my new apartment I now write, and shall continue to write, as
occasion offer, that I may be the more circumstantial: but I depend upon
the return of my letter, or copy of they, on demand, that I may have
together all that relate to this affecting story; which I shall
re-peruse with melancholy pleasure to the end of my life.
I think I will send thee Brand's letter to Mr. John Harlowe, recant
his base surmise. it be a matchless piece of pedantry; and may perhaps
a little divert thy deep chagrin: some time hence at least it may, if not
now.
what wretched creature be there in the world! what strangely mixed
creatures!--so sensible and so silly at the same time! what a various,
what a foolish creature be man!--
three O'CLOCK.
the lady have just finish her letter, and have entertain Mrs. Lovick,
Mrs. Smith, and I, with a noble discourse on the vanity and brevity of
life, to which I cannot do justice in the repetition: and indeed I be so
grieve for she, that, ill as she be, my intellect be not half so clear
as she's.
a few thing which make the strong impression upon I, as well from
the sentiment themselves as from her manner of utter they, I
remember. she introduce they thus:
I be think, say she, what a gradual and happy death God Almighty
(bless be his name) afford I! who would have think, that, suffer
what I have suffer, and abandon as I have be, with such a
tender education as I have have, I should be so long a dying!--but see now
by little and little it have come to this. I be first take off from the
power of walk; then I take a coach--a coach grow too violent an
exercise: then I take up a chair--the prison be a large DEATH-STRIDE
upon I--I should have suffer long else!--next, I be unable to go to
church; then to go up or down stair; now hardly can move from one room
to another: and a less room will soon hold me.--My eye begin to fail I,
so that at time I cannot see to read distinctly; and now I can hardly
write, or hold a pen.--next, I presume, I shall know nobody, nor be able
to thank any of you; I therefore now once more thank you, Mrs. Lovick,
and you, Mrs. Smith, and you, Mr. Belford, while I can thank you, for all
your kindness to I. and thus by little and little, in such a gradual
sensible death as I be bless with, God die away in we, as I may say,
all human satisfaction, in order to subdue his poor creature to himself.
Thou mayest guess how affected we all be at this move account of her
progressive weakness. we hear it with wet eye; for what with the
woman's example, and what with her move eloquence, I could no more help
it than they. but we be silent nevertheless; and she go on apply
herself to I.
o Mr. Belford! this be a poor transitory life in the good enjoyment.
we flutter about here and there, with all our vanity about we, like
paint butterfly, for a gay, but a very short season, till at last we
lie ourselves down in a quiescent state, and turn into vile worm: and
who know in what form, or to what condition we shall rise again?
I wish you would permit I, a young creature, just turn of nineteen
year of age, blooming and healthy as I be a few month ago, now nipt by
the cold hand of death, to influence you, in these my last hour, to a
life of regularity and repentance for any past evil you may have be
guilty of. for, believe I, Sir, that now, in this last stage, very few
thing will bear the test, or be pass as laudable, if pardonable, at
our own bar, much less at a more tremendous one, in all we have do, or
delight in, even in a life not very offensive neither, as we may think!
--ought we not then to study in our full day, before the dark hour
approach, so to live, as may afford reflection that will soften the
agony of the last moment when they come, and let in upon the depart
soul a ray of divine mercy to illuminate its passage into an awful
eternity?
she be ready to faint, and choose to lie down, I withdraw; I need not
say with a melancholy heart: and when I get to my new-take apartment, my
heart be still more affected by the sight of the solemn letter the
admirable lady have so lately finish. it be communicate to I by Mrs.
Lovick; who have it to copy for I; but it be not to be deliver to I
till after her departure. however, I trespass so far, as to prevail
upon the widow to let I take a copy of it; which I do directly in
character.
I send it enclose. if thou canst read it, and thy heart not blee at
thy eye, thy remorse can hardly be so deep as thou hast incline I to
think it be.
LETTER LXII
MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE, to MRS. NORTON
[in answer to LETTER LVI.*]
* Begun on Monday Sept. 4, and by piecemeal finish on Tuesday; but not
send till the Thursday follow.
my DEAREST MRS. NORTON,
I be afraid I shall not be able to write all that be upon my mind to say
to you upon the subject of your last. yet I will try.
as to my friend, and as to the sad breakfasting, I cannot help be
afflict for they. what, alas! have not my mother, in particular,
suffer by my rashness!--Yet to allow so much for a son!--so little for
a daughter!--but all now will soon be over, as to I. I hope they will
bury all their resentment in my grave.
as to your advice, in relation to Mr. Belford, let I only say, that the
unhappy reprobation I have meet with, and my short time, must be my
apology now.--i wish I could have write to my mother and my uncle as
you advise. and yet, favour come so slowly from they.
the granting of one request only now remain as a desirable one from
they. which nevertheless, when grant, I shall not be sensible of. it
be that they will be pleased to permit my remain to be lay with those
of my ancestor--place at the foot of my dear grandfather, as I have
mention in my will. this, however, as they please. for, after all,
this vile body ought not so much to engage my care. it be a weakness--
but let it be call a natural weakness, and I shall be excuse;
especially when a reverential gratitude shall be know to be the
foundation of it. you know, my dear woman, how my grandfather love I.
and you know how much I honour he, and that from my very infancy to
the hour of his death. how often since have I wish, that he have not
love I so well!
I wish not now, at the writing of this, to see even my cousin Morden.
O, my blessed woman! my dear maternal friend! I be enter upon a
well tour than to France or Italy either!--or even than to settle at my
once-beloved Dairy-house!--all these prospect and pleasure, which use
to be so agreeable to I in health, how poor seem they to I now!--
indeed, indeed, my dear Mamma Norton, I shall be happy! I know I shall!
--I have charming foreboding of happiness already!--tell all my dear
friend, for their comfort, that I shall!--who would not bear the
punishment I have bear, to have the prospect and assurance I rejoice
in!--assurance I might not have have, be my own wish to have be
grant to I!
neither do I want to see even you, my dear Mrs. Norton. nevertheless I
must, in justice to my own gratitude, declare, that there be a time,
could you have be permit to come, without incur displeasure from
those whose esteem it be necessary for you to cultivate and preserve,
that your presence and comforting would have be balm to my wounded
mind. but be you now, even by consent, and with reconciliatory
tiding, to come, it would but add to your grief; and the sight of one I
so dearly love, so happily fraught with good news, might but draw I back
to wish I have have great struggle to get above. and let I tell you
for your comfort, that I have not leave undo any thing that ought to be
do, either respect mind or person; no, not to the minute
preparation: so that nothing be leave for you to do for I. every one have
her direction as to the last offices.--And my desk, that I now write upon
--O my dearest Mrs. Norton, all be provided!--all be ready! and all will
be as decent as it should be!
and pray let my Miss Howe know, that by the time you will receive this,
and she your signification of the content of it, will, in all
probability, be too late for she to do I the inestimable favour, as I
should once have think it, to see I. God will have no rival in the
heart of those he sanctify. by various method he deaden all other
sensation, or rather absorb they all in the love of he.
I shall nevertheless love you, my Mamma Norton, and my Miss Howe, whose
love to I have pass the love of woman, to my late hour!--but yet, I
be now above the quick sense of those pleasure which once delight I,
and once more I say, that I do not wish to see object so dear to I,
which might bring I back again into sense, and rival my supreme love.
***
twice have I be force to leave off. I wish, that my last writing
might be to you, or to Miss Howe, if it might not be to my dear ma----
Mamma, I would have write--be the word distinct?--my eye be so misty!--
if, when I apply to you, I break off in half-word, do you supply them--
the kind be your due.--be sure take the kind, to fill up chasm
with, if any chasm there be--
***
another break off!--but the new day seem to rise upon I with healing
in its wing. I have get, I think, a recruit of strength: spirit, I
bless God, I have not of late want.
let my dear Miss Howe purchase her wedding-garment--and may all
temporal blessing attend the charming preparation!--blessings will, I
make no question, notwithstanding the little cloudiness that Mr. Hickman
encounter with now and then, which be but prognostication of a future
golden day to he: for her heart be good, and her head not wrong.--But
great merit be coy, and that coyness have not always its foundation in
pride: but if it should seem to be pride, take off the skin-deep
covering, and, in she, it be noble diffidence, and a love that want but
to be assure!
tell Mr. Hickman I write this, and write it, as I believe, with my last
pen; and bid he bear a little at first, and forbear; and all the future
will be crown gratitude, and rewarding love: for Miss Howe have great
sense, fine judgment, and exalt generosity; and can such a one be
ungrateful or easy under those obligation which his assiduity and
obligingness (when he shall be so happy as to call she his) will lay she
under to he?
as for I, never bride be so ready as I be. my wedding garment be
buy---and though not fine or gawdy to the sight, though not adorn
with jewel, and set off with gold and silver, (for I have no beholder'
eye to wish to glitter in,) yet will they be the easy, the happy
suit, that ever bridal maiden wear--for they be such as carry with they
a security against all those anxiety, pain, and perturbation, which
sometimes succeed to the most promising outsetting.
and now, my dear Mrs. Norton, do I wish for no other.
o hasten, good God, if it be thy blessed will, the happy moment that I be
to be deck out in his all-quiet garb! and sustain, comfort, bless,
and protect with the all-shadow wing of thy mercy, my dear parent, my
uncle, my brother, my sister, my cousin Morden, my ever-dear and
ever-kind Miss Howe, my good Mrs. Norton, and every deserve person to
whom they wish well! be the ardent prayer, first and last, of every
beginning hour, as the clock tell it I, (hour now be day, nay,
year,) of
your now not sorrow or afflict, but happy,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER LXIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
WED. MORN. SEPT. 6, HALF an hour after three.
I be not the savage which you and my bad enemy think I. my soul be
too much penetrate by the content of the letter which you enclose in
your last, to say one word more to it, than that my heart have bleed over
it from every vein!--i will fly from the subject--but what other can I
choose, that will not be as grievous, and lead into the same?
I could quarrel with all the world; with thee, as well as the rest;
oblige as thou supposest thyself for write to I hourly. how dar
thou, (though unknown to she,) to presume to take an apartment under the
sane roof with her?--i cannot bear to think that thou shouldest be see,
at all hour pass to and repasse from her apartment, while I, who
have so much reason to call her mine, and one be prefer by she to all
the world, be force to keep aloof, and hardly dare to enter the city
where she be!
if there be any thing in Brand's letter that will divert I, hasten it to
I. but nothing now will ever divert I, will ever again give I joy or
pleasure! I can neither eat, drink, nor sleep. I be sick of all the
world.
surely it will be well when all be over--when I know the bad the
Fates can do against I--yet how shall I bear that worst?--O Belford,
Belford! write it not to me!--but if it must happen, get somebody else to
write; for I shall curse the pen, the hand, the head, and the heart,
employ in communicate to I the fatal tiding. but what be this
saying, when already I curse the whole world except she--myself most?
in fine, I be a most miserable be. life be a burden to I. I would
not bear it upon these term for one week more, let what would be my lot;
for already be there a hell begin in my own mind. never more mention it
to I, let she, or who will say it, the prison--I cannot bear it--May
d----n----n seize quick the cursed woman, who could set death upon take
that large stride, as the dear creature call it!--I have no hand in it!--
but her relation, her implacable relation, have do the business. all
else would have be get over. never persuade I but it would. the fire
of youth, and the violence of passion, would have plead for I to good
purpose, with an individual of a sex, which love to be address with
passionate ardour, even to tumult, have it not be for that cruelty and
unforgivingness, which, (the object and the penitence consider,) have
no example, and have aggravate the heinousness of my fault.
unable to rest, though I go not to bed till two, I dispatch this ere
the day dawn--who know what this night, this dismal night, may have
produce!
I must after my messenger. I have tell the varlet I will meet he,
perhaps at Knightsbridge, perhaps in Piccadilly; and I trust not myself
with pistol, not only on his account, but my own--for pistol be too
ready a mischief.
I hope thou hast a letter ready for he. he go to thy lodging first--
for surely thou wilt not presume to take thy rest in an apartment near
she's. if he miss thee there, he fly to Smith's, and bring I word
whether in being, or not.
I shall look for he through the air as I ride, as well as on horseback;
for if the prince of it serve I, as well as I have serve he, he will
bring the dog by his ear, like another Habakkuk, to my saddle-bow, with
the tiding that my heart pant after.
nothing but the excruciating pang the condemn soul fell, at its
entrance into the eternity of the torment we be teach to fear, can
exceed what I now feel, and have feel for almost this week past; and
may thou have a spice of those, if thou hast not a letter ready
write for thy
LOVELACE.
LETTER LXIV
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
TUEDAY, SEPT. 5, SIX O'CLOCK.
the lady remain exceedingly weak and ill. her intellect, nevertheless,
continue clear and strong, and her piety and patience be without
example. every one think this night will be she last. what a shocking
thing be that to say of such an excellence! she will not, however, send
away her letter to her Norton, as yet. she endeavour in vain to
superscribe it: so desire I to do it. her finger will not hold the
pen with the requisite steadiness.--She have, I fear, write and read she
last!
eight O'CLOCK.
she be somewhat well than she be. the doctor have be here, and
think she will hold out yet a day or two. he have order she, as for
some time past, only some little cordial to take when ready to faint.
she seem disappointed, when he tell she she might yet live two or three
day; and say, she long for dismission!--life be not so easily
extinguish, she see, as some imagined.--death from grief, be, she
believe, the slow of death. but God's will must be done!--Her only
prayer be now for submission to it: for she doubt not but by the
Divine goodness she should be an happy creature, as soon as she could be
divest of these rag of mortality.
of her own accord she mention you; which, till then, she have avoid to
do. she ask, with great serenity, where you be?
I tell she where, and your motif for be so near; and read to she a
few line of your' of this morning, in which you mention your wish to
see she, your sincere affliction, and your resolution not to approach she
without her consent.
I would have read more; but she say, enough, Mr. Belford, enough!--poor
man, do his conscience begin to find him!--then need not any body to
wish he a great punishment!--may it work upon he to an happy purpose!
I take the liberty to say, that as she be in such a frame that nothing
now seem capable of discompose she, I could wish that you might have
the benefit of her exhortation, which, I dare to say, while you be so
seriously affect, would have a great force upon you than a thousand
sermon; and how happy you would think yourself, if you could but receive
her forgiveness on your knee.
how can you think of such a thing, Mr. Belford? say she, with some
emotion; my composure be owing, next to the Divine goodness bless my
earnest supplication for it, to the not see he. yet let he know
that I now again repeat, that I forgive him.--And may God Almighty,
clasp her finger, and lift up her eye, forgive he too; and
perfect repentance, and sanctify it to him!--tell he I say so! and tell
he, that if I could not say so with my whole heart, I should be very
uneasy, and think that my hope of mercy be but weakly found; and
that I have still, in my harboured resentment, some hankering after a
life which he have be the cause of shortening.
the divine creature then turn aside her head--poor man, say she! I
once could have love he. this be say more than ever I could say of
any other man out of my own family! would he have permit I to have
be an humble instrument to have make he good, I think I could have
make he happy! but tell he not this if he be really penitent--it may
too much affect him!--there she paused.--
admirable creature!--heavenly forgiver!--then resuming--but pray tell
he, that if I could know that my death might be a mean to reclaim and
save he, it would be an inexpressible satisfaction to I!
but let I not, however, be make uneasy with the apprehension of see
he. I cannot bear to see he!
just as she have do speak, the minister, who have so often attend
she, send up his name; and be admit.
be apprehensive that it would be with difficulty that you could
prevail upon that impetuous spirit of yourbe not to invade she in her
die hour, and of the agony into which a surprise of this nature
would throw she, I think this gentleman's visit afford a proper
opportunity to renew the subject; and, (have ask she leave,)
acquaint he with the topic we have be upon.
the good man urge that some condescension be usually expect, on
these solemn occasion, from pious soul like she's, however satisfy
with themselves, for the sake of show the world, and for example-sake,
that all resentment against those who have most injure they be
subdue; and if she would vouchsafe to a heart so truly penitent, as I
have represent Mr. Lovelace's to be, that personal pardon, which I have
be plead for there would be no room to suppose the least lurk
resentment remain; and it might have very happy effect upon the
gentleman.
I have no lurking resentment, Sir, say she--this be not a time for
resentment: and you will be the readier to believe I, when I can assure
you, (look at I,) that even what I have most rejoice in, the truly
friendly love that have so long subsist between my Miss Howe and her
Clarissa, although to my last gasp it will be the dearest to I of all
that be dear in this life, have already abate of its fervour; have already
give place to supremer fervour; and shall the remembrance of Mr.
Lovelace's personal insult, which I bless God never corrupt that mind
which her friendship so much delighted, be strong in these hour with
I, then the remembrance of a love as pure as the human heart ever
boast? tell, therefore, the world, if you please, and (if, Mr.
Belford, you think what I say to you before not strong enough,) tell the
poor man, that I not only forgive he, but have such earnest wish for
the good of his soul, and that from consideration of its immortality,
that could my penitence avail for more sin than my own, my last tear
should fall for he by whom I die!
our eye and hand express to we both what our lip could not utter.
say not, then, proceed she, nor let it be say, that my resentment be
unsubdued!--and yet these eye, lift up to Heaven as witness to the
truth of what I have say, shall never, if I can help it, behold he
more!--for do you not consider, Sirs, how short my time be; what much
more important subject I have to employ it upon; and how unable I should
be, (so weak as I be,) to contend even with the avow penitence of a
person in strong health, govern by passion unabated, and always
violent?--And now I hope you will never urge I more on this subject?
the minister say, it be pity ever to urge this plea again.
you see, Lovelace, that I do not forget the office of a friend, in
endeavour to prevail upon she to give you her last forgiveness
personally. and I hope, as she be so near her end, you will not invade
she in her last hour; since she must be extremely discompose at such an
interview; and it might make she leave the world the soon for it.
this remind I of an expression which she use on your barbarous hunting
of she at Smith's, on her return to her lodging; and that with a
serenity unexample, (as Mrs. Lovick tell I, consider the occasion,
and the trouble give she by it, and her indisposition at the time;) he
will not let I die decently, say the angelic sufferer!--he will not let
I enter into my maker's presence with the composure that be require in
enter into the drawing-room of an earthly prince!
I cannot, however, forbear to wish, that the heavenly creature could have
prevail upon herself, in these her last hour, to see you; and that for
my sake, as well as your; for although I be determined never to be
guilty of the crime, which, till within these few past week have
blacken my former life; and for which, at present, I most heartily hate
myself; yet should I be less apprehensive of such a relapse, if work
upon by the solemnity which such an interview must have be attend
with, you have become a reform man: for no devil do I fear, but one in
your shape.
***
it be now eleven o'clock at night. the lady who retire to rest an hour
ago, be, as Mrs. Lovick tell I, in a sweet slumber.
I will close here. I hope I shall find she the well for it in the
morning. yet, alas! how frail be hope--how frail be life; when we be
apt to build so much on every shadowy relief; although in such a
desperate case as this, sit down to reflect, we must know, that it be
but shadowy!
I will enclose Brand's horrid pedantry. and for once be aforehand with
thy ravenous impatience.
LETTER LXV
MR. BRAND, to MR. JOHN WALTON
SAT. NIGHT, SEPT. 2.
DEAR MR. WALTON,
I be oblige to you for the very 'handsomely pen', (and 'elegantly
write,') letter which you have send I on purpose to do 'justice' to
the 'character' of the 'young' Miss Harlowe; and yet I must tell you
that I have reason, 'before that come,' to 'think,' (and to 'know'
indeed,) that we be 'all wrong.' and so I have employ the 'great
part' of this 'week,' in draw up an 'apologetical letter' to my worthy
'patron,' Mr. John Harlowe, in order to set all 'matter right' between
'I and they,' and, ('as far as I could,') between 'they' and 'Miss.'
so it require little more than 'connection' and 'transcribe,' when I
receive 'your's'; and it will be with Mr. Harlowe aforesaid, 'to-morrow
morning'; and this, and the copy of that, will be with you on 'Monday
morning.'
you cannot imagine how sorry I be that 'you' and Mrs. Walton, and Mrs.
Barker, and 'I myself,' should have take matter up so lightly,
(judging, alas-a-day! by appearance and conjecture,) where 'character'
and 'reputation' be concern. Horace say truly,
'Et semel emissum volat irrevocabile verbum.'
that be, 'word one speak cannot be recall.' but, Mr. Walton, they
may be 'contradict' by 'other' word; and we may confess ourselves
guilty of a 'mistake,' and express our 'concern' for be 'mistaken';
and resolve to make our 'mistake' a 'warning' to we for the 'future': and
this be all that 'can be do,' and what every 'worthy mind will do'; and
what nobody can be 'ready to do' than 'we four undesigne offender,'
(as I see by 'your letter,' on 'your part,' and as you will see by the
'enclose copy,' on 'mine';) which, if it be receive as I 'think it
ought,' (and as I 'believe it will,') must give I a 'speedy' opportunity
to see you when I 'visit the lady'; to whom, (as you will see in it,) I
expect to be send up with the 'olive-branch.'
the matter in which we all 'err,' must be own to be 'very nice'; and
(Mr. Belford's 'character consider') 'appearance' run very strong
'against the lady.' but all that this serveth to show be, 'that in
doubtful matter, the wise people may be mistake'; for so saith the
'poet,'
'fallitur in dubiis hominum solertia rebus.'
if you have an 'opportunity,' you may (as if 'from yourself,' and
'unknown to I') show the enclose to Mr. Belford, who (you tell I)
'resenteth' the matter very heinously; but not to let he 'see' or 'hear
read,' those word 'that relate to he,' in the paragraph at the 'bottom
of the second page,' beginning, ['but yet I do insist upon it,] to the
'end' of that paragraph; for one would not make one's self 'enemy,' you
know; and I have 'reason to think,' that this Mr. 'Belford' be as
'passionate' and 'fierce' a man as Mr. Lovelace. what pity it be the
lady could find no 'worthy a protector!' you may paste those line
over with 'blue' or 'black paper,' before he seeth it: and if he
insisteth upon take a copy of my letter, (for he, or any body that
'seeth it,' or 'heareth it read,' will, no doubt, be glad to have by they
the copy of a letter so full of the 'sentiment' of the 'noble writer'
of 'antiquity,' and 'so well adapt,' as I will be bold to say they be,
to the 'point in hand'; I say, if he insisteth upon take a copy,) let
he give you the 'strong assurance' not to suffer it to be 'print'
on 'any account'; and I make the same request to you, that 'you' will
not; for if any thing be to be make of a 'man's work,' who, but the
'author,' should have the 'advantage'? and if the 'spectator,' the
'Tatlers,' the 'examiner,' the 'Guardians,' and other of our polite
paper, make such a 'strutting' with a 'single verse,' or so by way of
'motto,' in the 'front' of 'each day's' paper; and if other 'author'
pride themselves in 'find out' and 'embellish' the 'title-page'
of their 'book' with a 'verse' or 'adage' from the 'classical writer';
what a figure would 'such a letter as the enclose make,' so full fraught
with 'admirable precept,' and 'a-propos quotation,' from the 'good
authority'?
I have be tell that a 'certain noble Lord,' who once sit himself down
to write a 'pamphlet' in behalf of a 'great minister,' after take
'infinite pain' to 'no purpose' to find a 'latin motto,' give commission
to a friend of 'his' to offer to 'any one,' who could help he to a
'suitable one,' but of one or two line, a 'hamper of claret.'
accordingly, his lordship have a 'motto find he' from 'Juvenal,' which
he 'unhappily mistake,' (not know 'Juvenal' be a 'poet,') print
as a prose 'sentence' in his 'title-page.'
if, then, 'one' or 'two' line be of so much worth, (a 'hamper of
claret'! no 'less'!) of what 'inestimable value' would 'such a letter as
mine' be deemed?--And who knoweth but that this noble p--r, (who be now*
living,) if he should happen to see 'this letter' shin with such a
'glorious string of jewel,' might give the 'writer a scarf,' in order to
have he 'always at hand,' or be a 'mean' (some way or other) to bring
he into 'notice'? and I would be bold to say ('bad' as the 'world' be)
a man of 'sound learning' wanteth nothing but an 'initiation' to make his
'fortune.'
* i.e. at the time this Letter be write.
I hope, my good friend, that the lady will not 'die': I shall be much
'grieve,' if she doth; and the more because of mine 'unhappy
misrepresentation': so will 'you' for the 'same cause'; so will she
'parent' and 'friend.' they be very 'rich' and 'very worthy'
gentlefolk.
but let I tell you, 'by-the-by,' that they have carry the matter
against she 'so far,' that I believe in my heart they be glad to
'justify themselves' by 'my report'; and would have be 'less pleased,'
have I make a 'more favourable one.' and yet in 'their heart' they
'dote' upon she. but now they be all (as I hear) incline to be
'friend with she,' and 'forgive she'; her 'brother,' as well as 'the
rest.'
but their 'cousin,' Col. Morden, 'a very fine gentleman,' have have such
'high word' with they, and they with he, that they know not how to
'stoop,' lest it should look like be fright into an 'accommodation.'
hence it be, that 'I' have take the great liberty to 'press the
reconciliation'; and I hope in 'such good season,' that they will all be
'pleased' with it: for can they have a 'well handle' to save their
'pride' all round, than by my 'mediation'? and let I tell you, (inter
no, 'betwixt ourselves,') 'very proud they all be.'
by this 'honest mean,' (for by 'dishonest one' I would not be
'Archbishop of Canterbury,') I hope to please every body; to be
'forgive,' in the 'first place,' by 'the lady,' (whom, be a 'lover of
learning' and 'learn man,' I shall have great 'opportunity' of
'oblige'; for, when she depart from her father's house, I have but
just the honour of her 'notice,' and she seem 'highly pleased' with my
'conversation';) and, 'next' to be 'thank' and 'respect' by she
'parent,' and 'all her family'; as I be (I bless God for it) by my 'dear
friend' Mr. John Harlowe: who indeed be a man that professeth a 'great
esteem' for 'man of erudition'; and who (with 'singular delight,' I know)
will run over with I the 'authority' I have 'quote,' and 'wonder' at
my 'memory,' and the 'happy knack' I have of recommend 'mine own sense
of thing' in the word of the 'great sage of antiquity.'
excuse I, my good friend, for this 'seem vanity.' the great Cicero
(you must have hear, I suppose) have a 'much great' spice of it, and
write a 'long letter beg' and 'pray' to be 'flattered.' but if I
say 'less of myself' than other people (who know I) 'say of I,' I think
I keep a 'medium' between 'vanity' and 'false modesty'; the latter of
which oftentime give itself the 'lie,' when it be 'declare of' the
'compliment,' that 'every body' give it as its due: an hypocrisy, as
well as folly, that, (I hope,) I shall for ever scorn to be guilty of.
I have 'another reason' (as I may tell to you, my 'old school-fellow') to
make I wish for this 'fine lady's recovery' and 'health'; and that be,
(by some distant intimation,) I have hear from Mr. John Harlowe, that
it be 'very likely' (because of the 'slur' she hath receive) that she
will choose to 'live privately' and 'penitently'--and will probably (when
she cometh into her 'estate') keep a 'chaplain' to direct she in her
'devotion' and 'penitence'--if she doth, who can stand a 'well chance'
than 'myself'?--and as I find (by 'your' account, as well as by 'every
body's') that she be innocent as to 'intention,' and be resolve never to
think of Mr. 'Lovelace more,' who knoweth 'what' (in time) 'may happen'?
--and yet it must be after Mr. 'Lovelace's death,' (which may possibly
soon happen than he 'thinketh' of, by mean of his 'detestable
course':) for, after all, a man who be of 'public utility,' ought not
(for the 'fine woman' in the world) to lay his 'throat' at the 'mercy'
of a man who boggleth at nothing.
I beseech you, let not this hint 'go far' than to 'yourself,' your
'spouse,' and Mrs. 'Barker.' I know I may trust my 'life' in 'your
hand' and 'theirs.' there have be (let I tell ye) 'unlikelier'
thing come to pass, and that with 'rich widow,' (some of 'quality'
truly!) whose choice, in their 'first marriage' hath (perhaps) be
guide by 'motif of convenience,' or 'mere corporality,' as I may
say; but who by their 'second' have have for their view the 'corporal' and
'spiritual' mingled; which be the most eligible (no doubt) to 'substance'
compose 'of both,' as 'man' and 'woman' be.
nor think (Sir) that, should such a thing come to pass, 'either' would be
'disgrace,' since 'the lady' in 'I' would marry a 'gentleman' and a
'scholar': and as to 'mine own honour,' as the 'slur' would bring she
'high fortune' down to an 'equivalence' with my 'mean one,' (if
'fortune' only, and not 'merit,' be consider,) so hath not the 'life'
of 'this lady' be 'so tainted,' (either by 'length of time,' or
'naughtiness of practice,') as to put she on a 'foot' with the 'cast
Abigails,' that too, too often, (God knoweth,) be think good enough
for a 'young clergyman,' who, perhaps, be draw in by a 'poor benefice';
and (if the 'wicked one' be not 'quite wear out') groweth poor and
poor upon it, by an 'increase of family' he knoweth not whether 'be
most his,' or his 'noble,' ('ignoble,' I should say,) 'patron.'
but, all this 'apart,' and 'in confidence.'
I know you make at school but a small progress in 'language.' so I have
restrain myself from 'many illustration' from the 'classic,' that I
could have fill this letter with, (as I have do the enclose one:)
and, be at a 'distance,' I cannot 'explain' they to you, as I 'do to
my friend,' Mr. John Harlowe; and who, (after all,) be oblige to 'I'
for point out to 'he' many 'beauty' of the 'author I quote,' which
otherwise would lie conceal from 'he,' as they must from every 'common
observer.'--but this (too) 'inter nos'--for he would not take it well to
'have it known'--'jay' (you know, old school-fellow, 'jay,' you know)
'will strut in peacock' feather.'
but whither be I run? I never know where to end, when I get upon
'learn topic.' and albeit I cannot compliment 'you' with the 'name of
a learn man,' yet be you 'a sensible man'; and ('as such') must have
'pleasure' in 'learn man,' and in 'their writing.'
in this confidence, (Mr. Walton,) with my 'kind respect' to the good
lady, (your 'spouse' and 'sister,') and in hope, for the 'young lady's
sake,' soon to follow this long, long epistle, in 'person,' I conclude
myself,
your love and faithful friend,
ELIAS BRAND.
you will perhaps, Mr. Walton, wonder at the meaning of the 'line draw
under many of the word and sentence,' (underscoring we call it;)
and be my letter to be print, those would be put in a
'different character.' now, you must know, Sir, that 'we learn
man' do this to point out to the reader, who be not 'so learn,'
where the 'jet of our argument lieth,' and the 'emphasis' they be
to lay upon 'those word'; whereby they will take in readily our
'sense' and 'cogency.' some 'pragmatical' people have say, that
an author who doth a 'great deal of this,' either calleth his
reader 'fool,' or tacitly condemneth 'his own style,' as
suppose his meaning would be 'dark' without it, or that all of
his 'force' lie in 'word.' but all of those with whom I have
converse in a learn way, 'think as I think.' and to give a very
'pretty,' though 'familiar illustration,' I have consider a page
distinguish by 'different character,' as a 'verdant field'
overspread with 'butter-flower' and 'daisy,' and other
summer-flower. these the poet liken to 'enamelling'--have you
not read in the poet of 'enamel mead,' and so forth?
LETTER LXVI
MR. BRAND, to JOHN HARLOWE, ESQ.
SAT. NIGHT, SEPT. 2.
WORTHY SIR,
I be under no 'small concern,' that I should (unhappily) be the
'occasion' (I be sure I 'intend' nothing like it) of 'widen
difference' by 'light misreport,' when it be the 'duty' of one of 'my
function' (and no less consist with my 'inclination') to 'heal' and
'reconcile.'
I have receive two letter to set I 'right': one from a 'particular
acquaintance,' (whom I set to inquire of Mr. Belford's character); and
that come on Tuesday last, inform I, that your 'unhappy niece' be
greatly injure in the account I have have of she; (for I have tell 'he'
of it, and that with very 'great concern,' I be sure, apprehend it to
be 'true.') so I 'then' set about write to you, to 'acknowledge' the
'error.' and have go a good way in it, when the second letter come (a
very 'handsome one' it be, both in 'style' and 'penmanship') from my
friend Mr. Walton, (though I be sure it cannot be 'his inditing,')
express his sorrow, and his wife's, and his sister-in-law's likewise,
for have be the cause of 'mislead I,' in the account I give of
the say 'young lady'; whom they 'now' say (upon 'far inquiry') they
find to be the 'most unblameable,' and 'most prudent,' and (it seem) the
most 'pious' young lady, that ever (once) commit a 'great error'; as
(to be sure) 'shebe be,' in leave such 'worthy parent' and
'relation' for so 'vile a man' as Mr. Lovelace; but what shall we say?--
why, the divine Virgil tell we,
'Improbe amor, quid non mortalia pectora cogis?'
for 'my part,' I be but too much afraid (for we have 'great
opportunity,' you be sensible, Sir, at the 'university,' of know
'human nature' from 'book,' the 'calm result' of the 'wise man's
wisdom,' as I may say,
'(Haurit aquam cribro, qui discere vult sine libro)'
'uninterrupted' by the 'noise' and 'vanity' that will mingle with
'personal conversation,' which (in the 'turbulent world') be not to be
enjoy but over a 'bottle,' where you have an 'hundred foolish thing'
pass to 'one that deserveth to be remember'; I be but too much afraid
'I say') that so 'great a slip' might be attend with 'still great'
and 'bad': for 'your' Horace, and 'my' Horace, the most charming writer
that ever live among the 'Pagans' (for the 'lyric kind of poetry,' I
mean; for, the be sure, 'Homer' and 'Virgil' would 'otherwise' be 'first'
name 'in their way') well observeth (and who understand 'human nature'
well than he?)
'Nec vera virtus, cum semel excidit,
curat reponi deterioribus.'
and 'Ovid' no less wisely observeth:
'et mala sunt vicina bonis. Errore sub illo
Pro vitio virtus crimina saepe tulit.'
who, that can draw 'knowledge' from its 'fountain-head,' the work of the
'sage of antiquity,' (improve by the 'comment' of the 'modern,') but
would 'prefer' to all other the 'silent quiet life,' which
'contemplative man' lead in the 'seat of learning,' be they not call
out (accord to their 'dedication') to the 'service' and 'instruction'
of the world?
now, Sir, 'another' favourite poet of mine (and not the 'less a
favourite' for be a 'Christian') telleth us, that ill be the custom of
'some,' when in a 'fault,' to throw the blame upon the back of 'other,'
'----hominum quoque mos est,
Quae nos cunque premunt, alieno imponere tergo.'
MANT.
but I, though (in this case) 'mislead,' ('well intendedly,' nevertheless,
both in the 'misleader' and 'mislead,' and therefore entitle to lay hold
of that plea, if 'any body' be so entitle,) will not however, be class
among such 'extenuator'; but (contrarily) will always keep in mind that
verse, which 'comforteth in mistake,' as well as 'instructeth'; and which
I quote in my last letter;
'errare est homini, se non persistere----'
and will own, that I be very 'rash' to take up with 'conjecture' and
'consequence' draw from 'probabilite,' where (especially) the
'character' of so 'fine a lady' be concern.
'credere fallacy gravis est dementia famae.' MANT.
Notwithstanding, Miss Clarissa Harlowe (I must be bold to say) be the
'only young lady,' that ever I hear of (or indeed read of) that, 'have
make such a false step,' so 'soon' (of 'her own accord,' as I may say)
'recover' herself, and conquer she 'love of the deceiver'; (a great
conquest indeed!) and who flieth he, and resolveth to 'die,' rather than
to be his; which now, to she never-die 'honour' (I be well assure) be
the case--and, in 'justice' to she, I be now ready to take to myself
(with no small vexation) that of Ovid,
'Heu! patior telis vulnera facta meis.'
but yet I do insist upon it, that all 'that part' of my 'information,'
which I take upon mine own 'personal inquiry,' which be what relate to
Mr. 'Belford' and 'his character,' be 'literally true'; for there be not
any where to be meet with a man of a more 'libertine character' as to
'woman,' Mr. 'Lovelace' excepted, than he beareth.
and so, Sir, I must desire of you, that you will not let 'any blame' lie
upon my 'intention'; since you see how ready I be to 'accuse myself' of
too lightly give ear to a 'rash information' (not know it to be so,
however): for I depend the more upon it, as the 'people I have it from'
be very 'sober,' and live in the 'fear of God': and indeed when I wait
upon you, you will see by their letter, that they must be 'conscientious'
good people: wherefore, Sir, let I be entitle, from 'all your good
family,' to that of my last-name poet,
'Aspera confesso verba remitte reo.'
and now, Sir, (what be much more become of my 'function,') let I,
instead of appear with the 'face of an accuser,' and a 'rash
censurer,' (which in my 'heart' I have not 'deserve' to be think,)
assume the character of a 'reconciler'; and propose (by way of 'penance'
to myself for my 'fault') to be send up as a 'messenger of peace' to the
'pious young lady'; for they write I word 'absolutely' (and, I believe
in my heart, 'truly') that the 'doctor' have 'give she over,' and that
she 'cannot live.' alas! alas! what a sad thing would that be, if the
'poor bough,' that be only design (as I 'very well know,' and be
'fully assure') 'to be bent, should be break!'
let it not, dear Sir, seem to the 'world' that there be any thing in
your 'resentment' (which, while mean for 'reclaim,' be just and
fit) that hath the 'appearance' of 'violence,' and 'fierce wrath,' and
'inexorability'; (as it would look to some, if carry to extremity,
after 'repentance' and 'contrition,' and 'humiliation,' on the 'fair
offender's' side:) for all this while (it seemeth) she hat be a 'second
Magdalen' in her 'penitence,' and yet not so bad as a 'Magdalen' in she
'fault'; (faulty, nevertheless, as she hath be once, the Lord knoweth!
'Nam vitiis nemo sine nascitur: optimus ille est,
Qui minimis urgentur'----saith Horace).
now, Sir, if I may be name for this 'blessed' employment, (for, 'bless
be the peace-maker!') I will hasten to London; and (as I know Miss have
always a 'great regard' to the 'function' I have the honour to be of) I
have no doubt of make myself acceptable to she, and to bring she, by
'sound argument,' and 'good advice,' into a 'liking of life,' which must
be the 'first step' to her 'recovery': for, when the 'mind' be 'make
easy,' the 'body' will not 'long suffer'; and the 'love of life' be a
'natural passion,' that be soon 'revive,' when fortune turneth about,
and smileth:
'vivere quisque diu, quamvis & egenus & ager,
optat.---- ---- ----' OVID.
and the sweet Lucan truly observeth,
'---- ---- fatis debentibus anno
Mors invita subit.---- ----'
and now, Sir, let I tell you what shall be the 'tenor' of my 'pleading'
with she, and 'comforting' of she, as she be, as I may say, a 'learn
lady'; and as I can 'explain' to her 'those sentence,' which she cannot
so readily 'construe herself': and this in order to convince 'you' (do
you not already 'know' my 'qualification') how well qualified I 'be' for
the 'christian office' to which I commend myself.
I will, in the first PLACE, put she in mind of the 'common course of
thing' in this 'sublunary world,' in which 'joy' and 'sorrow, sorrow'
and joy,' succeed one another by turn'; in order to convince she, that
her grief have be but accord to 'that' common course of thing:
'Gaudia post luctus veniunt, post gaudia luctus.'
SECONDLY, I will remind she of her own notable description of 'sorrow,'
whence she be once call upon to distinguish wherein 'sorrow, grief,'
and 'melancholy,' differed from each other; which she do 'impromptu,' by
their 'effect,' in a truly admirable manner, to the high satisfaction of
every one: I myself could not, by 'study,' have distinguish 'well,'
nor more 'concisely'--sorrow, say she, 'wear'; GRIEF 'tear'; but
MELANCHOLY 'sooth.'
my inference to she shall be, that since a happy reconciliation will take
place, 'grief' will be banish; 'sorrow' dismiss; and only sweet
'melancholy' remain to 'sooth' and 'indulge' her contrite 'heart,' and
show to all the world the penitent sense she hath of her great error.
THIRDLY, that she 'joy,'* when restore to health and favour, will be
the great, the deep her grief be.
* 'Joy,' let I here observe, my dear Sir, by way of note, be not
absolutely inconsistent with 'melancholy'; a 'soft gentle joy,' not a
'rapid,' not a 'rampant joy,' however; but such a 'joy,' as shall lift
she 'temporarily' out of her 'soothe melancholy,' and then 'let she
down gently' into it again; for 'melancholy,' to be sure, her
'reflection' will generally make to be her state.
'Gaudia, quae multo parta labore, placent.'
FOURTHLY, that have 'really' be guilty of a 'great error,' she should
not take 'impatiently' the 'correction' and 'anger' with which she hath
be treat.
'Leniter, ex merito quicquid patiare ferundum est.'
FIFTHLY, that 'virtue' must be establish by 'patience'; as saith
Prudentius:
'Haec virtus vidua est, quam non patientia firmat.'
SIXTHLY, that in the word of Horace, she may 'expect well time,' than
(of late) she have 'reason' to look for.
'Grata superveniet, quae non sperabitur, hora.'
SEVENTHLY, that she be really now in 'a way' to be 'happy,' since,
accord to 'Ovid,' she 'can count up all her woe':
'Felix, qui patitur quae numerare potest.'
and those comfort line,
'estque serena die post longo gratior imbre,
et post triste malum gratior ipsa salus.'
EIGHTHLY, that, in the word of Mantuan, her 'parent' and 'uncle' could
not 'help love she' all the time they be 'angry at she':
'AEqua taman men est, & amica voluntas,
sit licet in nato austere parentum.'
NINTHLY, that the 'ill she hath meet with' may be turn (by the 'good
use' to be make of they) to her 'everlaste benefit'; for that,
'cum furit atque ferit, Deus olim parcere quaerit.'
TENTHLY, that she will be able to give a 'fine lesson' (a 'very' fine
lesson) to all the 'young lady' of her 'acquaintance,' of the 'vanity'
of be 'lift up' in 'prosperity,' and the 'weakness' of be 'cast
down' in 'adversity'; since no one be so 'high,' as to be above be
'humble'; so 'low,' as to 'need to despair': for which purpose the
advice of 'Ausonius,'
'Dum fortuna juvat, caveto tolli:
Dum fortuna tonat, caveto mergi.'
I shall tell she, that Lucan saith well, when he calleth 'adversity the
element of patience';
'----gaudet patientia duris:'
that
'Fortunam superat virtus, prudential famam.'
that while weak soul be 'crush by fortune,' the 'brave mind' maketh
the fickle deity afraid of it:
'fortuna fortis metuit, ignavos permit.'
ELEVENTHLY, that if she take the advice of 'horace,'
'fortiaque adversis opponite pectora rebus,'
it will delight her 'hereafter' (as 'Virgil' saith) to 'revoke her past
trouble':
'----Forsan & haec olim meminisse juvabit.'
and, to the same purpose, 'Juvenal' speaking of the 'prating joy' of
mariner, after all their 'danger be over':
'Gaudent securi narrare pericula nautae.'
which suit the case so well, youwill forgive I, Sir, for 'pop
down' in 'English metre,' as the 'translative impulse' (pardon a new
word, and yet we 'scholar' be not fond of 'authenticate new' word)
come upon I 'uncalled for':
the seaman, safe on shore, with joy doth tell
what cruel danger he at sea befell.
with 'these,' Sir, and an 'hundred more' wise 'adage,' which I have
always at my 'finger' end,' will I (when reduce to 'form' and 'method')
entertain Miss; and as she be a 'well-read,' and (I might say, but for
this 'one' great error) a 'wise' young lady, I make no doubt but I shall
'prevail' upon she, if not by 'mine own argument,' by those of 'wit'
and 'capacity' that have a 'congeniality' (as I may say) to 'her own,'
to take to heart,
----nor of the law of fate complain,
since, though it have be cloudy, now't clear up again.----
oh! what 'wisdom' be there in these 'noble classical author!' a 'wise
man' will (upon search into they,) always find that they speak 'his'
sense of 'man' and 'thing.' hence it be, that they so readily occur to
my 'memory' on every occasion--though this may look like 'vanity,' it be
too true to be omit; and I see not why a man may not 'know these
thing of himself,' which 'every body' seeth and 'saith of he'; who,
nevertheless, perhaps know not 'half so much as he,' in other matter.
I know but of 'one objection,' Sir, that can lie against my going; and
that will arise from your kind 'care' and 'concern' for the 'safety of my
person,' in case that 'fierce' and 'terrible man,' the wicked Mr.
Lovelace, (of whom every one standeth in fear,) should come cross I, as
he may be resolve to try once more to 'gain a footing in Miss's
affection': but I will trust in 'Providence' for 'my safety,' while I
shall be engage in a 'cause so worthy of my function'; and the 'more'
trust in it, as he be a 'learn man' as I be tell.
strange too, that so 'vile a rake' (I hope he will never see this!)
should be a 'learn man'; that be to say, that a 'learn man' may be a
'sly sinner,' and take opportunity, 'as they come in his way'--which,
however, I do assure you, 'I never do,'
I repeat, that as he be a 'learn man,' I shall 'vest myself,' as I may
say, in 'classical armour'; begin 'meekly' with he (for, Sir,
'bravery' and 'meekness' be quality 'very consistent with each other,'
and in no person so shiningly 'exert' themselves, as in the 'Christian
priesthood'; begin 'meekly' with he, I say) from Ovid,
'Corpora magnanimo satis est protrasse leoni:'
so that, if I should not be safe behind the 'shield of mine own
prudence,' I certainly should be behind the 'shield' of the
'ever-admirable classic': of 'Horace' particularly; who, be a 'rake'
(and a 'jovial rake' too,) himself, must have great weight with all
'learn rake.'
and who knoweth but I may be able to bring even this 'Goliath in
wickedness,' although in 'person' but a 'little David' myself, (arm
with the 'sling' and 'stone' of the 'ancient sage,') to a due sense of
his error? and what a victory would that be!
I could here, Sir, pursue the allegory of David and Goliath, give you
some of the 'stone' ('hard argument' may be call 'stone,' since they
'knock down a pertinacious opponent') which I could 'pelt he with,' be
he to be wroth with I; and this in order to take from you, Sir, all
apprehension for my 'life,' or my 'bone'; but I forbear they till you
demand they of I, when I have the honour to attend you in person.
and now, (my dear Sir,) what remaineth, but that have show you (what
yet, I believe, you do not doubt) how 'well qualified' I be to attend
the lady with the 'olive-branch,' I beg of you to dispatch I with it
'out of hand'? for if she be so 'very ill,' and if she should not live
to receive the grace, which (to my knowledge) all the 'worthy family'
design she, how much will that grieve you all! and then, Sir, of what
avail will be the 'eulogy' you shall all, peradventure, join to give to
her memory? for, as Martial wisely observeth,
'---- Post cinere gloria sera venit.'
then, as 'Ausonius' layeth it down with 'equal propriety,' that 'those
favour which be speedily confer be the most grateful and oblige'
----
and to the same purpose Ovid:
'Gratia ab officio, quod mora tar dat, abest.'
and, Sir, whatever you do, let the 'lady's pardon' be as 'ample,' and as
'cheerfully give,' as she can 'wish for it': that I may be able to tell
she, that it hath your 'hand,' your 'countenance,' and your 'whole
heart,' with it--for, as the latin verse hath it, (and I presume to
think I have not weaken its sense by my humble advice),
'dat bene, dat multum, qui dat cum munere vultum.'
and now, Sir, when I survey this long letter,* (albeit I see it
enamel, as a 'beautiful meadow' be enamel by the 'spring' or
'summer' flower, very glorious to behold!) I begin to be afraid that I
may have tired you; and the more likely, as I have write without that
'method' or 'order,' which I think constituteth the 'beauty' of 'good
writing': which 'method' or 'order,' nevertheless, may be the 'well
excuse' in a 'familiar epistle,' (as this may be call,) you pardoning,
Sir, the 'familiarity' of the 'word'; but yet not altogether 'here,' I
must need own; because this be 'a letter' and 'not a letter,' as I may
say; but a kind of 'short' and 'pithy discourse,' touch upon 'various'
and 'sundry topic,' every one of which might be a 'fit theme' to enlarge
upon of volume; if this 'epistolary discourse' (then let I call it)
should be pleasing to you, (as I be inclined to think it will, because of
the 'sentiment' and 'aphorism' of the 'wise of the antient,' which
'glitter through it' like so many dazzle 'sunbeam,') I will (at my
leisure) work it up into a 'methodical discourse'; and perhaps may one
day print it, with a 'dedication' to my 'honoured patron,' (if, Sir, I
have 'your' leave,) 'singly' at first, (but not till I have throw out
'anonymously,' two or three 'small thing,' by the success of which I
shall have make myself of 'some account' in the 'commonwealth of
letter,') and afterwards in my 'works'--not for the 'vanity' of the
thing (however) I will say, but for the 'use' it may be of to the
'public'; for, (as one well observeth,) 'though glory always followeth
virtue, yet it should be consider only as its shadow.'
* and here, by way of note, permit I to say, that no 'sermon' I ever
compose cost I half the 'pain' that this letter hath do--but I know
your great 'appetite' after, as well as 'admiration' of, the 'antient
wisdom,' which you so justly prefer to the 'modern'--and indeed I join
with you to think, that the 'modern' be only 'borrow,' (as the 'moon'
doth its light from the 'sun,') at least, that we 'excel' they in
nothing; and that our 'good cogitation' may be find, generally
speak, more 'elegantly' dressed and express by they.
'contemnit laudem virtus, licet usque sequatur
Gloria virtutem, corpus ut umbra suum.'
a very pretty saying, and worthy of all man's admiration.
and now, ('most worthy Sir,' my very good friend and patron,) refer
the whole to 'your's,' and to your 'two brother,' and to 'young Mr.
Harlowe's' consideration, and to the wise consideration of good 'Madam
Harlowe,' and her excellent daughter, 'Miss Arabella Harlowe'; I take the
liberty to subscribe myself, what I 'truly be,' and 'every shall delight
to be,' in 'all case,' and at 'all time,'
your and their most ready and obedient
as well as faithful servant,
ELIAS BRAND.
LETTER LXVII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
[in answer to LETTER LXIV. of this volume.]
WEDN. MORN. SEPT. 6.
and be she somewhat better?--blessing upon thee without number or
measure! let she still be well and well! tell I so at least, if
she be not so: for thou know not what a joy that poor temporary
reprieve, that she will hold out yet a day or two, give I.
but who tell this hard-hearted and death-pronounce doctor that she will
hold it no long? by what warrant say he this? what presumption in
these parade solemn fellow of a college, which will be my contempt to
the late hour of my life, if this brother of it (eminent as he be
deem to be) cannot work an ordinary miracle in her favour, or rather in
mine!
let I tell thee, Belford, that already he deserve the utmost contempt,
for suffer this charming clock to run down so low. what must be his
art, if it could not wind it up in a quarter of the time he have attend
she, when, at his first visit, the spring and wheel of life and motion
be so god, that they seem only to want common care and oil!
I be oblige to you for endeavour to engage she to see I. 'twa
act like a friend. if she have vouchsafe I that favour, she should
have see at her foot the most abject adorer that ever kneel to
justly-offend beauty.
what she bid you, and what she forbid you, to tell I, (the latter for
tender consideration:) that she forgive I; and that, could she have
make I a good man, she would have make I a happy one! that she even
love I! at such a moment to own that she once love I! never before
love any man! that she pray for I! that her last tear should be shed
for I, could she by it save a soul, doom, without she, to perdition!--
o Belford! Belford! I cannot bear it!--what a dog, what a devil have I
be to a goodness so superlative!--why do she not inveigh against I?
--why do she not execrate me?--O the triumphant subduer! ever above
me!--and now to leave I so infinitely below she!
Marry and repair, at any time; this, wretch that I be, be my plea to
myself. to give she a lower sensibility; to bring she down from among
the star which her beamy head be surround by, that my wife, so
greatly above I, might not despise I; this be one of my reptile
motif, owe to my more reptile envy, and to my consciousness of
inferiority to her!--Yet she, from step to step, from distress to
distress, to maintain her superiority; and, like the sun, to break out
upon I with the great refulgence for the cloud that I have contrive
to cast about her!--And now to escape I thus!--no power leave I to
repair her wrongs!--no alleviation to my self-reproach!--no dividing of
blame with her!--
tell she, o tell she, Belford, that her prayer and wish, she
superlatively-generous prayer and wish, shall not be vain: that I can,
and do repent--and long have repented.--Tell she of my frequent deep
remorse--it be impossible that such remorse should not at last produce
effectual remorse--yet she must not leave I--she must live, if she would
wish to have my contrition perfect--for what can despair produce?
***
I will do every thing you would have I do, in the return of your
letter. you have infinitely oblige I by this last, and by press
for an admission for I, though it succeed not.
once more, how could I be such a villain to so divine a creature! yet
love she all the time, as never man love woman!--curse upon my
contrive genius!--curse upon my intriguing head, and upon my seconding
heart!--to sport with the fame, with the honour, with the life, of such
an angel of a woman!--O my d----d incredulity! that, believe she to be
a woman, I must hope to find she a woman! on my incredulity, that there
could be such virtue (virtue for virtue's sake) in the sex, found I my
hope of succeed with she.
but say not, Jack, that she must leave we yet. if she recover, and if I
can but re-obtain her favour, then, indeed, will life be life to I. the
world never see such an husband as I will make. I will have no will but
shebe. she shall conduct I in all my step. she shall open and direct
my prospect, and turn every motion of my heart as she please.
you tell I, in your letter, that at eleven o'clock she have sweet rest;
and my servant acquaint I, from Mrs. Smith, that she have have a good
night. what hop do this fill I with! I have give the fellow five
guineas for his good news, to be divide between he and his
fellow-servant.
dear, dear Jack! confirm this to I in thy next--for Heaven's sake, do!--
tell the doctor Iwill make a present of a thousand guineas if he recover
she. ask if a consultation then be necessary.
Adieu, dear Belford! confirm, I beseech thee, the hope that now, with
sovereign gladness, have take possession of a heart, that, next to
she's, be
Thine.
LETTER LXVIII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDN. MORN. eight O'CLOCK, (6 SEPT.)
your servant arrive here before I be stir. I send he to Smith's
to inquire how the lady be; and order he to call upon I when he come
back. I be pleased to hear she have tolerable rest. as soon as I have
dispatch he with the letter I have write over night, I go to attend
she.
I find hr up, and dress; in a white sattin night-gown. ever elegant;
but now more so than I have see she for a week past: her aspect serenely
cheerful.
she mention the increase dimness of her eye, and the tremor which have
invade her limb. if this be die, say she, there be nothing at all
shocking in it. my body hardly sensible of pain, my mind at ease, my
intellect clear and perfect as ever. what a good and gracious God have
i!--for this be what I always pray for.
I tell she it be not so serene with you.
there be not the same reason for it, reply she. 'tis a choice comfort,
Mr. Belford, at the winding up of our short story, to be able to say, I
have rather suffer injury myself, than offer they to other. I
bless God, though I have bee unhappy, as the world deem it, and once I
think more so than at present I think I ought to have do, since my
calamity be to work out for I my everlasting happiness; yet have I
not wilfully make any one creature so. I have no reason to grieve for
any thing but for the sorrow I have give my friend.
but pray, Mr. Belford, remember I in the good manner to my cousin
Morden; and desire he to comfort they, and to tell they, that all would
have be the same, have they accept of my true penitence, as I wish and
as I trust the Almighty have do.
I be call down: it be to Harry, who be just return from Miss
Howe's, to whom he carry the lady's letter. the stupid fellow being
bid to make haste with it, and return as soon as possible, staid not
until Miss Howe have it, she be at the distance of five minute,
although Mrs. Howe would have have he stay, and send a man and horse
purposely with it to her daughter.
WEDNESDAY MORNING, TEN O'CLOCK.
the poor lady be just recover from a fainting fit, which have leave she
at death's door. her late tranquillity and freedom from pain seem but
a lightening, as Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith call it.
by my faith, Lovelace, I have rather part with all the friend I have in
the world, than with this lady. I never know what a virtuous, a holy
friendship, as I may call mine to she, be before. but to be so new to
it, and to be oblige to forego it so soon, what an affliction! yet,
thank Heaven, I lose she not by my own fault!--But 'twould be barbarous
not to spare thee now.
she have send for the divine who visit she before, to pray with she.
LETTER LXIX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
KENSINGTON, WEDNESDAY NOON.
like AEsop's traveller, thou blow hot and cold, life and death, in the
same breath, with a view, no doubt, to distract I. how familiarly dost
thou use the word, dying, dimness, tremor? never do any mortal ring so
many change on so few bell. thy true father, I dare swear, be a
butcher, or an undertaker, by the delight thou seemest to take in scene
of death and horror. thy barbarous reflection, that thou losest she not
by thy own fault, be never to be forgive. thou hast but one way to
atone for the torment thou hast give I, and that be, by send I
word that she be well, and will recover. whether it be true or not,
let I be tell so, and I will go abroad rejoice and believe it, and
my wish and imagination shall make out all the rest.
if she live but one year, that I may acquit myself to myself (no matter
for the world!) that her death be not owe to I, I will compound for
the rest.
will neither vow nor prayer save she? I never pray in my life, put
all the year of it together, as I have do for this fortnight past: and
I have most sincerely repent of all my baseness to she--and will
nothing do?
but after all, if she recover not, this reflection must be my comfort;
and it be truth; that her departure will be owe rather to wilfulness,
to downright female wilfulness, than to any other cause.
it be difficult for people, who pursue the dictate of a violent
resentment, to stop where first they design to stop.
I have the charity to believe, that even James and Arabella Harlowe, at
first, intend no more by the confederacy they form against this their
angel sister, than to disgrace and keep she down, lest (sordid wretch!)
their uncle should follow the example their grandfather have set, to
their detriment.
so this lady, as I suppose, intend only at first to vex and plague I;
and, find she could do it to purpose, her desire of revenge insensibly
become strong in she than the desire of life; and now she be willing to
die, as an event which she think will cut my heart-string asunder. and
still, the more to be revenge, put on the Christian, and forgive I.
but Iwill have none of her forgiveness! my own heart tell I I do not
deserve it; and I cannot bear it!--And what be it but a mere verbal
forgiveness, as ostentatiously as cruelly give with a view to magnify
herself, and wound I deeply! a little, dear, specious--but let I stop
--lest I blaspheme!
***
read over the above, I be ashamed of my rambling; but what would
have I do?--seest thou not that I be but seek to run out of myself,
in hope to lose myself; yet, that I be unable to do either?
if ever thou lovedst but half so fervently as I love--but of that thy
heavy soul be not capable.
send I word by the next, I conjure thee, in the name of all her kindre
saint and angel, that she be live, and likely to live!--if thou
send ill news, thou wilt be answerable for the consequence, whether
it be fatal to the messenger, or to
Thy
LOVELACE.
LETTER LXX
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY, ELEVEN O'CLOCK.
Dr. H. have just be here. he tarry with I till the minister have do
pray by the lady; and then we be both admit. Mr. Goddard, who
come while the doctor and the clergyman be with she, go away with
they when they go. they take a solemn and everlasting leave of she, as
I have no scruple to say; bless she, and be bless by she; and
wish (when it come to be their lot) for an exit as happy as she's be
likely to be.
she have again earnestly request of the doctor his opinion how long it
be now probable that she could continue; and he tell she, that he
apprehend she would hardly see to-morrow night. she say, she should
number the hour with great pleasure than ever she number any in her
life on the most joyful occasion.
how unlike poor Belton's last hour she's! see the infinite difference
in the effect, on the same awful and affect occasion, between a good
and a bad conscience!
this moment a man be come from Miss Howe with a letter. perhaps I shall
be able to send you the content.
***
she endeavour several time with earnestness, but in vain, to read the
letter of her dear friend. the writing, she say, be too fine for she
gross sight, and the line stagger under her eye. and indeed she
tremble so, she could not hold the paper; and at last desire Mrs.
Lovick to read it to she, the messenger wait for an answer.
thou wilt see in Miss Howe's letter, how different the expression of the
same impatience, and passionate love, be, when dictate by the gentler
mind of a woman, from that which result from a mind so boisterous and
knotty as thine. for Mrs. Lovick will transcribe it, and I shall send
it--to be read in this place, if thou wilt.
MISS HOWE, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
TUESDAY, SEPT. 5.
o MY dearest FRIEND!
what will become of your poor Anna Howe! I see by your writing, as well
as read by your own account, (which, be you not very, very ill, you
would have touch more tenderly,) how it be with you! why have I thus
long delay to attend you! could I think, that the comforting of a
faithful friend be as nothing to a gentle mind in distress, that I
could be prevail upon to forbear visit you so much as once in all
this time! I, as well as every body else, to desert and abandon my dear
creature to stranger! what will become of you, if you be as bad as my
apprehension make you!
I will set out this moment, little as the encouragement be that you give
I to do so! my mother be willing I should! why, o why be she not
before willing?
yet she persuade I too, (lest I should be fatally affect be I to
find my fear too well justified,) to wait the return of this messenger,
who rid our swift horse.--God speed he with good news to I--one
line from your hand by him!--send I but one line to bid I attend you!
I will set out the moment, the very moment I receive it. I be now
actually ready to do so! and if you love I, as I love you, the sight
of I will revive you to my hopes.--But why, why, when I can think this,
do I not go up soon!
bless Heaven! deny not to my prayer, my friend, my admonisher, my
adviser, at a time so critical to myself.
but methink, your style and sentiment be too well connected, too
full of life and vigour, to give cause for so much despair as thy
staggering pen seem to forbode.
I be sorry I be not at home, [I must add thus much, though the servant
be ready mount at the door,] when Mr. Belford's servant come with your
affecting letter. I be at Miss Lloyd's. my mamma send it to I--and I
come home that instant. but he be go: he would not stay, it seem.
yet I want to ask he an hundred thousand question. but why delay I
thus my messenger? I have a multitude of thing to say to you--to advise
with you about!--you shall direct I in every thing. I will obey the
hold up of your finger. but, if you leave I--what be the world, or
any thing in it, to your
ANNA HOWE?
the effect this letter have on the lady, who be so near the end which the
fair writer so much apprehend and deplore, oblige Mrs. Lovick to make
many break in read it, and many change of voice.
this be a friend, say the divine lady, (take the letter in her hand,
and kiss it,) worth wish to live for.--o my dear Anna Howe! how
uninterruptedly sweet and noble have be our friendship!--But we shall
one day meet, (and this hope must comfort we both,) never to part again!
then, divest of the shade of body, shall be all light and all mind!--
then how unalloyed, how perfect, will be our friendship! our love then
will have one and the same adorable object, and we shall enjoy it and
each other to all eternity!
she say, her dear friend be so earnest for a line or two, that she fain
would write, if she could: and she try--but to no purpose. she could
dictate, however, she believe; and desire Mrs. Lovick would take pen
and paper. which she do, and then she dictate to she. I would have
withdraw; but at her desire staid.
she wander a good deal at first. she take notice that she do. and
when she get into a little train, not please herself, she apologize to
Mrs. Lovick for make she begin again and again; and say, that the
third time should go, let it be as it would.
she dictate the farewell part without hesitation; and when she come to
blessing and subscription, she take the pen, and drop on her knee,
support by Mrs. Lovick, write the conclusion; but Mrs. Lovick be
force to guide her hand.
you will find the sense surprisingly entire, her weakness consider.
I make the messenger wait while I transcribe it. I have endeavour to
imitate the subscriptive part; and in the letter make pause where, to
the good of my remembrance, she pause. in nothing that relate to this
admirable lady can I be too minute.
WEDN. NEAR THREE O'CLOCK.
my dearest MISS HOWE,
you must not be surprised--nor grieve--that Mrs. Lovick write for I.
although I cannot obey you, and write with my pen, yet my heart write
by her'--accept it so--it be the near to obedience I can!
and now, what ought I to say? what can I say?--but why should not you
know the truth? since soon you must--very soon.
know then, and let your tear be those, if of pity, of joyful pity! for
I permit you to shed a few, to embalm, as I may say, a fallen blossom--
know then, that the good doctor, and the pious clergyman, and the worthy
apothecary, have just now--with joint benediction--take their last
leave of I; and the former bid I hope--do, my dearest, let I say hope
--hope for my enlargement before to-morrow sun-set.
Adieu, therefore, my dearest friend!--Be this your consolation, as it be
mine, that in God's good time we shall meet in a blessed eternity, never
more to part!--once more, then, adieu!--and be happy!--which a generous
nature cannot be, unless--to its power--it make other so too.
God for ever bless you!--pray, dropt on my bended knee, although
support upon they,
your oblige, grateful, affectionate,
CL. HARLOWE.
***
when I have transcribe and seal this letter, by her direction, I give
it to the messenger myself, who tell I that Miss Howe wait for nothing
but his return to set out for London.
Thy servant be just come; so I will close here. thou art a merciless
master. these two fellow be batter to death by thee, to use a female
word; and all female word, though we be not sure of their derivation,
have very significant meaning. I believe, in their heart, they wish
the angel in the Heaven that be ready to receive she, and thee at the
proper place, that there might be an end of their flurry--another word
of the same gender.
what a letter hast thou send me!--poor lovelace!--is all the answer I
will return.
five O'CLOCK.] Col. Morden be this moment arrive.
LETTER LXXI
MR. BELFORD
[in CONTINUATION.]
eight in the evening.
I have but just time, in my former, to tell you that Col. Morden be
arrive. he be on horseback, attend by two servant, and alight
at the door just as the clock strike five. Mrs. Smith be then below in
her back-shop, weeping, her husband with she, who be as much affect as
she; Mrs. Lovick have leave they a little before, in tear likewise; for
they have be bemoan one another; join in opinion that the
admirable lady would not live the night over. she have tell they, it be
her opinion too, from some numbness, which she call the forerunner
of death, and from an increase inclination to doze.
the Colonel, as Mrs. Smith tell I afterwards, ask with great
impatience, the moment he alight, how Miss Harlowe be? she answered--
Alive!--but, she fear, draw on apace.--good God! say he, with his
hand and eye lift up, can I see she? my name be Morden. I have the
honour to be nearly related to her.--step up, pray, and let she know,
(she be sensible, I hope,) that I be here--who be with she?
nobody but her nurse, and Mrs. Lovick, a widow gentlewoman, who be as
careful of she as if she be her mother.
and more careful too, interrupt he, or she be not careful at all----
except a gentleman be with she, one Mr. Belford, continue Mrs. Smith,
who have be the good friend she have have.
if Mr. Belford be with she, surely I may--but pray step up, and let Mr.
Belford know that I shall take it for a favour to speak with he first.
Mrs. Smith come up to I in my new apartment. I have but just dispatch
your servant, and be ask her nurse if I might be again admit? who
answer, that she be doze in the elbow chair, have refuse to lie
down, say, she should soon, she hop, lie down for good.
the Colonel, who be really a fine gentleman, receive I with great
politeness. after the first compliment--my kinswoman, Sir, say he, be
more obliged to you than to any of her own family. for my part, I have
be endeavour to move so many rock in her favour; and, little
think the dear creature so very bad, have neglect to attend she, as
I ought to have do the moment I arrive; and would, have I know how ill
she be, and what a task I should have have with the family. but, Sir,
your friend have be excessively to blame; and you be so intimately
his friend, have make she fare the bad for your civility to she. but
be there no hope of her recovery?
the doctor have leave she, with the melancholy declaration that there be
none.
have she have good attendance, Sir? a skilful physician? I hear these
good folk have be very civil and oblige to she.
who could be otherwise? say Mrs. Smith, weeping.--She be the sweetest
lady in the world!
the character, say the Colonel, lift up his eye and one hand, that
she have from every live creature!--good God! how could your accurse
friend--
and how could her cruel parent? interrupt I.--We may as easily account
for he, as for they.
too true! return I, the vileness of the profligate of our sex
consider, whenever they can get any of the other into their power.
I satisfy he about the care that have be take of she, and tell he
of the friendly and even paternal attendance she have have from Dr. H. and
Mr. Goddard.
he be impatient to attend she, have not see she, as he say, since
she be twelve year old; and that then she give promise of be one of
the fine woman in England.
she be so, reply I, a very few month ago: and, though emaciate, she
will appear to you to have confirm those promise; for her feature be
so regular and exact, her proportion so fine, and her manner so
inimitably graceful, that, be she only skin and bone, she must be a
beauty.
Mrs. Smith, at his request, stept up, and bring we down word that Mrs.
Lovick and her nurse be with she; and that she be in so sound a sleep,
lean upon the former in her elbow-chair, that she have neither hear
she enter the room, nor go out. the Colonel beg, if not improper,
that he might see she, though sleep. he say, that his impatience
would not let he stay till he awake. yet he would not have she
disturb; and should be glad to contemplate her sweet feature, when she
see not he; and ask, if she think he could not go in, and come out,
without disturb she?
she believe he might, she answer; for her chair's back be towards the
door.
he say he would take care to withdraw, if she awake, that his sudden
appearance might not surprise she.
Mrs. Smith, step up before we, bid Mrs. Lovick and nurse not stir,
when we enter; and then we go up softly together.
we behold the lady in a charming attitude. dress, as I tell you
before, in her virgin white. she be sit in her elbow-chair, Mrs.
Lovick close by she, in another chair, with her left arm round her neck,
support it, as it be; for, it seem, the lady have bid she do so,
say, she have be a mother to she, and she would delight herself in
think she be in her mamma's arm; for she find herself drowsy;
perhaps, she say, for the last time she should be so.
one fade cheek rest upon the good woman's bosom, the kindly warmth of
which have overspread it with a faint, but charming flush; the other paler
and hollow, as if already ice over by death. her hand white as the
lily, with her meander vein more transparently blue than ever I have
see even shebe, (vein so soon, alas! to be choke up by the congealment
of that purple stream, which already so languidly creep, rather than
flow, through they!) her hand hang lifelessly, one before she, the
other grasp by the right-hand of the kind widow, whose tear bedew
the sweet face which her motherly boson support, though unfelt by the
fair sleeper; and either insensibly to the good woman, or what she would
not disturb she to wipe off, or to change her posture: her aspect be
sweetly calm and serene: and though she start now and then, yet her
sleep seem easy; her breath, indeed short and quick; but tolerably
free, and not like that of a die person.
in this heart-move attitude she appear to we when we approach she,
and come to have her lovely face before we.
the Colonel, sigh often, gaze upon she with his arm fold, and with
the most profound and affectionate attention; till at last, on she
starting, and fetch her breath with great difficulty than before, he
retire to a screen, that be draw before her house, as she call it,
which, as I have heretofore observe, stand under one of the window.
this screen be place there at the time she find herself oblige to
take to her chamber; and in the depth of our concern, and the fulness of
other discourse at our first interview, I have forget to apprize the
Colonel of what he would probably see.
retire thither, he draw out his handkerchief, and, overwhelm with
grief, seem unable to speak; but, on cast his eye behind the screen,
he soon break silence; for, strike with the shape of the coffin, he
lift up a purplish-colour cloth that be spread over it, and,
start back, Good God! say he, whatbe here?
Mrs. Smith stand next he, why, say he, with great emotion, be my
cousin suffer to indulge her sad reflection with such an object before
she?
alas! Sir, reply the good woman, who should controul she? we be all
stranger about she, in a manner: and yet we have expostulate with she
upon this sad occasion.
I ought, say I, (step softly up to he, the lady again fall into
a doze,) to have apprize you of this. I be here when it be bring
in, and never be so shocked in my life. but she have none of her friend
about she, and no reason to hope for any of they to come near she; and,
assure she should not recover, she be resolve to leave as little as
possible, especially as to what relate to her person, to her executor.
but it be not a shocking object to she, though it be to every body else.
curse upon the hard-heartedness of those, say he, who occasion she to
make so sad a provision for herself!--what must her reflection have be
all the time she be think of it, and give order about it? and
what must they be every time she turn her head towards it? these
uncommon genius's--but indeed she should have be controule in it, have
I be here.
the lady fetch a profound sigh, and, start, it break off our talk;
and the Colonel then withdraw far behind the screen, that his sudden
appearance might not surprise she.
where be I?--said she. how drowsy I be! how long have I doze? donot
go, Sir, (for I be retire,) I be very stupid, and shall be more and
more so, I suppose.
she then offer to raise herself; but be ready to faint through
weakness, be force to sit down again, recline her head on her chair
back; and, after a few moment, I believe now, my good friend, say she,
all your kind trouble will soon be over. I have sleep, but be not
refresh, and my finger' end seem numb--have no feeling! (hold
they up,)--'tis time to send the letter to my good Norton.
shall I, Madam, send my servant post with it?
o no, Sir, I thank you. it will reach the dear woman too soon, (as she
will think,) by the post.
I tell she this be not post-day.
be it Wednesday still, say she; bless I! I know not how the time go
--but very tediously, 'tis plain. and now I think I must soon take to my
bed. all will be most conveniently, and with least trouble, over there--
will it not, Mrs. Lovick?--I think, Sir, turn to I, I have leave
nothing to these last incapacitating hour. nothing either to say, or to
do--I bless God, I have not. if I have, how unhappy should I be! can
you, Sir, remind I of any thing necessary to be do or say to make
your office easy?
if, Madam, your cousin Morden should come, you would be glad to see he,
I presume?
I be too weak to wish to see my cousin now. it would but discompose I,
and he too. yet, if he come while I can see he, I will see he, be
it but to thank he for former favour, and for his present kind
intention to I. have any body be here from he?
he have call, and will be here, Madam, in half an hour; but he fear to
surprise you.
nothing can surprise I now, except my mamma be to favour I with she
last blessing in person. that would be a welcome surprise to I, even
yet. but do my cousin come purposely to town to see I?
yes, Madam, I take the liberty to let he know, by a line last Monday,
how ill you be.
you be very kind, Sir. I be, and have be greatly oblige to you. but
I think I shall be pain to see he now, because he will be concern to
see I. and yet, as I be not so ill as I shall presently be--the soon
he come the well. but if he come, what shall I do about the screen?
he will chide I, very probably, and I cannot bear chide now. perhaps,
[lean upon Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith,] I can walk into the next
apartment to receive he.
she motion to rise, but be ready to faint again, and force to sit
still.
the Colonel be in a perfect agitation behind the screen to hear this
discourse; and twice, unseen by his cousin, be come from it towards
she; but retreat for fear of surprise she too much.
I stept to he, and favour his retreat; she only say, be you go,
Mr. Belford? be you send for down? be my cousin come? for she hear
somebody step softly across the room, and think it to be I; her
hearing be more perfect than her sight.
I tell she, I believe he be; and she say, we must make the good of it,
Mrs. Lovick, and Mrs. Smith. I shall otherwise most grievously shock my
poor cousin: for he love I dearly once.--pray give I a few of the
doctor's last drop in water, to keep up my spirit for this one
interview; and that be all, I believe, that can concern I now.
the Colonel, (who hear all this,) send in his name; and I, pretend to
go down to he, introduce the afflict gentleman; she have first
order the screen to be put as close to the window as possible, that he
might not see what be behind it; while he, have hear what she have
say about it, be determined to take no notice of it.
he fold the angel in his arm as she sit, drop down on one knee;
for, support herself upon the two elbow of the chair, she attempt
to rise, but could not. Excuse, my dear Cousin, say she, excuse I,
that I cannot stand up--I do not expect this favour now. but I be glad
of this opportunity to thank you for all your generous goodness to I.
I never, my well-beloved and dear Cousin, say he, (with eye run
over,) shall forgive myself, that I do not attend you soon. little
do I think you be so ill; nor do any of your friend believe it. if
they did--
if they do, repeat she, interrupt he, I should have have more
compassion from they. I be sure I should--but pray, Sir, how do you
leave they? be you reconcile to they? if you be not, I beg, if you
love your poor Clarissa, that you will; for every widen difference
augment but my fault; since that be the foundation of all.
I have be expect to hear from they in your favour, my dear Cousin,
say he, for some hour, when this gentleman's letter arrive, which
hasten I up; but I have the account of your grandfather's estate to
make up with you, and have bill and draft upon their banker for the
sum due to you; which they desire you may receive, lest you should have
occasion for money. and this be such an earnest of an approach
reconciliation, that I dare to answer for all the rest be accord to
your wish, if----
Ah! Sir, interrupt she, with frequent break and pause--I wish--I wish
this do not rather show that, be I to live, they would have nothing
more to say to I. I never have any pride in be independent of they;
all my action, when I might have make myself more independent, show this
--but what avail these reflection now?--i only beg, Sir, that you, and
this gentleman--to whom I be exceedingly oblige--will adjust those
matter--accord to the will I have write. Mr. Belford will excuse
I; but it be in truth more necessity than choice that make I think of
give he the trouble he so kindly accept. have I the happiness to see
you, my Cousin, soon--or to know that you still honour I with your
regard--I should not have have the assurance to ask this favour of him.--
but, though the friend of Mr. Lovelace, he be a man of honour, and he
will make peace rather than break it. and, my dear Cousin, let I beg
of you while I have near relation than my Cousin Morden, dear as you
be, and always be to I, you have no title to avenge my wrong upon
he who have be the occasion of they. but I write to you my mind on
this subject, and my reason--and I hope I need not far urge they.
I must do Mr. Lovelace so much justice, answer he, wipe his eye, as
to witness how sincerely he repent he of his ungrateful baseness to
you, and how ready he be to make you all the amend in his power. he
own his wickedness, and your merit. if he do not, I could not pass it
over, though you have near relation; for, my dear Cousin, do not your
grandfather leave I in trust for you? and should I think myself
concerned for your fortune, and not for your honour? but since he be so
desirous to do you justice, I have the less to say; and you may make
yourself entirely easy on that account.
I thank you, thank you, Sir, say she;--all be now as I wished.--but I be
very faint, very weak. I be sorry I cannot hold up; that I cannot well
deserve the honour of this visit--but it will not be--and say this, she
sink down in her chair, and be silent.
Hereupon we both withdraw, leave word that we would be at the Bedford
Head, if any thing extraordinary happen.
we bespoke a little repast, have neither of we din; and, while it be
get ready, you may guess at the subject of our discourse. both
join in lamentation for the lady's desperate state; admire her
manifold excellency; severely condemn you and her friend. yet, to
bring he into well opinion of you, I read to he some passage from
your last letter, which show your concern for the wrong you have do
she, and your deep remorse: and he say it be a dreadful thing to labour
under the sense of a guilt so irredeemable.
we procure Mr. Goddard, (Dr. H. not be at home,) once more to visit
she, and to call upon we in his return. he be so good as to do so; but
he tarry with she not five minute; and tell we, that she be draw
on apace; that he fear she would not live till morning; and that she
wish to see Colonel Morden directly.
the Colonel make excuse where none be need; and though our little
refection be just bring in, he go away immediately.
I could not touch a morsel; and take pen and ink to amuse myself, and
oblige you; know how impatient you would be for a few line: for, from
what I have recite, you see it be impossible I could withdraw to write
when your servant come at half an hour after five, or have an opportunity
for it till now; and this be accidental; and yet your poor fellow be
afraid to go away with the verbal message I send; import, as no doubt
he tell you, that the Colonel be with we, the lady excessively ill, and
that I could not stir to write a line.
TEN O'CLOCK.
the Colonel send to I afterwards, to tell I that the lady have be
in convulsion, he be so much disorder that he could not possibly
attend I.
I have send every half hour to know how she do--and just now I have the
pleasure to hear that her convulsion have leave she; and that she be go
to rest in a much quieter way than could be expect.
her poor cousin be very much indisposed; yet will not stir out of the
house while she be in such a way; but intend to lie down on a couch,
have refuse any other accommodation.
END of VOL. 8.
volume IX.
content of volume IX
LETTER I. Belford to Lovelace.--
her silent devotion. strong symptom of her approach dissolution.
comfort her cousin and he. wish she have her parent' last blessing:
but God, she say, would not let she depend for comfort on any but
himself. repeat her request to the Colonel, that he will not seek to
avenge her wrong; and to Belford, that he will endeavour to heal all
breach.
LETTER II. from the same.--
the Colonel write to Mr. John Harlowe that they may now spare themselves
the trouble of debate about a reconciliation. the lady take from her
bosom a miniature picture of Miss Howe, to be give to Mr. Hickman after
her decease. her affect address to it, on part with it.
LETTER III. Belford to mowbray.--
desire he and Tourville to throw themselves in the way of Lovelace, in
order to prevent he do either mischief to himself or other, on the
receipt of the fatal news which he shall probably send he in an hour or
two.
LETTER IV. Lovelace to Belford.--
a letter fill with rage, curse, and alternate despair and hope.
LETTER V. Belford to Lovelace.--
with the fatal hint, that he may take a tour to Paris, or wherever else
his destiny shall lead he.
LETTER VI. Mowbray to belford.--
with the particular, in his libertine manner, of Lovelace's behaviour
on his receive the fatal breviate, and of the distracted way he be in.
LETTER VII. Belford to Lovelace.--
Particulars of Clarissa's truly christian behaviour in her last hour. a
short sketch of her character.
LETTER viii. from the same.--
the three next follow letter bring by a servant in livery, direct
to the depart lady, viz.
LETTER IX. from Mrs. Norton.--
with the news of a general reconciliation upon her own condition.
LETTER x. from Miss arabella.--
in which she assure she of all their return love and favour.
LETTER XI. from Mr. John Harlowe.--
regret that thing have be carry so far; and desire she to
excuse his part in what have pass.
LETTER XII. Belford to Lovelace.--
his executorial proceeding. eleven posthumous letter of the lady.
Copy of one of they write to himself. tell Lovelace of one write to
he, in pursuance of her promise in her allegorical letter. (see letter
XVIII. of Vol. VIII.) other executorial proceeding. the Colonel's
letter to James Harlowe, signify Clarissa's request to be bury at
the foot of her grandfather.
LETTER XIII. from the same.--
Mrs. Norton arrive. her surprise and grief to find her beloved young
lady depart. the posthumous letter calculate to give comfort, and
not to reproach.
LETTER XIV. XV. XVI. XVII. xviii.
copy of Clarissa's posthumous letter to her father, mother, brother,
sister, and uncle.
substance of her letter to her aunt Hervey, conclude with advice to her
cousin dolly.
substance of her letter to Miss Howe, with advice in favour of Mr.
Hickman.
LETTER XIX. Belford to Lovelace.--
the wretched sinclair break her leg, and dispatch Sally Martin to beg
a visit from he, and that he will procure for her the
forgiveness. Sally's remorse for the treatment she give she at
Rowland's. acknowledge the lady's ruin to be in a great measure owe
to their instigation.
LETTER XX. from the same.--
Miss Howe's distress on receive the fatal news, and the posthumous
letter direct to she. Copy of James Harlowe's answer to Colonel
Morden's letter, in which he relate the unspeakable distress of the
family; endeavour to exculpate himself; desire the body may be send
down to Harlowe-place; and that the Colonel will favour they with his
company.
LETTER XXI. Belford to Lovelace.--
the corpse send down, attend by the Colonel and Mrs. Norton.
LETTER XXII. Mowbray to Belford.--
an account of Lovelace's delirious unmanageableness, and extravagant
design, have they not all interpose. they have get Lord M. to he. he
endeavour to justify Lovelace by rakish principle, and by a true story
of a villany which he think great than that of Lovelace by Clarissa.
LETTER XXIII. Lovelace to Belford.--
write in the height of his delirium. the whole world, he say, be but
one great Bedlam. every one in it mad but himself.
LETTER XXIV. Belford to mowbray.--
Desires that Lovelace, on his recovery, may be prevail upon to go
abroad; and why. exhort he and Tourville to reform, as he be resolve
to do.
LETTER XXV. Belford to Lovelace.--
describe the terrible impatience, despondency, and death of the
wretched Sinclair.
[as the bad house be often mention in this work, without any other
stigma than what arise from the wicked principle and action
occasionally give of the wretch who inhabit it; Mr. Belford here
enter into the secret retirement of those creature, and expose they
in the appearance they be suppose to make, before they be trick out
to ensnare weak and inconsiderate mind.]
LETTER XXVI. Colonel Morden to Mr. Belford.--
with an account of his arrival at Harlowe-place before the body. the
dreadful distress of the whole family in expectation of its coming. the
deep remorse of James and Arabella Harlowe. mutual recrimination on
recollect the numerous instance of their inexorable cruelty. Mrs.
Norton so ill he be force to leave she at St. Alban's. he date again
to give a farth account of their distress on the arrival of the hearse.
solemn respect pay to her memory by crowd of people.
LETTER XXVII. from the same.--
far interesting account of what pass among the Harlowes. Miss
Howe expect to see, for the last time, her beloved friend.
LETTER XXVIII. from the same.--
Miss Howe arrive. the Colonel receive she. her tender woe; and
characteristic behaviour.
LETTER XXIX. Colonel Morden to Mr. Belford.--
Mrs. Norton arrive. amend in spirit. to what owe. far
recrimination of the unhappy parent. they attempt to see the corpse;
but cannot. could ever wilful hard-heartedness, the Colonel ask, be
more severely punish? substance of the lady's posthumous letter to
Mrs. Norton.
LETTER XXX. from the same.--
account of the funeral solemnity. head of the eulogium. the universal
justice do to the lady's great and good quality. other affect
particular.
LETTER XXXI. belford to Colonel Morden.--
compliment he on his pathetic narrative. far account of his
executorial proceeding.
LETTER XXXII. James Harlowe to Belford.
LETTER XXXIII. Mr. Belford. in answer.
the lady's last WILL. in the preamble to which, as well as in the body
of it, she give several instructive hint; and display, in an exemplary
manner, her forgiving spirit, her piety, her charity, her gratitude, and
other christian and heroic virtue.
LETTER XXXIV. Colonel Morden to Mr. Belford.--
the will read. what pass on the occasion.
LETTER XXXV. Belford to Lord M.--
apprehend a vindictive resentment from the colonel.--desire that Mr.
Lovelace may be prevail upon to take a tour.
letter xxxvi. Miss Montague. in answer.
Summary account of proceeding relate to the execution of the lady's
will, and other matter. substance of a letter from Mr. Belford to Mr.
Hickman; of Mr. Hickman's answer; and of a letter from Miss Howe to Mr.
Belford.
LETTER XXXVII. Lovelace to belford.--
describe his delirium as dawn into sense and recollection. all be
conscience and horror with he, he say. a description of his misery at
its height.
LETTER xxxviii. from the same.--
revoke his last letter, as ashamed of it. yet break into fit and
start, and be ready to go back again. why, he ask, do his mother
bring he up to know no controul? his heart sicken at the recollection
of what he be. dread the return of his malady. make an effort to
forget all.
LETTER XXXIX. Lovelace to Belford.--
be prepare to leave the kingdom. his route. seasonable warning,
though deliver in a ludicrous manner, on Belford's resolution to
reform. complain that he have be strangely keep in the dark of late.
demand a copy of the lady's will.
LETTER XL. Belford to Lovelace.--
Justice likely to overtake his instrument Tomlinson. on what occasion.
the wretched man's remorse on the lady's account. Belford urge Lovelace
to go abroad for his health. answer very seriously to the warning he
give he. amiable scheme for the conduct of his future life.
LETTER XLI. Lovelace to Belford.--
Pities Tomlinson. find that he be dead in prison. happy that he live
not to be hang. why. no discomfort so great but some comfort may be
draw from it. endeavour to defend himself by a whimsical case which
he put between a. a miser, and B. a thief.
LETTER XLII. from the same.--
ridicule he on the scheme of life he have draw out for himself. in his
manner give Belford some far caution and warning. reproaches he
for not save the lady. a breach of confidence in some case be more
excusable than to keep a secret. rally he on his person and air, on
his cousin Charlotte, and the widow Lovick.
LETTER XLIII. Mr. Belford to Colonel Morden.--
on a declaration he have make, of take vengeance of Mr. Lovelace. his
argument with he on that subject, from various topic.
LETTER XLIV. the Lady's posthumous letter to her cousin Morden.--
contain argument against DUELLING, as well as with regard to her
particular case, as in general. see also Letter XVI. to her brother, on
the same subject.
LETTER XLV. Colonel Morden to Mr. Belford.--
in answer to his plea against avenge his cousin. he paint in very
strong colour the grief and distress of the whole family, on the loss of
a child, whose character and excellency rise upon they to their
torment.
LETTER XLVI. Colonel Morden to Mr. Belford.--
farther particular relate to the execution of the lady's will. give
his thought of woman's friendship in general; of that of Miss Howe and
his cousin, in particular. an early habit of familiar letter-writing,
how improve. Censures Miss Howe for her behaviour to Mr. Hickman. Mr.
Hickman's good character. caution to parent who desire to preserve
their child's veneration for they. Mr. Hickman, unknown to Miss Howe,
put himself and equipage in mourn for Clarissa. her lively turn upon
he on that occasion. what he, the Colonel, expect from the generosity
of Miss Howe, in relation to Mr. Hickman. weakness of such as be afraid
of make their last will.
LETTER XLVII. Belford to Miss howe.--
with copy of Clarissa's posthumous letter; and respectfully, as from
Colonel Morden and himself, remind she of she perform her part of
her dear friend's last desire, in make one of the most deserving man
in England happy. inform she of the delirium of Lovelace, in order to
move her compassion for he, and of the dreadful death of Sinclair and
Tomlinson.
LETTER xlviii. Miss Howe to Mr. Belford.--
Observations on the letter and subject he communicate to she. she
promise another letter, in answer to his and Colonel Morden's call upon
she in Mr. Hickman's favour. applaud the Colonel for purchase her
beloved friend's jewel, in order to present they to Miss Dolly Hervey.
letter XLIX. from the same.--
she account for, though not defend, her treatment of Mr. Hickman. she
own that he be a man worthy of a well choice; that she value no man
more than he: and assure Mr. Belford and the Colonel that her
endeavour shall not be want to make he happy.
LETTER L. Mr. Belford to Miss howe.--
a letter full of grateful acknowledgement for the favour of she's.
LETTER LI. Lord M. to Mr. Belford.--
acquaint he with his kinsman's set out for London, in order to
embark. wish he to prevent a meeting between he and Mr. Morden.
LETTER LII. Mr. Belford to Lord M.--
have have a visit from Mr. Lovelace. what pass between they on the
occasion. have an interview with Colonel Morden.
LETTER LIII. Mr. Belford to Lord M.--
just return from attend Mr. Lovelace part of his way towards Dover.
their solemn parting.
LETTER LIV. from the same.--
an account of what pass between himself and Colonel Morden at their
next meeting. their affectionate parting.
LETTER LV. Miss Howe to Mr. Belford.--
Gives, at his request, the character of her beloved friend at large; and
an account of the particular distribution of her time in the twenty-four
hour of the natural day.
LETTER LVI. Lovelace to Belford, from Paris.--
Conscience the conqueror of soul. he cannot run away from his
reflection. he desire a particular account of all that have pass
since he leave England.
LETTER LVII. Belford to Lovelace.--
answer he as to all the particular he write about.
LETTER LVIII. Lovelace to Belford.--
have receive a letter from Joseph Leman (who, he say, be
conscience-ridden) to inform he that Colonel Morden resolve to have his
will of he. he cannot bear to be threaten. he will write to the
Colonel to know his purpose. he cannot get off his regret on account of
the dear lady for the blood of he.
LETTER LIX. Belford to Lovelace.--
it would be matter of serious reflection to he, he say, if that very
Leman, who have be his machine, should be the instrument of his fall.
LETTER LX. Lovelace to Belford.--
have write to the Colonel to know his intention: but yet in such a
manner that he may handsomely avoid take it as a challenge; though, in
the like case, he own that he himself should not. copy of his letter to
the Colonel.
LETTER LXI. from the same.--
he be now in his way to Trent, in order to meet Colonel Morden. he be
sure of victory: but will not, if he can help it, out of regard to
Clarissa, kill the Colonel.
LETTER LXII. from the same.--
interview with Colonel Morden. to-morrow, say he, be the day that will,
in all probability, send either one or two ghost to attend the mane of
my Clarissa. he doubt not to give the Colonel his life, or his death;
and to be able, by next morning eleven, to write all the particular.
LETTER LXIV. the issue of the DUEL.
CONCLUSION
POSTSCRIPT
the history
of
CLARISSA HARLOWE
LETTER I
MR. BELFORD
[in CONTINUATION.]
SOHO, SIX O'CLOCK, SEPT. 7.
the lady be still alive. the Colonel have just send his servant to let
I know that she inquire after I about an hour ago, I be dress to
attend she. Joel beg of I to dispatch he back, though but with one
line to gratify your present impatience. he expect, he say, to find
you at Knightsbridge, let he make what haste he can back; and, if he have
not a line or two to pacify you, he be afraid you will pistol he; for he
apprehend that you be hardly yourself. I therefore dispatch this, and
will have another ready, as soon as I can, with particulars.--but you
must have a little patience; for how can I withdraw myself every half
hour to write, if I be admit to the lady's presence, or if I be with
the Colonel?
SMITH's, eight in the morning.
the lady be in a slumber. Mrs. Lovick, who sit up with she, say she have
a well night than be expect; for although she sleep little, she
seem easy; and the easy for the pious frame she be in; all her
wake moment be take up in devotion, or in an ejaculatory silence;
her hand and eye often lift up, and her lip move with a fervour
worthy of these her last hour.
TEN O'CLOCK.
the Colonel be earnest to see his cousin as soon as she awake, we be
both admit. we observe in she, as soon as we enter, strong
symptom of her approach dissolution, notwithstanding what the woman
have flatter we with from her last night's tranquillity.--The Colonel
and I, each loth to say what we think, look upon one another with
melancholy countenance.
the Colonel tell she he should send a servant to her uncle Antony's for
some paper he have leave there; and ask if she have any command that
way.
she think not, she say, speak more inwardly than she do the day
before. she have indeed a letter ready to be send to her good Norton; and
there be a request intimate in it. but it be time enough, if the
request be signify to those whom it concern when all be over.
--However, it might be send they by the servant who be go that way.
and she cause it to be give to the Colonel for that purpose.
her breath be very short, she desire another pillow. have two
before, this make she in a manner sit up in her bed; and she speak then
with more distinctness; and, see we greatly concern, forget her own
suffering to comfort we; and a charming lecture she give we, though a
brief one, upon the happiness of a timely preparation, and upon the
hazard of a late repentance, when the mind, as she observe, be so much
weaken, as well as the body, as to render a poor soul hardly able to
contend with its natural infirmity.
I beseech ye, my good friend, proceed she, mourn not for one who
mourn not, nor have cause to mourn, for herself. on the contrary,
rejoice with I, that all my worldly trouble be so near to their end.
believe I, Sirs, that I would not, if I might, choose to live, although
the pleasantest part of my life be to come over again: and yet eighteen
year of it, out of nineteen, have be very pleasant. to be so much
expose to temptation, and to be so liable to fail in the trial, who
would not rejoice that all her danger be over?--all I wish be pardon
and blessing from my dear parent. easy as my departure seem promise
to be, it would have be still easy, have I that pleasure. but GOD
ALMIGHTY would not let I DEPEND for COMFORT UPON ANY but HIMSELF.
she then repeat her request, in the most earnest manner, to her cousin,
that he would not heighten her fault, by seek to avenge her death; to
I, that I would endeavour to make up all breach, and use the power I
have with my friend, to prevent all future mischief from he, as well as
that which this trust might give I to prevent any to he.
she make some excuse to her cousin, for not have be able to alter
her will, to join he in the executorship with I; and to I, for the
trouble she have give, and yet should give I.
she have fatigue herself so much, (grow sensibly weak) that she sink
her head upon her pillow, ready to faint; and we withdraw to the window,
look upon one another; but could not tell what to say; and yet both
seem inclinable to speak: but the motion pass over in silence. our
eye only speak; and that in a manner neither's be use to--mine, at
least, not till I know this admirable creature.
the Colonel withdraw to dismiss his messenger, and send away the letter
to Mrs. Norton. I take the opportunity to retire likewise; and to write
thus far. and Joel return to take it, I now close here.
ELEVEN O'CLOCK.
LETTER II
MR. BELFORD
[in CONTINUATION.]
the Colonel tell I that he have write to Mr. John Harlowe, by his
servant, 'that they might spare themselves the trouble of debate about
a reconciliation; for that his dear cousin would probably be no more
before they could resolve.'
he ask I after his cousin's mean of subsist; and whether she have
accept of any favour from I; he be sure, he say, she would not from
you.
I acquaint he with the truth of she part with some of her apparel.
this wring his heart; and bitterly do he exclaim as well against you as
against her implacable relation.
he wish he have not come to England at all, or have come soon; and
hop I would apprize he of the whole mournful story, at a proper
season. he add, that he have thought, when he come over, of fix
here for the remainder of his day; but now, as it be impossible his
cousin could recover, he would go abroad again, and re-settle himself at
Florence or Leghorn.
the lady have be give order, with great presence of mind, about her
body! direct her nurse and the maid of the house to put she in the
coffin as soon as she be cold. Mr. Belford, she say, would know the
rest by her will.
***
she have just now give from her bosom, where she always wear it, a
miniature picture, set in gold, of Miss Howe. she give it to Mrs.
Lovick, desire she to fold it up in white paper, and direct it, to
Charles Hickman, Esq. and to give it to I, when she be depart, for
that gentleman.
she look upon the picture, before she give it she--sweet and
ever-amiable friend!--companion!--sister!--lover! say she--and kiss
it four several time, once at each tender appellation.
***
your other servant be come.--Well may you be impatient!--well may you!
--but do you think I can leave off, in the middle of a conversation, to
run and set down what offer, and send it away piece-meal as I write?
--if I could, must I not lose one half, while I put down the other?
this event be nearly as interesting to I as it be to you. if you be
more grieved than I, there can be but one reason for it; and thatbe at
your heart!--i have rather lose all the friend I have in the world,
(yourself in the number,) than this divine lady; and shall be unhappy
whenever I think of her suffering, and of her merit; though I have
nothing to reproach myself by reason of the former.
I say not this, just now, so much to reflect upon you as to express my
own grief; though your conscience I suppose, will make you think
otherwise.
your poor fellow, who say that he beg for his life, in desire to be
dispatch back with a letter, tear this from I--else, perhaps, (for
I be just send for down,) a quarter of an hour would make you--not easy
indeed--but certain--and that, in a state like your's, to a mind like
your's, be a relief.
THURSDAY AFTERNOON, FOUR O'CLOCK.
LETTER III
MR. BELFORD, TO RICHARD MOWBRAY, ESQ.
THURSDAY AFTERNOON.
DEAR MOWBRAY,
I be glad to hear you be in town. throw yourself the moment this come
to your hand, (if possible with Tourville,) in the way of the man who
least of all man deserve the love of the worthy heart; but most that of
thine and Tourville; else the news I shall most probably send he within
an hour or two, will make annihilation the great blessing he have to
wish for.
you will find he between Piccadilly and Kensington, most probably on
horseback, rid backwards and forwards in a crazy way; or put up,
perhaps, at some inn or tavern in the way--a waiter possibly, if so,
watch for his servant's return to he from I.
***
his man Will. be just come to I. he will carry this to you in his way
back, and be your director. hie away in a coach, or any how. your being
with he may save either his or a servant's life. see the blessed
effect of triumphant libertinism! soon or later it come home to we,
and all conclude in gall and bitterness!
Adieu.
J. BELFORD.
LETTER IV
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
curse upon the Colonel, and curse upon the writer of the last letter I
receive, and upon all the world! thou to pretend to be as much
interested in my Clarissa's fate as myself!--'tis well for one of we that
this be not say to I, instead of written.--living or die, she be
mine--and only mine. have I not earn her dearly?--is not d----n----n
likely to be the purchase to I, though a happy eternity will be she's?
an eternal separation!--o God! o god!--how can I bear that thought!--but
yet there be life!--Yet, therefore, hope--enlarge my hope, and thou shalt
be my good genius, and I will forgive thee every thing.
for this last time--but it must not, shall not be the last--let I hear,
the moment thou receivest this--what I be to be--for, at present, I be
the most miserable of Men.
ROSE, AT KNIGHTSBRIDGE, five O'CLOCK.
my fellow tell I that thou art send Mowbray and Tourville to me:--i
want they not--my soul's sick of they, and of all the world--but most of
myself. yet, as they send I word they will come to I immediately, I
will wait for they, and for thy next. o Belford, let it not be--but
hasten it, be what it may!
LETTER V
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
seven O'CLOCK, THURSDAY EVENING, SEPT. 7.
I have only to say at present--thou wilt do well to take a tour to
Paris; or wherever else thy destiny shall lead thee!----
JOHN BELFORD.
LETTER VI
MR. MOWBRAY, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
UXBRIDGE, SEPT. 7, between ELEVEN and TWELVE AT NIGHT.
DEAR JACK,
I send by poor Lovelace's desire, for particular of the fatal breviate
thou sentest he this night. he cannot bear to set pen to paper; yet
want to know every minute passage of Miss Harlowe's departure. yet why
he should, I cannot see: for if she be go, she be go; and who can
help it?
I never hear of such a woman in my life. what great matter have she
suffer, that grief should kill she thus?
I wish the poor fellow have never know she. from first to last, what
trouble she have cost he! the charming fellow have be half lose to we
ever since he pursue she. and what be there in one woman more than
another, for matter of that?
it be well we be with he when your note come. your show your true
friendship in your foresight. why, Jack, the poor fellow be quite
beside himself--mad as any man ever be in Bedlam.
will. bring he the letter just after we have join he at the Bohemia
Head; where he have leave word at the Rose at Knightsbridge he should be;
for he have be saunter up and down, backwards and forwards, expect
we, and his fellow. will., as soon as he deliver it, get out of his
way; and, when he open it, never be such a piece of scenery. he
tremble like a devil at receive it: fumble at the seal, his finger
in a palsy, like Tom. Doleman's; his hand shake, shake, shake, that he
tear the letter in two, before he could come at the content: and, when
he have read they, off go his hat to one corner of the room, his wig to
the other--D--n--n seize the world! and a whole volley of such-like
excratious wish; run up and down the room, and throw up the
sash, and pull it down, and smite his forehead with his double fist,
with such force as would have fell as ox, and stamp and tearing,
that the landlord run in, and fast out again. and this be the
distraction scene for some time.
in vain be all Jemmy or I could say to he. I offer once to take hold
of his hand, because he be go to do himself a mischief, as I
believe, look about for his pistol, which he have lay upon the
table, but which will., unseen, have take out with he, [a faithful,
honest dog, that will.! I shall for ever love the fellow for it,] and he
hit I a d--d dowse of the chop, as make my nose bleed. 'twas well
'twa he, for I hardly know how to take it.
Jemmy rave at he, and tell he, how wicked it be in he, to be so
brutish to abuse a friend, and run mad for a woman. and then he say he
be sorry for it; and then will. venture in with water and a towel; and
the dog rejoice, as I could see by his look, that I have it rather than
he.
and so, by degree, we bring he a little to his reason, and he
promise to behave more like a man. and so I forgave he: and we ride on
in the dark to here at Doleman's. and we all try to shame he out of
his mad, ungovernable foolishness: for we tell he, as how she be but a
woman, and an obstinate perverse woman too; and how could he help it?
and you know, Jack, (as we tell he, moreover,) that it be a shame to
manhood, for a man, who have serve twenty and twenty woman as bad or
bad, let he have serve Miss Harlowe never so bad, should give himself
such obstropulous air, because she would die: and we advise he never
to attempt a woman proud of her character and virtue, as they call it,
any more: for why? the conquest do not pay trouble; and what be there
in one woman more than another? Hay, you know, Jack!--And thus we
comfort he, and advise he.
but yet his d--d addled pate run upon this lady as much now shebe dead
as it do when she be live. for, I suppose, Jack, it be no joke: she
be certainly and bona fide dead: i'n't she? if not, thou deservest to be
doubly d--d for thy fooling, I tell thee that. so he will have I write
for particular of her departure.
he willnot bear the word dead on any account. a squeamish puppy! how love
unman and soften! and such a noble fellow as this too! rot he for an
idiot, and an oaf! I have no patience with the foolish duncical dog
--upon my soul, I have not!
so send the account, and let he howl over it, as I suppose he will.
but he must and shall go abroad: and in a month or two Jemmy, and you,
and I, will join he, and hewill soon get the well of this
chicken-hearte folly, never fear; and will then be ashamed of himself:
and then wewill not spare he; though now, poor fellow, it be pity to
lay he on so thick as he deserve. and do thou, till then, spare all
reflection upon he; for, it seem, thou hast work he unmercifully.
I be willing to give thee some account of the hand we have have with the
tear fellow, who have certainly be a lost man, have we not be with
he; or he would have kill somebody or other. I have no doubt of it.
and now he be but very middling; sit grin like a man in straw;
curse and swear, and be confound gloomy; and creep into hole and
corner, like an old hedge-hog hunt for his grease.
and so, adieu, Jack. Tourville, and all of we, wish for thee; for no one
have the influence upon he that thou hast.
R. MOWBRAY.
as I promise he that I would write for the particular abovesaid, I
write this after all be go to bed; and the fellow be set out
with it by day-break.
LETTER VII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
THURSDAY NIGHT.
I may as well try to write; since, be I to go to bed, I shall not
sleep. I never have such a weight of grief upon my mind in my life, as
upon the demise of this admirable woman; whose soul be now rejoice
in the region of light.
you may be glad to know the particular of her happy exit. I will try
to proceed; for all be hush and still; the family retire; but not one
of they, and least of all her poor cousin, I dare say, to rest.
at four o'clock, as I mention in my last, I be send for down; and,
as thou usedst to like my description, I will give thee the woeful scene
that present itself to I, as I approach the bed.
the Colonel be the first that take my attention, kneel on the side of
the bed, the lady's right hand in both his, which his face cover,
bath it with his tear; although she have be comfort he, as the
woman since tell I, in elevated strain, but broken accent.
on the other side of the bed sit the good widow; her face overwhelm
with tear, lean her head against the bed's head in a most
disconsolate manner; and turn her face to I, as soon as she see I,
o Mr. Belford, cry she, with folded hand--the dear lady--a heavy sob
permit she not to say more.
Mrs. Smith, with clasped finger, and uplifted eye, as if implore help
from the only power which could give it, be kneel down at the bed's
foot, tear in large drop trickle down her cheek.
her nurse be kneel between the widow and Mrs. Smith, her arm
extend. in one hand she hold an ineffectual cordial, which she have
just be offer to her die mistress; her face be swoln with weeping
(though use to such scene as this); and she turn her eye towards I,
as if she call upon I by they to join in the helpless sorrow; a fresh
stream burst from they as I approach the bed.
the maid of the house with her face upon her fold arm, as she stand
lean against the wainscot, more audibly expr her grief than any of
the other.
the lady have be silent a few minute, and speechless, as they think,
move her lip without utter a word; one hand, as I say, in her
cousin's. but when Mrs. Lovick, on my approach, pronounce my name, O
Mr. Belford, say she, with a faint inward voice, but very distinct
nevertheless--now!--now! [in broken period she spoke]--I bless God for
his mercy to his poor creature--all will soon be over--a few--a very
few moment--will end this strife--and I shall be happy!
Comfort here, Sir--turn her head to the Colonel--comfort my cousin
--see! the blame--able kindness--he would not wish I to be happy
--so soon!
here she stopt for two or three minute, earnestly look upon he.
then resume, my dear Cousin, say she, be comfort--what be die
but the common lot?--the mortal frame may seem to labour--but that be
all!--It be not so hard to die as I believe it to be!--the preparation
be the difficulty--I bless God, I have have time for that--the rest be
bad to beholder, than to me!--I be all bless hope--hope itself. she
look what she say, a sweet smile beam over her countenance.
after a short silence, once more, my dear Cousin, say she, but still in
broken accent, commend I most dutifully to my father and mother--there
she stopt. and then proceed--to my sister, to my brother, to my
uncle--and tell they, I bless they with my parting breath--for all their
goodness to I--even for their displeasure, I bless they--most happy have
be to I my punishment here! happy indeed!
she be silent for a few moment, lift up her eye, and the hand she
cousin hold not between his. then, O death! say she, where be thy
sting! [the word I remember to have hear in the burial-service read
over my uncle and poor Belton.] and after a pause--it be good for I
that I be afflict! word of scripture, I suppose.
then turn towards we, who be lose in speechless sorrow--o dear, dear
gentleman, say she, you know not what foretaste--what assurance--and
there she again stop, and look up, as if in a thankful rapture,
sweetly smile.
then turn her head towards I--do you, Sir, tell your friend that I
forgive him!--and I pray to God to forgive him!--Again pausing, and
lift up her eye as if pray that he would. let he know how
happily I die:--and that such as my own, I wish to be his last hour.
she be again silent for a few moment: and then resume--my sight
fail me!--your voice only--[for we both applaud her christian, her
divine frame, though in accent as break as her own]; and the voice of
grief be alike in all. be not this Mr. Morden's hand? press one of
his with that he have just let go. which be Mr. Belford's? hold out
the other. I give her mine. God Almighty bless you both, say she, and
make you both--in your last hour--for you must come to this--happy as I
be.
she pause again, her breath grow short; and, after a few minute
--and now, my dear Cousin, give I your hand--nearer--still nearer
--drawe it towards she; and she press it with her die lip--God
protect you, dear, dear Sir--and once more, receive my good and most
grateful thank--and tell my dear Miss Howe--and vouchsafe to see, and to
tell my worthy Norton--she will be one day, I fear not, though now lowly
in her fortune, a saint in Heaven--tell they both, that I remember they
with thankful blessing in my last moments!--and pray God to give they
happiness here for many, many year, for the sake of their friend and
lover; and an heavenly crown hereafter; and such assurance of it, as I
have, through the all-satisfy merit of my blessed Redeemer.
her sweet voice and broken period methink still fill my ear, and never
will be out of my memory.
after a short silence, in a more broken and faint accent--and you, Mr.
Belford, press my hand, may God preserve you, and make you sensible of
all your error--you see, in I, how all end--may you be--and down sink
her head upon her pillow, she faint away, and draw from we her
hand.
we think she be then go; and each give way to a violent burst of
grief.
but soon show sign of return life, our attention be again
engage; and I besought she, when a little recover, to complete in my
favour her half-pronounce blessing. she wave her hand to we both, and
bow her head six several time, as we have since recollect, as if
distinguish every person present; not forget the nurse and the
maid-servant; the latter have approach the bed, weeping, as if
crowd in for the divine lady's blessing; and she speak falter and
inwardly--Bless--bless--bless--you all--and--now--and now--[holde up
she almost lifeless hand for the last time] come--o come--bless Lord
--JESUS!
and with these word, the last but half-pronounce, expired:--such a
smile, such a charming serenity overspread her sweet face at the
instant, as seem to manifest her eternal happiness already begin.
o Lovelace!--But I can write no more!
***
I resume my pen to add a few line.
while warm, though pulseless, we press each her hand with our lip;
and then retire into the next room.
we look at each other, with intent to speak: but, as if one motion
govern, as one cause affect both, we turn away silent.
the Colonel sigh as if his heart would burst: at last, his face and
hand uplifted, his back towards I, Good Heaven! say he to himself,
support me!--and be it thus, o flower of nature!--then pausing--and must
we no more--never more!--my bless, bless Cousin! utter some other
word, which his sigh make inarticulate.--And then, as if recollect
himself--forgive I, Sir!--Excuse I, Mr. Belford! and slide by I,
Anon I hope to see you, Sir--and down stair he go, and out of the
house, leave I a statue.
when I recover, I be ready to repine at what I then call an unequal
dispensation; forget her happy preparation, and still happy
departure; and that she have but draw a common lot; triumph in it, and
leave behind she every one less assured of happiness, though equally
certain that the lot would one day be their own.
she depart exactly at forty minute after six o'clock, as by her watch
on the table.
and thus die Miss CLARISSA HARLOWE, in the blossom of her youth and
beauty: and who, her tender year consider, have not leave behind her her
superior in extensive knowledge and watchful prudence; nor hardly she
equal for unblemished virtue, exemplary piety, sweetness of manner,
discreet generosity, and true christian charity: and these all set off by
the most graceful modesty and humility; yet on all proper occasion,
manifest a noble presence of mind, and true magnanimity: so that she
may be say to have be not only an ornament to her sex, but to human
nature.
a well pen than mine may do her full justice. Thine, I mean, O
Lovelace! for well dost thou know how much she excel in the grace of
both mind and person, natural and acquire, all that be woman. and thou
also can well account for the cause of her immature death, through those
calamity which in so short a space of time, from the high pitch of
felicity, (every one in a manner adore she,) bring he to an exit so
happy for herself, but, that it be so early, so much to be deplore by
all who have the honour of her acquaintance.
this task, then, I leave to thee: but now I can write no more, only that
I be a sympathizer in every part of thy distress, except (and yet it be
cruel to say it) in that which arise from thy guilt.
one O'CLOCK, FRIDAY morning.
LETTER VIII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
NINE, FRIDAY MORN.
I have no opportunity to write at length, have necessary order to give
on the melancholy occasion. Joel, who get to I by six in the morning,
and whom I dispatch instantly back with the letter I have ready from
last night, give I but an indifferent account of the state of your
mind. I wonder not at it; but time (and nothing else can) will make it
easy to you: if (that be to say) you have compound with your
conscience; else it may be heavy every day than other.
***
Tourville tell we what a way you be in. I hope you will not think of
come hither. the lady in she will desire you may not see she. four
copy be make of it. it be a long one; for she give her reason for
all she will. I will write to you more particularly as soon as possibly
I can.
***
three letter be just bring by a servant in livery, direct to Miss
Clarissa Harlowe. I will send copy of they to you. the content be
enough to make one mad. how would this poor lady have rejoice to
receive them!--and yet, if she have, she would not have be enable to
say, as she nobly do,* that God would not let she depend for comfort
upon any but himself.--and indeed for some day past she have seem to
have get above all worldly considerations.--her fervent love, even for
her Miss Howe, as she acknowledge, have give way to supremer
fervour.**
* see Letter I. of this volume.
** see Vol. VIII. Letter LXII.
LETTER IX
MRS. NORTON, to MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
WEDNESDAY, SEPT. 6.
at length, my good beloved Miss Clary, every thing be in the wished
train: for all your relation be unanimous in your favour. even your
brother and your sister be with the foremost to be reconcile to you.
I know it must end thus! by patience, and persevere sweetness, what a
triumph have you gain!
this happy change be owe to letter receive from your physician, from
your cousin Morden, and from Mr. Brand.
Colonel Morden will be with you, no doubt, before this can reach you,
with his pocket-book fill with money-bill, that nothing may be want
to make you easy.
and now, all our hope, all our prayer, be, that this good news may
restore you to spirit and health; and that (so long withhold) it may not
come too late.
I know how much your dutiful heart will be raise with the joyful tiding
I write you, and still shall more particularly tell you of, when I have
the happiness to see you: which will be by next Sunday, at farth;
perhaps on Friday afternoon, by the time you can receive this.
for this day, be send for by the general voice, I be receive by
every one with great goodness and condescension, and entreat (for that
be the word they be pleased to use, when I need no entreaty, I be
sure,) to hasten up to you, and to assure you of all their affectionate
regard to you: and your father bid I say all the kind thing that be
in my heart to say, in order to comfort and raise you up, and they would
hold themselves bind to make they good.
how agreeable be this commission to your Norton! my heart will overflow
with kind speech, never fear! I be already meditate what I shall
say, to cheer and raise you up, in the name of every one dear and near
to you. and sorry I be that I cannot this moment set out, as I might,
instead of writing, would they favour my eager impatience with their
chariot; but as it be not offer, it would be a presumption to have
ask for it: and to-morrow a hire chaise and pair will be ready; but at
what hour I know not.
how I long once more to fold my dear, precious young lady to my fond, my
more than fond, my maternal bosom!
your sister will write to you, and send her letter, with this, by a
particular hand.
I must not let they see what I write, because of my wish about the
chariot.
your uncle Harlowe will also write, and (I doubt not) in the kind
term: for they be all extremely alarmed and trouble at the dangerous
way your doctor represent you to be in; as well as delighted with the
character he give you. would to Heaven the good gentleman have write
soon! and yet he write, that you know not he have now write. but it
be all our confidence, and our consolation, that he would not have
write at all, have he think it too late.
they will prescribe no condition to you, my dear young lady; but will
leave all to your own duty and discretion. only your brother and sister
declare they will never yield to call Mr. Lovelace brother; nor will your
father, I believe, be easily bring to think of he for a son.
I be to bring you down with I as soon as your health and inclination
will permit. you will be receive with open arm. every one long to
see you. all the servant please themselves that they shall be permit
to kiss your hand. the pert Betty's note be already change; and she
now run over in your just praise. what friend do prosperity make!
what enemy adversity! it always be, and always will be so, in every
state of life, from the throne to the cottage.--But let all be forget
now on this jubilee change: and may you, my dear Miss, be capable of
rejoice in this good news; as I know you will rejoice, if capable of
any thing.
God preserve you to our happy meeting! and I will, if I may say so,
weary Heaven with my incessant prayer to preserve and restore you
afterwards!
I need not say how much I be, my dear young lady,
your ever-affectionate and devoted,
JUDITH NORTON.
an unhappy delay, as to the chaise, will make it Saturday morning before
I can fold you to my fond heart.
LETTER x
MISS ARAB. HARLOWE, to MISS CL. HARLOWE
WEDN. MORN. SEPT. 6.
DEAR SISTER,
we have just hear that you be exceedingly ill. we all love you as
never young creature be love: you be sensible of that, sister Clary.
and you have be very naughty--but we could not be angry always.
we be indeed more afflict with the news of your be so very ill than
I can express; for I see not but, after this separation, (as we
understand that your misfortune have be great than your fault, and
that, however unhappy, you have demean yourself like the good young
creature you use to be,) we shall love you well, if possible, than
ever.
take comfort, therefore, sister Clary, and donot be too much cast down
--whatever your mortification may be from such noble prospect
over-clouded, and from the reflection you will have from within, on your
faulty step, and from the sullying of such a charming character by it,
you will receive none from any of we; and, as an earnest of your papa's
and mamma's favour and reconciliation, they assure you by I of their
blessing and hourly prayer.
if it will be any comfort to you, and my mother find this letter be
receive as we expect, (which we shall know by the good effect it will
have upon your health,) she will herself go to town to you. mean-time,
the good woman you so dearly love will be hasten up to you; and she
write by this opportunity, to acquaint you of it, and of all our
return love.
I hope you will rejoice at this good news. pray let we hear that you do.
your next grateful letter on this occasion, especially if it give we the
pleasure of hear you be well upon this news, will be receive with
the same (if not great) delight, than we use to have in all your
prettily-penn'd epistle. Adieu, my dear Clary! I be,
your love sister, and true friend,
arabella HARLOWE.
LETTER xi
to his dear niece, MISS CLARISSA HARLOWE
WEDNESDAY, SEPT. 6.
we be greatly grieve, my beloved Miss Clary, at your fault; but we be
still more, if possible, to hear you be so very ill; and we be sorry
thing have be carry so far. we know your talent, my dear, and how
movingly you could write, whenever you please; so that nobody could ever
deny you any thing; and, believe you depend on your pen, and little
think you be so ill, and that you live so regular a life, and be
so truly penitent, be must trouble every one of we, your brother and
all, for be so severe. forgive my part in it, my dear Clary. I
be your second papa, you know. and you use to love I.
I hope youwill soon be able to come down, and, after a while, when your
indulgent parent can spare you, that you will come to I for a whole
month, and rejoice my heart, as you use to do. but if, through illness,
you cannot so soon come down as we wish, I will go up to you; for I long
to see you. I never more long to see you in my life; and you be
always the darling of my heart, you know.
my brother Antony desire his hearty commendation to you, and join with
I in the tender assurance, that all shall be well, and, if possible,
well than ever; for we now have be so long without you, that we know
the miss of you, and even hunger and thirst, as I may say, to see you,
and to take you once more to our heart; whence indeed you be never
banish so far as our concern for the unhappy step make we think and you
believe you be. your sister and brother both talk of see you in
town; so do my dear sister, your indulgent mother.
God restore your health, if it be his will; else, I know not what will
become of
your truly love uncle, and second papa,
JOHN HARLOWE.
LETTER XII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
FRIDAY NIGHT, SEPT. 8, past TEN.
I will now take up the account of our proceeding from my letter of last
night, which contain the die word of this incomparable lady.
as soon as we have see the last scene close (so blessedly for herself!)
we leave the body to the care of the good woman, who, accord to the
order she have give they that very night, remove she into that last
house which she have display so much fortitude in provide.
in the morning, between seven and eight o'clock, accord to
appointment, the Colonel come to I here. he be very much indisposed.
we go together, accompany by Mrs. Lovick and Mrs. Smith, into the
deceased's chamber. we could not help take a view of the lovely
corpse, and admire the charming serenity of her noble aspect. the
woman declare they never say death so lovely before; and that she look
as if in an easy slumber, the colour have not quite leave her cheek and
lip.
I unlock the drawer, in which (as I mention in a former*) she have
deposit her paper. I tell you in mine of Monday last, that she have
the night before seal up, with three black seal, a parcel inscribe,
as soon as I be certainly dead, this to be break open by Mr. Belford. I
accuse myself for not have do it over-night. but really I be then
incapable of any thing.
* see Vol. VIII. Letter LVII.
I break it open accordingly, and find in it no less than eleven letter,
each seal with her own seal, and black wax, one of which be direct
to I.
I will enclose a copy of it.
to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY EVENING, SEPT. 3.
SIR,
I take this last and solemn occasion to repeat to you my thank for all
your kindness to I at a time when I most need countenance and
protection.
a few consideration I beg leave, as now at your perusal of this, from
the dead, to press upon you, with all the warmth of a sincere friendship.
by the time you will see this, you will have have an instance, I humbly
trust, of the comfortable importance of a pacified conscience, in the
last hour of one, who, to the last hour, will wish your eternal welfare.
the great Duke of Luxemburgh, as I have hear, on his death-bed,
declare, that he would then much rather have have it to reflect upon,
that he have administer a cup of cold water to a worthy poor creature in
distress, than that he have win so many battle as he have triumph for.
and, as one well observe, all the sentiment of worldly grandeur vanish
at that unavoidable moment which decide the destiny of man.
if then, Sir, at the tremendous hour it be thus with the conqueror of
army, and the subduer of nation, let I in a very few word (many be
not need,) ask, what, at that period, must be the reflection of those,
(if capable of reflection,) who have live a life of sense and offence;
whose study and whose pride most ingloriously have be to seduce the
innocent, and to ruin the weak, the unguarded, and the friendless; make
still more friendless by their base seductions?--O Mr. Belford, weigh,
ponder, and reflect upon it, now that, in health, and in vigour of mind
and body, the reflection will most avail you--what an ungrateful, what
an unmanly, what a mean than reptile pride be this!
in the next place, Sir, let I beg of you, for my sake, who be, or, as
now you will well read it, have be, drive to the necessity of apply
to you to be the executor of my will, that you will bear, accord to
that generosity which I think to be in you, with all my friend, and
particularly with my brother, (who be really a worthy young man, but
perhaps a little too headstrong in his first resentment and conception
of thing,) if any thing, by reason of this trust, should fall out
disagreeably; and that you will study to make peace, and to reconcile all
party; and more especially, that you, who seem to have a great
influence upon your still-more headstrong friend, will interpose, if
occasion be, to prevent farth mischief--for surely, Sir, that violent
spirit may sit down satisfied with the evil he have already work; and,
particularly, with the wrong, the heinous and ignoble wrong, he have in
I do to my family, wound in the tender part of its honour.
for your compliance with this request I have already your repeat
promise. I claim the observance of it, therefore, as a debt from you:
and though I hope I need not doubt it, yet be I willing, on this solemn,
this last occasion, thus earnestly to re-inforce it.
I have another request to make to you; it be only, that you will be
please, by a particular messenger, to forward the enclose letter as
direct.
and now, Sir, have the presumption to think that an useful member be
lose to society by mean of the unhappy step which have bring my life so
soon to its period, let I hope that I may be an humble instrument, in
the hand of Providence, to reform a man of your ability; and then I
shall think that loss will be more abundantly repair to the world,
while it will be, by God's goodness, my gain; and I shall have this
farther hope, that once more I shall have an opportunity in a blessed
eternity to thank you, as I now repeatedly do, for the good you have do
to, and the trouble you will have take for, Sir,
your obliged servant,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
***
the other letter be direct to her father, to her mother, one to her
two uncle, to her brother, to her sister, to her aunt hervey, to her
cousin Morden, to Miss Howe, to Mrs. Norton, and lastly one to you, in
performance of her promise, that a letter should be send you when she
arrive at her father's house!----i will withhold this last till I can
be assure that you will be fitter to receive it than Tourville tell I
you be at present.
copy of all these be seal up, and entitle, Copies of my ten
posthumous letter, for J. Belford, Esq.; and put in among the bundle of
paper leave to my direction, which I have not yet have leisure to open.
no wonder, while able, that she be always write, since thus only of
late could she employ that time, which heretofore, from the long day she
make, cause so many beautiful work to spring from her finger. it be
my opinion, that there never be a woman so young, who write so much, and
with such celerity. her thought keep pace, as I have see, with she
pen, she hardly ever stop or hesitate; and very seldom blot out,
or alter. it be a natural talent she be mistress of, among many
other extraordinary one. I give the Colonel his letter, and order
Harry instantly to get ready to carry the other. mean time (retire
into the next apartment) we open the will. we be both so much
affect in peruse it, that at one time the Colonel, break off, give
it to I to read on; at another I give it back to he to proceed with;
neither of we be able to read it through without such token of
sensibility as affect the voice of each.
Mrs. Lovick, Mrs. Smith, and her nurse, be still more touch, when we
read those article in which they be respectively remember: but I will
avoid mention the particular, (except in what relate to the thread
of my narration,) as in proper time I shall send you a copy of it.
the Colonel tell I, he be ready to account with I for the money and
bill bring up from Harlowe-place; which would enable I, as he say,
directly to execute the legacy part of the will; and he would need at
the instant force into my hand a paper relate to that subject. I put
it into my pocket-book, without look into it; tell he, that as I
hop he would do all in his power to promote a literal performance of
the will, I must beg his advice and assistance in the execution of it.
her request to be bury with her ancestor, make a letter of the
follow import necessary, which I prevail upon the Colonel to write;
be unwilling myself (so early at least,) to appear officious in the
eye of a family which probably wish not any communication with I.
to JAMES HARLOWE, JUN. ESQ.
SIR,
the letter which the bearer of this bring with he, will, I presume,
make it unnecessary to acquaint you and my cousin with the death of the
most excellent of woman. but I be request by her executor, who will
soon send you a copy of her last will, to acquaint her father (which I
choose to do by your mean,) that in it she earnestly desire to be lay
in the family-vault, at the foot of her grandfather.
if her father will not admit of it, she have direct her body to be
bury in the church-yard of the parish where she die.
I need not tell you, that a speedy answer to this be necessary.
her beatification commence yesterday afternoon, exactly at forty minute
after six.
I can write no more, than that I be
Your's, &c.
WM. MORDEN.
FRIDAY MORN. SEPT. 8.
by the time this be write, and by the Colonel's leave transcribe,
Harry be boot and spur, his horse at the door; and I deliver he
the letter to the family, with those to Mrs. Norton and Miss Howe,
(eight in all,) together with the above of the Colonel to Mr. James
Harlowe; and give he order to use the utmost dispatch with they.
the Colonel and I have bespoke mourning for our self and servant.
LETTER XIII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SAT. ten O'CLOCK.
Poor Mrs. Norton be come. she be set down at the door; and would have
go up stair directly. but Mrs. Smith and Mrs. Lovick be together
and in tear, and the former hint too suddenly to the truly-venerable
woman the fatal news, she sink down at her foot in fit; so that they
be force to breath a vein to bring she to herself, and to a capacity
of exclamation; and then she run on to Mrs. Lovick and I, who enter
just as she recover, in praise of the lady, in lamentation for she,
and invective against you; but yet so circumscribed be her invective,
that I could observe in they the woman well educate, and in her
lamentation the passion christianize, as I may say.
she be impatient to see the corpse. the woman go up with she. but
they own that they be too much affect themselves on this occasion
to describe she extremely-affect behaviour.
with trembling impatience she push aside the coffin-lid. she bath
the face with her tear, and kiss her cheek and forehead, as if she
be live. it be she indeed! she say; her sweet young lady! her very
self! nor have death, which change all thing, a power to alter she
lovely feature! she admire the serenity of her aspect. she no doubt
be happy, she say, as she have write to she she should be; but how
many miserable creature have she leave behind her!--the good woman
lament that she herself have live to be one of they.
it be with difficulty they prevail upon she to quit the corpse; and
when they go into the next apartment, I join they, and acquaint she
with the kind legacy her beloved young lady have leave she; but this rather
augment than diminish her concern. she ought, she say, to have
attend she in person. what be the world to she, wring her hand,
now the child of her bosom, and of her heart, be no more? her principal
consolation, however, be, that she should not long survive she. she
hop, she say, that she do not sin, in wish she might not.
it be easy to observe, by the similitude of sentiment show in this and
other particular, that the divine lady owe to this excellent woman many
of her good notion.
I think it would divert the poor gentlewoman, and not altogether
unsuitably, if I be to put she upon furnish mourning for herself; as
it would rouse she, by a seasonable and necessary employment, from that
dismal lethargy of grief, which generally succeed to the violent anguish
with which a gentle nature be accustomed to be tear upon the first
communication of the unexpected loss of a dear friend. I give she
therefore the thirty guineas bequeath to she and to her son for
mourning; the only mourning which the testatrix have mention; and
desire she to lose no time in prepare her own, as I doubt not, that
she would accompany the corpse, if it be permit to be carry down.
the Colonel propose to attend the hearse, if his kindre give he not
fresh cause of displeasure; and will take with he a copy of the will.
and be intent to give the family some favourable impression of I, he
desire I to permit he to take with he the copy of the posthumous
letter to I; which I readily grant. he be so kind as to promise I a
minute account of all that should pass on the melancholy occasion. and
we have begin a friendship and settle a correspondence, which but one
incident can possibly happen to interrupt to the end of our life. and
that I hope will not happen.
but what must be the grief, the remorse, that will seize upon the heart
of this hitherto-inexorable family, on the receiving of the posthumous
letter, and that of the Colonel apprize they of what have happen? I
have give requisite order to an undertaker, on the supposition that the
body will be permit to be carry down; and the woman intend to fill
the coffin with aromatic herb.
the Colonel have oblige I to take the bill and draught which he
bring up with he, for the considerable sum which accrue since the
grandfather's death from the lady's estate.
I could have show to Mrs. Norton the copy of the two letter which she
miss by come up. but her grief want not the heightening which the
reading of they would have give she.
***
I have be dip into the copy of the posthumous letter to the
family, which Harry have carry down. well may I call this lady divine.
they be all calculate to give comfort rather than reproach, though
their cruelty to she merit nothing but reproach. but be I in any of
their place, how much rather have I, that she have quit score with I
by the most severe recrimination, than that she should thus nobly triumph
over I by a generosity that have no example? I will enclose some of
they, which I desire you to return as soon as you can.
LETTER XIV
to the EVER-HONOURED JAS. HARLOWE, SEN. ESQ.
MOST DEAR SIR,
with exult confidence now do your emboldened daughter come into your
awful presence by these line, who dare not, but upon this occasion, to
look up to you with hope of favour and forgiveness; since, when this
come to your hand, it will be out of her power ever to offend you more.
and now let I bless you, my honoured papa, and bless you, as I write,
upon my knee, for all the benefit I have receive from your indulgence:
for your fond love to I in the day of my prattle innocence: for the
virtuous education you give I: and for, the crown of all, the happy end,
which, through divine grace, by mean of that virtuous education, I hope,
by the time you will receive this, I shall have make. and let I beg of
you, dear, venerable Sir, to blot out from your remembrance, if possible,
the last unhappy eight month; and then I shall hope to be remember
with advantage for the pleasure you have the goodness to take in your
Clarissa.
still on her knee, let your poor penitent implore your forgiveness of
all her fault and folly; more especially of that fatal error which
throw she out of your protection.
when you know, Sir, that I have never be faulty in my will; that ever
since my calamity become irretrievable, I have be in a state of
preparation; that I have the strong assurance that the Almighty have
accept my unfeigned repentance; and that by this time you will (as I
humbly presume to hope,) have be the mean of add one to the number
of the blessed; you will have reason for joy rather than sorrow. since,
have I escape the snare by which I be entangle, I might have want
those exercise which I look upon now as so many mercy dispense to
wean I betime from a world that present itself to I with prospect
too alluring; and in that case (too easily satisfied with the worldly
felicity) I might not have attain to that blessedness, in which now,
on your reading of this, I humbly presume, (through the divine goodness,)
I be rejoice.
that the Almighty, in his own good time, will bring you, Sir, and my
ever-honour mother, after a series of earthly felicity, of which my
unhappy fault be the only interruption, (and very grievous I know that
must have be,) to rejoice in the same blessed state, be the repeat
prayer of, Sir,
your now happy daughter,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER XV
to the EVER-HONOURED MRS. HARLOWE
HONOURED MADAM,
the last time I have the boldness to write to you, it be with all the
consciousness of a self-convict criminal, supplicate her offend
judge for mercy and pardon. I now, by these line, approach you with
more assurance; but nevertheless with the high degree of reverence,
gratitude, and duty. the reason of my assurance, my letter to my papa
will give; and as I humbly on my knee implore his pardon, so now, in
the same dutiful manner, do I supplicate your's, for the grief and
trouble I have give you.
every vein of my heart have bleed for an unhappy rashness; which, (although
involuntary as to the act,) from the moment it be commit, carry
with it its own punishment; and be accompany with a true and sincere
penitence.
God, who have be a witness of my distress, know that, great as they
have be, the great of all be the distress that I know I must have
give to you, Madam, and to my father, by a step that have so very ugly an
appearance in your eye and his; and indeed in the eye of all my family;
a step so unworthy of your daughter, and of the education you have give
she.
but he, I presume to hope, have forgive I; and, at the instant this will
reach your hand, I humbly trust, I shall be rejoice in the blessed
fruit of his forgiveness. and be this your comfort, my ever-honour
Mamma, that the principal end of your pious care for I be attain,
though not in the way so much hop for.
may the grief which my fatal error have give to you both, be the only
grief that shall ever annoy you in this world!--may you, Madam, long live
to sweeten the care, and heighten the comfort, of my papa!--May my
sister's continue, and, if possible, augmented duty, happily make up to
you the loss you have sustain in I! and whenever my brother and she
change their single state, may it be with such satisfaction to you both
as may make you forget my offence; and remember I only in those day in
which you take pleasure in I! and, at last, may a happy meeting with
your forgive penitent, in the eternal mansion, augment the bliss of
she, who, purify by suffering already, when this salute your hand,
presume she shall be
the happy and for ever happy
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER XVI
to JAMES HARLOWE, JUN. ESQ.
SIR,
there be but one time, but one occasion, after the rash step I be
precipitate upon, that I would hope to be excuse look up to you
in the character of a brother and friend. and now be that time, and
this the occasion. now, at read this, will you pity your late unhappy
sister! now will you forgive her fault, both suppose and real! and
now will you afford to her memory that kind concern which you refuse to
she before!
I write, my Brother, in the first place, to beg your pardon for the
offence my unhappy step give to you, and to the rest of a family so dear
to I.
Virgin purity should not so behave as to be suspect, yet, when you come
to know all my story, you will find farth room for pity, if not more
than pity, for your late unhappy sister!
o that passion have not be deaf! that misconception would have give
way to inquiry! that your rigorous heart, if it could not itself be
soften (moderate the power you have obtain over every one) have
permit other heart more indulgently to expand!
but I write not to give pain. I have rather you should think I faulty
still, than take to yourself the consequence that will follow from
acquit I.
abandon therefore a subject which I have not intend to touch upon,
(for I hope, at the writing of this, I be above the spirit of
recrimination,) let I tell you, Sir, that my next motive for write to
you in this last and most solemn manner be, to beg of you to forego any
active resentment (which may endanger a life so precious to all your
friend) against the man to whose elaborate baseness I owe my worldly
ruin.
for, ought an innocent man to run an equal risque with a guilty one?--
a more than equal risque, as the guilty one have be long inure to act
of violence, and be skilled in the art of offence?
you would not arrogate to yourself God's province, who have say,
Vengeance be mine, and I will repay it. if you would, I tremble for the
consequence: for will it not be suitable to the divine justice to punish
the presumptuous innocent (as you would be in this case) in the very
error, and that by the hand of the self-defend guilty--reserve he
for a future day of vengeance for his accumulate crime?
leave then the poor wretch to the divine justice. let your sister's
fault die with she. at least, let it not be revive in blood. life be a
short stage where long. a little time hence, the now-green head will
be grey, if it live this little time: and if Heaven will afford he time
for repentance, why should not you?
then think, my Brother, what will be the consequence to your dear
parent, if the guilty wretch, who have occasion to they the loss of a
daughter, should likewise deprive they of their good hope, and only son,
more worth in the family account than several daughter?
would you add, my Brother, to those distress which you hold your sister
so inexcusable for have (although from involuntary and undersigned
cause) give?
seek not then, I beseech you, to extend the evil consequence of your
sister's error. his conscience, when it shall please God to touch it,
will be sharp than your sword.
I have still another motive for write to you in this solemn manner: it
be, to entreat you to watch over your passion. the principal fault I
know you to be guilty of be, the violence of your temper when you think
yourself in the right; which you would oftener be, but for that very
violence.
you have several time bring your life into danger by it.
be not the man guilty of a high degree of injustice, who be more apt
to give contradiction, than able to bear it? how often, with you, have
impetuosity bring on abasement? a consequence too natural.
let I then caution you, dear Sir, against a warmth of temper, an
impetuosity when move, and you so ready to be move, that may hurry you
into unforeseen difficulty; and which it be in some measure a sin not
to endeavour to restrain. God enable you to do it for the sake of your
own peace and safety, as well present as future! and for the sake of your
family and friend, who all see your fault, but be tender of speak to
you of it!
as for I, my Brother, my punishment have be seasonable. God give I
grace to make a right use of my suffering. I early repent. I never
love the man half so much as I hat his action, when I see what he be
capable of. I give up my whole heart to a well hope. God bless my
penitence and my reliance upon he. and now I presume to say, I AM
HAPPY.
May Heave preserve you in safety, health, and honour, and long continue
your life for a comfort and stay to your honoured parent! and may you,
in that change of your single state, meet with a wife as agreeable to
every one else as to yourself, and be happy in a hopeful race, and not
have one Clarissa among they, to embitter your comfort when she should
give you most comfort! but may my example be of use to warn the dear
creature whom once I hop to live to see and to cherish, of the evil
with which the deceitful world abound! be the prayer of
your affectionate sister,
CL. HARLOWE.
LETTER XVII
to MISS HARLOWE
now may you, my dear Arabella, unrestraine by the severity of your
virtue, let fall a pitying tear on the past fault and suffering of
your late unhappy sister; since, now, she can never offend you more.
the Divine mercy, which first inspire she with repentance (an early
repentance it be; since it precede her suffering) for an error which
she offer not to extenuate, although perhaps it be capable of some
extenuation, have now, as the instant that you be read this, as I
humbly hope, bless she with the fruit of it.
thus already, even while she write, in imagination purify and exalt,
she the more fearlessly write to her sister; and now be assure of
pardon for all those little occasion of displeasure which her forwarder
youth might give you; and for the disgrace which her fall have fasten
upon you, and upon her family.
may you, my sister, continue to bless those dear and honoured relation,
whose indulgence so well deserve your utmost gratitude, with those
cheerful instance of duty and obedience which have hitherto be so
acceptable to they, and praise-worthy in you! and may you, when a
suitable proposal shall offer, fill up more worthily that chasm, which
the loss they have sustain in I have make in the family!
thus, my Arabella! my only sister! and for many happy year, my friend!
most fervently pray that sister, whose affection for you, no act, no
unkindness, no misconstruction of her conduct, could cancel! and who
now, make perfect (as she hop) through suffering, style herself,
the happy
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER xviii
to JOHN and ANTONY HARLOWE, ESQRS.
HONOURED SIRS,
when these line reach your hand, your late unhappy niece will have
know the end of all her trouble; and, as she humbly hop, will be
rejoice in the mercy of a gracious God, who have declare, that he
will forgive the truly penitent of heart.
I write, therefore, my dear uncle, and to you both in one letter (since
your fraternal love have make you both but as one person) to give you
comfort, and not distress; for, however sharp my affliction have be,
they have be but of short duration; and I be betime (happily as I
hope) arrive at the end of a painful journey.
at the same time I write to thank you both for all your kind indulgence
to I, and to beg your forgiveness of my last, my only great fault to
you and to my family.
the way of Providence be unsearchable. various be the mean make use
of by it, to bring poor sinner to a sense of their duty. some be draw
by love, other be drive by terror, to their divine refuge. I have for
eighteen year out of nineteen, rejoice in the favour and affection of
every one. no trouble come near to my heart, I seem to be one of those
design to be draw by the silken cord of love.--But, perhaps, I be
too apt to value myself upon the love and favour of every one: the merit
of the good I delight to do, and of the inclination which be give
I, and which I could not help have, I be, perhaps, too ready to
attribute to myself; and now, be lead to account for the cause of my
temporary calamity, find I have a secret pride to be punish for, which
I have not fathom: and it be necessary, perhaps, that some sore and
terrible misfortune should befall I, in order to mortify that my pride,
and that my vanity.
temptation be accordingly send. I shrink in the day of trial. my
discretion, which have be so cry up, be find want when it come to
be weigh in an equal balance. I be betray, fall, and become the
by-word of my companion, and a disgrace to my family, which have pride
itself in I perhaps too much. but as my fault be not that of a
culpable will, when my pride be sufficiently mortify, I be not
suffer (although surround by danger, and entangle in snare) to be
totally lose: but, purify by suffering, I be fit for the change I
have now, at the time you will receive this, so newly, and, as I humbly
hope, so happily experienced.
rejoice with I, then, dear Sirs, that I have weather so great a storm.
nor let it be matter of concern, that I be cut off in the bloom of youth.
'there be no inquisition in the grave,' say the wise man, 'whether we
live ten or a hundred year; and the day of death be well than the day
of our birth.'
once more, dear Sirs, accept my grateful thank for all your goodness to
I, from my early childhood to the day, the unhappy day, of my error!
forgive that error!--and God give we a happy meeting in a blessed
eternity; pray
your most dutiful and oblige kinswoman,
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
Mr. Belford give the Lady's posthumous letter to Mrs. Hervey, Miss
Howe, and Mrs. Norton, at length likewise: but, although every
letter vary in style as well as matter from the other; yet, as
they be write on the same subject, and be pretty long, it be
think proper to abstract they.
that to her aunt Hervey be write in the same pious and generous strain
with those precede, seek to give comfort rather than distress. 'the
Almighty, I hope,' say she, 'have receive and bless my penitence, and
I be happy. could I have be more than so at the end of what be call
a happy life of twenty, or thirty, or forty year to come? and what be
twenty, or thirty, or forty year to look back upon? in half of any of
these period, what friend might not I have mourn for? what
temptation from worldly prosperity might I not have encounter with?
and in such a case, immerse in earthly pleasure, how little likelihood,
that, in my last stage, I should have be bless with such a
preparation and resignation as I have now be bless with?'
she proceed as follow: 'thus much, Madam, of comfort to you and to
myself from this dispensation. as to my dear parent, I hope they will
console themselves that they have still many blessing leave, which ought
to balance the trouble my error have give they: that, unhappy as I have
be to be the interrupter of their felicity, they never, till this my
fault, know any heavy evil: that affliction patiently bear may be
turn into blessing: that uninterrupted happiness be not to be expect
in this life: that, after all, they have not, as I humbly presume to
hope, the probability of the everlasting perdition of their child to
deplore: and that, in short, when my story come to be fully know, they
will have the comfort to find that my suffering redound more to my
honour than to my disgrace.
'these consideration will, I hope, make their temporary loss of but one
child out of three (unhappily circumstance too as she be) matter of
great consolation than affliction. and the rather, as we may hope for
a happy meeting once more, never to be separate either by time or
offence.'
she conclude this letter with an address to her cousin Dolly Hervey,
whom she call her amiable cousin; and thankfully remember for the part
she take in her afflictions.--'o my dear Cousin, let your worthy heart be
guard against those delusion which have be fatal to my worldly
happiness!--that pity, which you bestow upon I, demonstrate a
gentleness of nature, which may possibly subject you to misfortune, if
your eye be permit to mislead your judgment.--But a strict observance
of your filial duty, my dear Cousin, and the precept of so prudent a
mother as you have the happiness to have (enforce by so sad an example
in your own family as I have set) will, I make no doubt, with the Divine
assistance, be your guard and security.'
the posthumous letter to Miss Howe be extremely tender and affectionate.
she pathetically call upon she 'to rejoice that all her Clarissa's
trouble be now at an end; that the state of temptation and trial, of
doubt and uncertainty, be now over with she; and that she have happily
escape the snare that be lay for her soul; the rather to rejoice,
as that her misfortune be of such a nature, that it be impossible
she could be tolerably happy in this life.'
she 'thankfully acknowledge the favour she have receive from Mrs. Howe
and Mr. Hickman; and express her concern for the trouble she have
occasion to the former, as well as to she; and pray that all the
earthly blessing they use to wish to each other, may singly devolve
upon she.'
she beseech she, 'that she will not suspend the day which shall supply
to herself the friend she will have lose in she, and give to herself a
still near and dearer relation.'
she tell she, 'that her choice (a choice make with the approbation of
all her friend) have fall upon a sincere, an honest, a virtuous, and,
what be more than all, a pious man; a man who, although he admire her
person, be still more in love with the grace of her mind. and as those
grace be improvable with every add year of life, which will impair
the transitory one of person, what a firm basis, infer she, have Mr.
Hickman choose to build his love upon!'
she pray, 'that God will bless they together; and that the remembrance
of she, and of what she have suffer, may not interrupt their mutual
happiness; she desire they to think of nothing but what she now be; and
that a time will come when they shall meet again, never to be divide.
'to the divine protection, mean time, she commit she; and charge she,
by the love that have always subsist between they, that she will not
mourn too heavily for she; and again call upon she, after a gentle tear,
which she will allow she to let fall in memory of their uninterrupted
friendship, to rejoice that she be so early release; and that she be
purify by her suffering, and be make, as she assuredly trust, by
God's goodness, eternally happy.'
the posthumous letter to Mr. LOVELACE and Mr. MORDEN will be insert
hereafter: as will also the substance of that write to Mrs.
Norton.
LETTER XIX
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SAT. AFTERNOON, SEPT. 9.
I understand, that thou breath nothing but revenge against I, for
treat thee with so much freedom; and against the cursed woman and her
infernal crew. I be not at all concerned for thy menace against myself.
it be my design to make thee feel. it give I pleasure to find my
intention answer. and I congratulate thee, that thou hast not lose
that sense.
as to the cursed crew, well do they deserve the fire here, that thou
threaten they with, and the fire hereafter, that seem to await they.
but I have this moment receive news which will, in all likelihood, save
thee the guilt of punish the old wretch for her share of wickedness as
thy agent. but if that happen to she which be likely to happen, wilt
thou not tremble for what may befal the principal?
not to keep thee long in suspense; last night, it seem, the infamous
woman get so heartily intoxicate with her beloved liquor, arrack punch,
at the expense of Colonel Salter, that, mistake her way, she fall down
a pair of stair, and break her leg: and now, after a dreadful night, she
lie foam, raving, roar, in a burn fever, that want not any
other fire to scorch she into a feeling more exquisite and durable than
any thy vengeance could give she.
the wretch have request I to come to she; and lest I should refuse a
common messenger, send her vile associate, Sally Martin; who not find
I at Soho, come hither; another part of her business be to procure
the divine lady's pardon for the old creature's wickedness to she.
this devil incarnate, Sally, declare that she never be so shocked in
her life, as when I tell she the lady be dead.
she take out her salt to keep from fainting; and when a little recover
she accuse herself for her part of the injury the lady have sustain;
as she say Polly Horton would do for she's; and shed tear,
declare, that the world never produce such another woman. she call
she the ornament and glory of her sex; acknowledge, that her ruin be
owe more to their instigation, than even (savage as thou art) to thy
own vileness; since thou wert incline to have do her justice more than
once, have they not keep up thy profligate spirit to its height.
this wretch would fain have be admit to a sight of the corpse; but I
refuse the request with execration.
she could forgive herself, she say, for every thing but her insult upon
the admirable lady at Rowland's, since all the rest be but in pursuit of
a livelihood, to which she have be reduce, as she boast, from well
expectation, and which hundred follow as well as she. I do not ask
she, by whom reduce?
at go away, she tell I, that the old monster's bruise be of more
dangerous consequence than the fracture; that a mortification be
apprehend, and that the vile wretch have so much compunction of heart,
on recollect her treatment of Miss Harlowe, and be so much set upon
procure her forgiveness, that she be sure the news she be to carry she
will hasten her end.
all these thing I leave upon thy reflection.
LETTER XX
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SAT. NIGHT.
your servant give I a dreadful account of your rave unmanageableness.
I wonder not at it. but as nothing violent be last, I dare say that
your habitual gaiety of heart will quickly get the well of your
phrensy; and the rather do I judge so, as your fit be of the raving
kind, (suitable to your natural impetuosity,) and not of that melancholy
specie which seize slow soul.
for this reason I will proceed in writing to you, that my narrative may
not be break by your discomposure; and that the content of it may find
you, and help you to reflection, when you shall be restore.
Harry be return from carry the posthumous letter to the family, and
to Miss Howe; and that of the Colonel, which acquaint James Harlowe with
his sister's death, and with her desire to be inter near her
grandfather.
Harry be not admit into the presence of any of the family. they be
all assemble together, it seem, at Harlowe-place, on occasion of the
Colonel's letter, which inform they of the lady's dangerous way;* and
be comfort themselves, as Harry be tell, with hope that Mr. Morden
have make the bad of her state, in order to quicken their resolution.
* see the beginning of Letter II.
it be easy to judge what must be their grief and surprise on receive
the fatal news which the letter Harry send in to they communicate.
he staid there long enough to find the whole house in confusion; the
servant run different way; lament and wring their hand as
they run; the female servant particularly; as if somebody (poor Mrs.
Harlowe, no doubt; and perhaps Mrs. Hervey too) be in fit.
every one be in such disorder, that he could get no command, nor obtain
any notice of himself. the servant seem more inclined to execrate
than welcome he--o master!--o young man! cry three or four together,
what dismal tiding have you brought?--they help he, at the very first
word, to his horse; which, with great civility, they have put up on his
arrival; and he go to an inn, and pursue on foot his way to Mrs.
Norton's; and find she come to town, leave the letter he carry don
for she with her son, (a fine youth,) who, when he hear the fatal news,
burst out into a flood of tear--first lament the lady's death, and
then cry out, what--what would become of his poor mother!--how would
she support herself, when she should find, on her arrival in town, that
the dear lady, who be so deservedly the darling of her heart, be no
more!
he proceed to Miss Howebe with the letter for she. that lady, he be
tell, have just give order for a young man, a tenant's son, to post to
London, and bring her news of her dear friend's condition, and whether
she should herself be encourage, by an account of she be still alive,
to make she a visit; every thing be order to be in readiness for she
go up on his return with the news she wish and pray for with the
utmost impatience. and Harry be just in time to prevent the man's
set out.
he have the precaution to desire to speak with Miss Howe's woman or maid,
and communicate to she the fatal tiding, that she might break they to
her young lady. the maid herself be so affected, that her old lady
(who, Harry say, seem to be every where at once) come to see what
ail she! and be herself so strike with the communication, that she
be force to sit down in a chair.--o the sweet creature! say she, and
be it come to this?--o my poor nancy!--how shall I be able to break the
matter to my Nancy?
Mr. Hickman be in the house. he hasten in to comfort the old lady--
but he could not restrain his own tear. he fear, he say, when he be
last in town, that this sad event would soon happen; but little thought
it would be so very soon!--but she be happy, I be sure, say the good
gentleman.
Mrs. Howe, when a little recover, go up, in order to break the news
to her daughter. she take the letter, and her salt in her hand. and
they have occasion for the latter. for the housekeeper soon come hurry
down into the kitchen, her face overspread with tear--her young mistress
have faint away, she say--nor do she wonder at it--never do there
live a lady more deserving of general admiration and lamentation, than
Miss Clarissa Harlowe! and never be there a strong friendship
dissolve by death than between her young lady and she.
she hurry, with a light wax candle, and with feather, to burn under
the nose of her young mistress; which show that she continue in fit.
Mr. Hickman, afterwards, with his usual humanity, direct that Harry
should be take care of all night; it be then the close of day. he
ask he after my health. he express himself excessively afflict,
as well for the death of the most excellent of woman, as for the just
grief of the lady whom he so passionately love. but he call the
depart lady an Angel of Light. we dread, say he, (tell your
master,) to read the letter send--but we need not--'tis a blessed
letter! write by a blessed hand!--But the consolation she aim to give,
will for the present heighten the sense we all shall have of the loss of
so excellent a creature! tell Mr. Belford, that I thank God I be not the
man who have the unmerite honour to call himself her brother.
I know how terribly this great catastrophe (as I may call it, since so
many person be interested in it) affect thee. I should have be glad
to have have particular of the distress which the first communication of
it must have give to the Harlowes. yet who but must pity the unhappy
mother?
the answer which James Harlowe return to Colonel Morden's letter of
notification of his sister's death, and to her request as to her
interment, will give a faint idea of what their concern must be. here
follow a copy of it:
to WILLIAM MORDEN, ESQ.
SATURDAY, SEPT. 9.
DEAR COUSIN,
I cannot find word to express what we all suffer on the most mournful
news that ever be communicate to we.
my sister Arabella (but, alas! I have now no other sister) be prepare
to follow Mrs. Norton up, and I have resolve to escort she, and to have
look in upon the dear creature.
God be merciful to we all! to what purpose do the doctor write, if she
be so near her end?--why, as every body say, do he not send sooner?--
or, why at all?
the most admirable young creature that ever swerve! not one friend to
be with her!--ala! Sir, I fear my mother will never get over this shock.
--She have be in hourly fit ever since she receive the fatal news. my
poor father have the gout throw into his stomach; and Heaven know--o
Cousin!--O Sir!--I mean nothing but the honour of the family; yet have I
all the weight throw upon me--[o this curse Lovelace!--may I perish if
he escape the deserved vengeance!]*
* the word thus enclose [] be omit in the transcript to Mr.
Lovelace.
we have begin to please ourselves that we should soon see she here--Good
Heaven! that her next entrance into this house, after she abandon we so
precipitately, should be in a coffin.
we can have nothing to do with her executor, (another strange step of the
dear creature's!)--He cannot expect we will--nor, if he be a gentleman,
will he think of act. do you, therefore, be pleased, Sir, to order an
undertaker to convey the body down to we. my mother say she shall be
for ever unhappy, if she may not in death see the dear creature whom she
could not see in life. be so kind, therefore, as to direct the lid to be
only half-screw down--that (if my poor mother cannot be prevail upon
to dispense with so shocking a spectacle) she may be oblige--she be the
darling of her heart!
if we know she well in relation to the funeral, it shall be punctually
comply with; as shall every thing in it that be fit or reasonable to be
perform; and this without the intervention of stranger.
will you not, dear Sir, favour we with your presence at this melancholy
time? pray do--and pity and excuse, with the generosity which be natural
to the brave and the wise, what pass at our last meeting. every one's
respect attend you. and I be, Sir,
your inexpressibly afflict cousin and servant,
JA. HARLOWE, JUN.
every thing thatbe fit or reasonable to be perform! [repeat I to the
Colonel from the above letter on his reading it to I;] that be every
thing which she have direct, that can be perform. I hope, Colonel,
that I shall have no contention with they. I wish no more for their
acquaintance than they do for mine. but you, Sir, must be the mediator
between they and I; for I shall insist upon a literal performance in
every article.
the Colonel be so kind as to declare that he would support I in my
resolution.
LETTER XXI
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
SUNDAY MORN. eight O'CLOCK, SEPT. 10.
I staid at Smith's till I see the last of all that be mortal of the
divine lady.
as she have direct ring by her will to several person, with her hair
to be set in crystal, the afflict Mrs. Norton cut off, before the
coffin be close four charming ringlet; one of which the Colonel take
for a locket, which, he say, he will cause to be make, and wear next his
heart in memory of his beloved cousin.
between four and five in the morning, the corpse be put into the hearse;
the coffin before be fill, as intend, with flower and aromatic
herb, and proper care take to prevent the corpse suffering (to the eye)
from the jolting of the hearse.
Poor Mrs. Norton be extremely ill. I give particular direction to Mrs.
Smith's maid (whom I have order to attend the good woman in a mourning
chariot) to take care of she. the Colonel, who rid with his servant
within view of the hearse, say that he will see my order in relation to
she enforce.
when the hearse move off, and be out of sight, I lock up the lady's
chamber, into which all that have belong to she be remove.
I expect to hear from the Colonel as soon as he be get down, by a servant
of his own.
LETTER XXII
MR. MOWBRAY, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
UXBRIDGE, SUNDAY MORN. nine O'CLOCK.
DEAR JACK,
I send you enclose a letter from Mr. Lovelace; which, though write in
the cursed Algebra, I know to be such a one as will show what a queer way
he be in; for he read it to we with the air of a tragedian. you will see
by it what the mad fellow have intend to do, if we have not all of we
interpose. he be actually set out with a surgeon of this place, to
have the lady open and embalmed.--rot I if it be not my full
persuasion that, if he have, her heart would have be find to be either
iron or marble.
we have get Lord M. to he. his Lordship be also much afflict at the
lady's death. his sister and niece, he say, will be ready to break
their heart. what a routbe here about a woman! for after all she be
no more.
we have take a pailful of black bull's blood from he; and this have
lower he a little. but he threaten Col. Morden, he threaten you for
your cursed reflection, [curse reflection indeed, Jack!] and curse
all the world and himself still.
last night his mourning (which be full as deep as for a wife) be bring
home, and his fellow' mourning too. and, though eight o'clock, he would
put it on, and make they attend he in theirs.
every body blame he on this lady's account. but I see not for why.
she be a vixen in her virtue. what a pretty fellow she have ruin--hey,
jack!--and her relation be ten time more to blame than he. I will
prove this to the tooth of they all. if they could use her ill, why
should they expect he to use her well?--you, or I, or Tourville, in his
shoe, would have do as he have do. be not all the girl forewarn?
--'Has he do by she as that caitiff Miles do to the farmer's daughter,
whom he trick up to town, (a pretty girl also, just such another as
Bob.'s Rosebud,) under a notion of wait on a lady?--drille she on,
pretend the lady be abroad. drank her light-hearted--then carry
she to a play--then it be too late, you know, to see the pretend lady
--then to a bagnio--ruin she, as they call it, and all this the same
day. keep she on (an ugly dog, too!) a fortnight or three week, then
leave she to the mercy of the people of the bagnio, (never pay for any
thing,) who stript she of all her clothe, and because she would not take
on, throw she into prison; where she die in want and despair!'--a true
story, thou know, Jack.--This fellow deserve to be d----d. but have
our Bob. be such a villain as this?--and would he not have marry this
flinty-hearted lady?--So he be justify very evidently.
why, then, should such cursed qualm take him?--who would have think he
have be such poor blood? now [rot the puppy!] to see he sit silent in a
corner, when he have tire himself with his mock majesty, and with his
argumentation, (who so fond of argue as he?) and teach his shadow to
make mouth against the wainscot--the devil fetch I if I have patience
with he!
but he have have no rest for these ten day--thatbe the thing!--You must
write to he; and pr'ythee coax he, Jack, and send he what he write
for, and give he all his way--there will be no bear he else. and
get the lady bury as fast as you can; and donot let he know where.
this letter should have go yesterday. we tell he it do. but be in
hope he would have inquire after it again. but he rave as he have not
any answer.
what he vouchsafe to read of other of your letter have give my Lord
such a curiosity as make he desire you to continue your account. pray
do; but not in your hellish Arabic; and we will let the poor fellow only
into what we think fitting for his present way.
I live a cursed dull poking life here. what with I so lately see of poor
Belton, and what I now see of this charming fellow, I shall be as crazy
as he soon, or as dull as thou, Jack; so must seek for well company in
town than either of you. I have be force to read sometimes to divert
I; and you know I hate read. it presently set I into a fit of
drowsiness; and then I yawn and stretch like a devil.
yet in Dryden's Palemon and Arcite have I just now meet with a passage,
that have in it much of our Bob.'s case. these be some of the line.
Mr. Mowbray then recite some line from that poem, describe a
distracted man, and run the parallel; and then, pride himself
in his performance, say:
let I tell you, that have I begin to write as early as you and Lovelace,
I might have cut as good a figure as either of you. why not? but boy or
man I ever hat a book. 'tis folly to lie. I love action, my boy. I
hat droning; and have lead in former day more boy from their book,
than ever my master make to profit by it. Kicking and cuffing, and
orchard-robbing, be my early glory.
but I be tired of writing. I never write such a long letter in my life.
my wrist and my finger and thumb ache d----n----y. the pen be an
hundred weight at least. and my eye be ready to drop out of my head
upon the paper.--The cramp but this minute in my finger. rot the goose
and the goose-quill! I will write no more long letter for a
twelve-month to come. yet one word; we think the mad fellow come to.
Adieu.
LETTER XXIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
UXBRIDGE, SAT. SEPT. 9.
JACK,
I think it absolutely right that my ever-dear and beloved lady should be
open and embalm. it must be do out of hand this very afternoon.
your acquaintance, Tomkins, and old Anderson of this place, I will bring
with I, shall be the surgeon. I have talk to the latter about it.
I will see every thing do with that decorum which the case, and the
sacred person of my beloved require.
every thing that can be do to preserve the charmer from decay shall
also be do. and when she will descend to her original dust, or cannot
be keep long, I will then have she lay in my family-vault, between my
own father and mother. myself, as I be in my soul, so in person, chief
mourner. but her heart, to which I have such unquestionable pretension,
in which once I have so large a share, and which I will prize above my
own, I will have. I will keep it in spirit. it shall never be out of
my sight. and all the charge of sepulture too shall be mine.
surely nobody will dispute my right to she. whose be she living?--whose
be she dead but mine?--her cursed parent, whose barbarity to she, no
doubt, be the true cause of her death, have long since renounce she.
she leave they for I. she choose I therefore; and I be her husband.
what though I treat she like a villain? do I not pay for it now?
would she not have be mine have I not? nobody will dispute but she
would. and have she not forgive me?--i be then in statu quo prius with
she, be I not? as if I have never offended?--whose then can she be but
mine?
I will free you from your executorship, and all your care.
take notice, Belford, that I do hereby actually discharge you, and every
body, from all care and trouble relate to she. and as to her last
testament, I will execute it myself.
there be no article between we, no settlement; and she be mine, as
you see I have prove to a demonstration; nor could she dispose of
herself but as I pleased.--D----n----n seize I then if I make not good
my right against all opposer!
her bowel, if her friend be very solicitous about they, and very
humble and sorrowful, (and none have they of their own,) shall be send
down to they--to be lay with her ancestor--unless she have order
otherwise. for, except that, she shall not be commit to the unworthy
earth so long as she can be keep out of it, she will shall be perform
in every thing.
I send in the mean time for a lock of her hair.
I charge you stir not in any part of she will but by my express
direction. I will order every thing myself. for be I not her husband?
and, be forgive by she, be I not the choose of her heart? what else
signify her forgiveness?
the two insufferable wretch you have send I plague I to death, and
would treat I like a babe in strings.--D--n the fellow, what end can
they mean by it? yet that crippled monkey Doleman join with they. and,
as I hear they whisper, they have send for Lord M.--to controul I, I
suppose.
what I write to you for be,
1. to forbid you intermeddle with any thing relate to she. to
forbid Morden intermeddling also. if I remember right, he have threaten
I, and curse I, and use I ill--and let he be go from she, if he
would avoid my resentment.
2. to send I a lock of her hair instantly by the bearer.
3. to engage tomkin to have every thing ready for the opening and
embalming. I shall bring Anderson with I.
4. to get her will and every thing ready for my perusal and
consideration.
I will have possession of her dear heart this very night; and let tomkin
provide a proper receptacle and spirit, till I can get a golden one make
for it.
I will take her paper. and, as no one can do her memory justice equal
to myself, and I will not spare myself, who can well show the world
what she be, and what a villain he that could use her ill? and the
world shall also see what implacable and unworthy parent she have.
all shall be set forth in word at length. no mincing of the matter.
name undisguise as well as fact. for, as I shall make the bad
figure in it myself, and have a right to treat myself as nobody else
shall, who shall controul I? who dare call I to account?
let I know, if the d----d mother be yet the subject of the devil's own
vengeance--if the old wretch be dead or alive? some exemplary mischief
I must yet do. my revenge shall sweep away that devil, and all my
opposer of the cruel Harlowe family, from the face of the earth. whole
hecatomb ought to be offer up to the mane of my Clarissa Lovelace.
although her will may in some respect cross mine, yet I expect to be
observe. I will be the interpreter of she's.
next to mine, shebe shall be observe: for she be my wife, and shall be
to all eternity.--i will never have another.
Adieu, Jack, I be prepare to be with you. I charge you, as you value
my life or your own, do not oppose I in any thing relate to my
Clarissa Lovelace.
my temper be entirely alter. I know not what it be to laugh, or smile,
or be pleasant. I be grow choleric and impatient, and will not be
controule.
I write this in character as I use to do, that nobody but you should
know what I write. for never be any man plague with impertinent as
I be.
R. LOVELACE.
in a separate paper enclosed in the ABOVE.
let I tell thee, in character still, that I be in a dreadful way just
now. my brain be all boil like a cauldron over a fiery furnace. what
a devil be the matter with I, I wonder! I never be so strange in my
life.
in truth, Jack, I have be a most execrable villain. and when I
consider all my action to the angel of a woman, and in she the piety,
the charity, the wit, the beauty, I have help to destroy, and the good
to the world I have thereby be a mean of frustrating, I can pronounce
d----n----n upon myself. how then can I expect mercy any where else?
I believe I shall have no patience with you when I see you. your d----d
sting and reflection have almost turn my brain.
but here Lord M. they tell I, be come!--D----n he, and those who send
for he!
I know not what I have write. but her dear heart and a lock of her
hair I will have, let who will be the gainsayer! for be she not mine?
whose else can she be? she have no father nor mother, no sister, no
brother, no relation but I. and my beloved be mine, and I be her's--
and thatbe enough.--but Oh!--
shebe out. the damp of death have quench'd she quite!
those spicy door, her lip, be shut, close lock'd,
which never gale of life shall open more!
and be it so?--is it indeed so?--Good God!--Good god!--but they will not
let I write on. I must go down to this officious peer--who the devil
send for he?
LETTER XXIV
MR. BELFORD, TO RICHARD MOWBRAY, ESQ.
SUNDAY, SEPT. 10. four in the AFTERNOON.
I have your's, with our unhappy friend's enclosed. I be glad my Lord be
with he. as I presume that his phrensy will be but of short
continuance, I most earnestly wish, that on his recovery he could be
prevail upon to go abroad. Mr. Morden, who be inconsolable, have see
by the will, (as indeed he suspect before he read it,) that the case
be more than a common seduction; and have dropt hint already, that he
look on himself, on that account, as free from his promise make to the
die lady, which be, that he would not seek to avenge her death.
you must make the recovery of his health the motive for urge he on
this head; for, if you hint at his own safety, he will not stir, but
rather seek the Colonel.
as to the lock of hair, you may easily pacify he, (as you once see the
angel,) with hair near the colour, if he be intent upon it.
at my Lord's desire I will write on, and in my common hand; that you may
judge what be, and what be not, fit to be read to Mr. Lovelace at
present. but as I shall not forbear reflection as I go along, in hope
to reach his heart on his recovery, I think it well to direct myself to
he still, and that as if he be not disorder.
as I shall not have leisure to take copy, and yet be willing to have
the whole subject before I, for my own future contemplation, I must
insist upon a return of my letter some time hence. Mr. Lovelace know
that this be one of my condition; and have hitherto comply with it.
Thy letter, Mowbray, be an inimitable performance. thou art a strange
impenetrable creature. but let I most earnestly conjure thee, and the
idle flutterer, Tourville, from what you have see of poor Belton's exit;
from our friend Lovelace's phrensy, and the occasion of it; and from the
terrible condition in which the wretched Sinclair lie; to set about an
immediate change of life and manner. for my own part, I be determine,
be your resolution what they may, to take the advice I give.
as witness,
J. BELFORD.
LETTER XXV
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
O Lovelace! I have a scene to paint in relation to the wretched Sinclair,
that, if I do it justice, will make thee seriously ponder and reflect, or
nothing can. I will lead thee to it in order; and that in my usual hand,
that thy compeer may be able to read it as well as thyself.
when I have write the precede letter, not know what to do with
myself, recollect, and in vain wish for that delightful and
improve conversation, which I have now for ever lose; I think I have as
good begin the task, which I have for some time past resolve to begin;
that be to say, to go to church; and see if I could not reap some benefit
from what I should hear there. accordingly I determine to go to hear
the celebrated preacher at St. James's church. but, as if the devil (for
so I be then ready to conclude) think himself concerned to prevent my
intention, a visit be make I, just as I be dress, which take I off
from my purpose.
from whom should this visit be, but from Sally Martin, accompany by
Mrs. Carter, the sister of the infamous Sinclair! the same, I suppose I
need not tell you, who keep the bagnio near Bloomsbury.
these tell I that the surgeon, apothecary, and physician, have all give
the wretched woman over; but that she say, she should not die, nor be at
rest, till she see I; and they besought I to accompany they in the
coach they come in, if I have one spark of charity, of christian charity,
as they call it, left.
I be very loth to be divert from my purpose by a request so unwelcome,
and from people so abhor; but at last went, and we get thither by ten;
where a scene so shocking present itself to I, that the death of poor
despond Belton be not, I think, to be compare with it.
the old wretch have once put her leg out by her rage and violence, and have
be cry, scold, cursing, ever since the precede evening, that
the surgeon have tell she it be impossible to save she; and that a
mortification have begin to show itself; insomuch that, purely in
compassion to their own ear, they have be force to send for another
surgeon, purposely to tell she, though against his judgment, and (be a
friend of the other) to seem to convince he, that he mistake the case;
and that if she would be patient, she might recover. but, nevertheless,
her apprehension of death, and her antipathy to the thought of dying,
be so strong, that their imposture have not the intended effect, and she
be rave, crying, cursing, and even howl, more like a wolf than a
human creature, when I come; so that as I go up stair, I say, surely
this noise, this howling, cannot be from the unhappy woman! Sally say
it be; and assure I, that it be note to the noise she have make all
night; and step into her room before I, dear Madam Sinclair, say
she, forbear this noise! it be more like that of a bull than a woman!--
here come Mr. Belford; and youwill fright he away if you bellow at this
rate.
there be no less than eight of her cursed daughter surround her bed
when I enter; one of her partner, Polly Horton, at their head; and now
Sally, her other partner, and Madam Carter, as they call she, (for they
be all Madams with one another,) make the number ten; all in shocking
dishabille, and without stay, except Sally, Carter, and Polly; who, not
dare to leave she, have not be in bed all night.
the other seven seem to have be but just up, rise perhaps from their
customer in the fore-house, and their nocturnal orgy, with face,
three or four of they, that have run, the paint lie in streaky seam not
half blowze off, discover coarse wrinkle skin: the hair of some of
they of diver colour, oblige to the black-lead comb where black be
affect; the artificial jet, however, yield apace to the natural
brindle: that of other plaster with oil and powder; the oil
predominating: but every onebe hang about her ear and neck in broken
curl, or ragged end; and each at my entrance take with one motion,
stroke their matted lock with both hand under their coif, mob, or
pinner, every one of which be awry. they be all slip-shoed;
stockingless some; only under-petticoate all; their gown, make to cover
straddling hoop, hang trollopy, and tangle about their heel; but
hastily wrapt round they, as soon as I come up stair. and half of they
(unpadde, shoulder-bent, pallid-lip, limber-joint wretch)
appear, from a bloom nineteen or twenty perhaps over-night, haggard
well-wear strumpet of thirty-eight or forty.
I be the more particular in describe to thee the appearance these
creature make in my eye when I come into the room, because I believe
thou never saw any of they, much less a group of they, thus unprepared
for be see.* I, for my part, never do before; nor have I now, but
upon this occasion, be thus favour. if thou hadst, I believe thou
wouldst hate a profligate woman, as one of Swift's yahoo, or Virgil's
obscene harpy, squirt their ordure upon the Trojan trench; since
the person of such in their retirement be as filthy as their minds.--
hate they as much as I do; and as much as I admire, and next to adore, a
truly virtuous and elegant woman: for to I it be evident, that as a neat
and clean woman must be an angel of a creature, so a sluttish one be the
impure animal in nature. but these be the veteran, the choose band;
for now-and-then flit in to the number of half a dozen or more, by
turn, subordinate sinner, under-graduate, young than some of the
choose phalanx, but not less obscene in their appearance, though indeed
not so much beholden to the plastering focus; yet unpropt by stay,
squalid, loose in attire, sluggish-haired, uner-petticoate only as the
former, eye half-open, wink and pinking, mispatched, yawning,
stretching, as if from the unworn-off effect of the midnight revel; all
arm in succession with supply of cordial (of which every one present
be either taster or partaker) under the direction of the busy Dorcas,
who frequently popt in, to see her slop duly give and take.
* whoever have see Dean Swift's Lady's Dressing room, will think this
description of Mr. Belford's not only more natural, but more decent
painting, as well as well justify by the design, and by the use that
may be make of it.
but when I approach the old wretch, what a spectacle present itself
to my eye!
her misfortune have not at all sink, but rather, as I think, increase
her flesh; rage and violence perhaps swell her muscular feature.
Behold she, then, spread the whole troubled bed with her huge quaggy
carcase: her mill-post arm hold up; her broad hand clench with
violence; her big eye, goggle and flame ready as we may suppose
those of a salamander; her matted griesly hair, make irreverend by her
wickedness (her clouted head-dress being half off, spread about her fat
ear and brawny neck;) her livid lip parch, and work violently;
her broad chin in convulsive motion; her wide mouth, by reason of the
contraction of her forehead (which seem to be half-lose in its own
frightful furrow) split her face, as it be, into two part; and
her huge tongue hideously roll in it; heaving, puff as if four
breath; her bellow-shaped and various-colour breast ascend by
turn to her chin, and descend out of sight, with the violence of her
gasping.
this be the spectacle, as recollection have enable I to describe it,
that this wretch make to my eye, by her suffragan and daughter, who
survey she with scoule fright attention, which one might easily
see have more in it of horror and self-concern (and self-condemnation too)
than of love or pity; as who should say, see! what we ourselves must one
day be!
as soon as she see I, her naturally-big voice, more hoarsened by her
raving, break upon I: o Mr. Belford! o Sir! see what I be come to!--
see what I be bring to!--To have such a cursed crew about I, and not
one of they to take care of I! but to let I tumble down stair so
distant from the room I go from! so distant from the room I mean to go
to!--Cursed, curse be every careless devil!--may this or bad be their
fate every one of they!
and then she curse and swear most vehemently, and the more, as two or
three of they be excuse themselves on the score of their be at
that time as unable to help themselves as she. as soon as she have
clear the passage of her throat by the oath and curse which her wild
impatience make her utter, she begin in a more hollow and whine strain
to bemoan herself. and here, say she--Heaven grant I patience!
[clench and unclenche her hand] be I to die thus miserably!--of a
break leg in my old age!--snatche away by mean of my own intemperance!
self-do! self-undone!--no time for my affair! no time to repent!--and
in a few hour (oh!--oh!--with another long howl O--h!--U--gh--o! a
kind of scream key terminate it) who know, who can tell where I
shall be?--oh! that indeed I never, never, have have a being!
what could one say to such a wretch as this, whose whole life have be
spend in the most diffusive wickedness, and who no doubt have number of
soul to answer for? yet I tell she, she must be patient: that her
violence make she bad: and that, if she would compose herself, she
might get into a frame more proper for her present circumstance.
who, I? interrupt she: I get into a well frame! I, who can neither
cry, nor pray! yet already feel the torment of the d----d! what mercy
can I expect? what hope be leave for me?--then, that sweet creature! that
incomparable Miss Harlowe! she, it seem, be dead and go! o that
cursed man! have it not be for he! I have never have this, the most
crying of all my sin, to answer for!
and then she set up another howl.
and be she dead?--indeed dead? proceed she, when her howl be over--o
what an angel have I be the mean of destroy! for though it be
that it be mine, and your's, and your's, and your's, devil as we all
be [turn to Sally, to Polly, and to one or two more] that he do not
do her justice! and that, that be my curse, and will one day be your!
and then again she howl.
I still advise patience. I say, that if her time be to be so short
as she apprehend, the more ought she to endeavour to compose herself:
and then she would at least die with more ease to herself--and
satisfaction to her friend, I be go to say--but the word die put she
into a violent raving, and thus she break in upon I. die, do you say,
Sir?--Die!--I will not, I cannot die!--i know not how to die!--die, Sir!
--And must I then die?--leave this world?--i cannot bear it!--And who
bring you hither, Sir?--[her eye strike fire at I] who bring you
hither to tell I I must die, Sir?--I cannot, I will not leave this
world. let other die, who wish for another! who expect a better!--i
have have my plague in this; but would compound for all future hope, so
as I may be nothing after this!
and then she howl and bellow by turn.
by my faith, Lovelace, I tremble in every joint; and look upon she
who speak this, and roar thus, and upon the company round I, I more
than once think myself to be in one of the infernal mansion.
yet will I proceed, and try, for thy good, if I can shock thee but half
as much with my description, as I be shock with what I see and hear.
Sally!--Polly!--Sister Carter! say she, do you not tell I I might
recover? do not the surgeon tell I I might?
and so you may, cry Sally; Monsieur Garon say you may, if youwill be
patient. but, as I have often tell you this blessed morning, you be
reader to take despair from your own fear, than comfort from all the
hope we can give you.
yet, cry the wretch, interrupting, do not Mr. Belford (and to he you
have tell the truth, though you willnot to I; do not he) tell I that I
shall die?--i cannot bear it! I cannot bear the thought of die!
and then, but that half a dozen at once endeavour to keep down her
violent hand, would she have beat herself; as it seem she have often
attempt to do from the time the surgeon popt out the word mortification
to she.
well, but to what purpose, say I (turn aside to her sister, and to
Sally and Polly), be these hope give she, if the gentleman of the
faculty give she over? you should let she know the bad, and then she
must submit; for there be no run away from death. if she have any
matter to settle, put she upon settle they; and do not, by tell she
she will live, when there be no room to expect it, take from her the
opportunity of do needful thing. do the surgeon actually give she
over?
they do, whisper they. her gross habit, they say, give no hope. we
have send for both surgeon, whom we expect every minute.
both the surgeon (who be french; for Mrs. Sinclair have hear Tourville
launch out in the praise of french surgeon) come in while we be thus
talk. I retire to the farth end of the room, and throw up a window
for a little air, be half-poison by the effluvia arise from so
many contaminate carcase; which give I no imperfect idea of the stench
of gaol, which, corrupt the ambient air, give what be call the
prison distemper.
I come back to the bed-side when the surgeon have inspect the fracture;
and ask they, if there be any expectation of her life?
one of they whisper I, there be none: that she have a strong fever
upon she, which alone, in such a habit, would probably do the business;
and that the mortification have visibly gain upon she since they be
there six hour ago.
will amputation save she? her affair and her mind want settle. a
few day add to her life may be of service to she in both respect.
they tell I the fracture be high in her leg; that the knee be greatly
bruise; that the mortification, in all probability, have spread half-way
of the femur: and then, get I between they, (three or four of the
woman join we, and listen with their mouth open, and all the sign
of ignorant wonder in their face, as there appear of self-sufficiency
in those of the artist,) do they by turn fill my ear with an
anatomical description of the leg and thigh; run over with term of
art, of the tarsus, the metatarsus, the tibia, the fibula, the patella,
the os tali, the os tibae, the tibialis posticus and tibialis anticus, up
to the os femoris, to the acetabulum of the os ischion, the great
trochanter, glutaeus, triceps, lividus, and little rotator; in short, of
all the muscle, cartilage, and bone, that constitute the leg and thigh
from the great toe to the hip; as if they would show I, that all their
science have penetrate their head no far than their mouth; while
Sally lift up her hand with a Laud bless I! be all surgeon so
learned!--but at last both the gentleman declare, that if she and her
friend would consent to amputation, they would whip off her leg in a
moment.
Mrs. Carter ask, to what purpose, if the operation would not save she?
very true, they say; but it might be a satisfaction to the patient's
friend, that all be do that could be do.
and so the poor wretch be to be lance and quarter, as I may say, for
an experiment only! and, without any hope of benefit from the operation,
be to pay the surgeon for torment she!
I cannot but say I have a mean opinion of both these gentleman, who,
though they make a figure, it seem, in their way of living, and boast
not only french extraction, but a Paris education, never will make any in
their practice.
how unlike my honest english friend tomkin, a plain serious, intelligent
man, whose art lie deep than in word; who always avoid parade and
jargon; and endeavour to make every one as much a judge of what he be
about as himself!
all the time that the surgeon run on with their anatomical process, the
wretched woman most frightfully roar and bellow; which the gentleman
(who show themselves to be of the class of those who be not affect
with the evil they do not feel,) take no other notice of, than by
raise their voice to be hear, as she raise her'--be evidently
more solicitous to increase their acquaintance, and to propagate the
notion of their skill, than to attend to the clamour of the poor wretch
whom they be call in to relieve; though by this very mean, like the
dog and the shadow in the fable, they lose both aim with I; for I never
be deceive in one rule, which I make early; to wit, that the stillest
water be the deep, while the bubble stream only betray shallowness;
and that stone and pebble lie there so near the surface, to point out
the good place to ford a river dry shod.
as nobody care to tell the unhappy wretch what every one apprehend
must follow, and what the surgeon convince I soon would, I undertake
to be the denouncer of her doom. accordingly, the operator be
withdraw, I sit down by the bed-side, and say, Come, Mrs. Sinclair, let
I advise you to forbear these raving at the carelessness of those, who,
I find, at the time, could take no care of themselves; and since the
accident have happen, and cannot be remedie, to resolve to make the
good of the matter: for all this violence but enrage the malady, and you
will probably fall into a delirium, if you give way to it, which will
deprive you of that reason which you ought to make the good of for the
time it may be lend you.
she turn her head towards I, and hear I speak with a determined
voice, and see I assume as determine an air, become more calm and
attentive.
I go on, tell she, that I be glad, from the hint she have give,
to find she concerned for her past misspent life, and particularly for
the part she have have in the ruin of the most excellent woman on earth:
that if she would compose herself, and patiently submit to the
consequence of an evil she have bring upon herself, it might possibly
be happy for she yet. meantime, continue I, tell I, with temper and
calmness, why be you so desirous to see I?
she seem to be in great confusion of thought, and turn her head this
way and that; and at last, after much hesitation, say, Alad for I! I
hardly know what I want with you. when I awake from my intemperate
trance, and find what a curse way I be in, my conscience smite I, and
I be for catch like a drown wretch, at every straw. I want to
see every body and any body but those I do see; every body who I think
could give I comfort. yet could I expect none from you neither; for you
have declare yourself my enemy, although I have never do you harm; for
what, Jackey, in her old tone, whine through her nose, be Miss Harlowe
to you?--But she be happy!--But oh! what will become of me?--Yet tell I,
(for the surgeon have tell you the truth, no doubt,) tell I, shall I do
well again? may I recover? if I may, I will begin a new course of life:
as I hope to be save, I will. Iwill renounce you all--every one of you,
[look round she,] and scrape all I can together, and live a life of
penitence; and when I die, leave it all to charitable us--I will, by my
soul--every doit of it to charity--but this once, lift up her rolling
eye, and fold hand, (with a wry-mouthed earnestness, in which every
muscle and feature of her face bear its part,) this one time--good God of
Heaven and earth, but this once! this once! repeat those word five or
six time, spare thy poor creature, and every hour of my life shall be
pass in penitence and atonement: upon my soul it shall!
less vehement! a little less vehement! say I--it be not for I, who have
lead so free a life, as you but too well know, to talk to you in a
reproach strain, and to set before you the iniquity you have live in,
and the many soul you have help to destroy. but as you be in so
penitent a way, if I might advise, you should send for a good clergyman,
the purity of whose life and manner may make all these thing come from
he with a well grace than they can from I.
how, Sir! what, Sir! interrupt I: send for a parson!--then you
indeed think I shall die! then you think there be no room for hope!----A
parson, Sir!----Who send for a parson, while there be any hope left?--
the sight of a parson would be death immediate to me!--I cannot, cannot
die!--Never tell I of it!--What! die!--what! cut off in the midst of my
sin!
and then she begin again to rave.
I cannot bear, say I, rise from my seat with a stern air, to see a
reasonable creature behave so outrageously!--will this vehemence, think
you, mend the matter? will it avail you any thing? will it not rather
shorten the life you be so desirous to have lengthen, and deprive you
of the only opportunity you can ever have to settle your affair for both
worlds?--death be but the common lot: and if it be your' soon, look
at she, it will be also your's, and your's, and your's, speak with a
raise voice, and turn to every trembling devil round she, [for they
all shake at my forcible application,] and mine too. and you have reason
to be thankful, turn again to she, that you do not perish in that act
of intemperance which bring you to this: for it might have be your
neck, as well as your leg; and then you have not have the opportunity you
now have for repentance--and, the Lord have mercy upon you! into what a
state might you have awake!
then do the poor wretch set up an inarticulate frightful howl, such a
one as I never before hear of she; and see every one half-fright,
and I motion to withdraw, o pity I, pity I, Mr. Belford, cry she,
her word interrupt by groan--I find you think I shall die!--and what
may I be, and where, in a very few hour--who can tell?
I tell she it be vain to flatter she: it be my opinion she would not
recover.
I be go to re-advise she to calm her spirit, and endeavour to resign
herself, and to make the beset of the opportunity yet leave she; but this
declaration set she into a most outrageous raving. she would have tear
her hair, and beat she breast, have not some of the wretch hold she
hand by force, while other keep she as steady as they could, lest she
should again put out her new-set leg; so that, see she thus incapable
of advice, and in a perfect phrensy, I tell Sally Martin, that there be
no bear the room; and that their good way be to send for a minister
to pray by she, and to reason with she, as soon as she should be capable
of it. and so I leave they; and never be so sensible of the benefit of
fresh air, as I be the moment I enter the street.
nor be it to be wonder at, when it be consider that, to the various
ill smell that will always be find in a close sick bed-room, (for
generally, when the physician come, the air be shut out,) this of Mrs.
Sinclair be the more particularly offensive, as, to the scent of
plaster, salve, and ointment, be add the stench of spirituous
liquor, burn and unburnt, of all denomination; for one or other of
the creature, under pretence of colic, gripe, or qualm, be
continually call for supply of these, all the time I be there.
and yet this be think to be a genteel house of the sort; and all the
prostitute in it be prostitute of price, and their visiter people of
note.
O, Lovelace! what life do most of we rake and libertine lead! what
company do we keep! and, for such company, what society renounce, or
endeavour to make like these!
what woman, nice in her person, and of purity in her mind and manner,
do she know what miry wallower the generality of man of our class be
in themselves, and constantly trough and sty with, but would detest the
thought of associate with such filthy sensualist, whose favourite
taste carry they to mingle with the dreg of stew, brothel, and
common sewer?
yet, to such a choice be many worthy woman betray, by that false and
inconsiderate notion, raise and propagate, no doubt, by the author of
all delusion, that a reform rake make the good husband. we rake,
indeed, be bold enough to suppose, that woman in general be as much
rake in their heart, as the libertine some of they suffer themselves
to be take with be in their practice. a supposition, therefore, which
it behove person of true honour of that sex to discountenance, by
reject the address of every man, whose character will not stand the
test of that virtue which be the glory of a woman: and indeed, I may
say, of a man too: why should it not?
how, indeed, can it be, if this point be duly weigh, that a man who
think alike of all the sex, and know it to be in the power of a wife
to do he the great dishonour man can receive, and doubt not she will
to do it, if opportunity offer, and importunity be not want: that such
a one, from principle, should be a good husband to any woman? and,
indeed, little do innocent think, what a total revolution of manner,
what a change of fix habit, nay, what a conquest of a bad nature, and
what a portion of Divine GRACE, be require, to make a man a good
husband, a worthy father, and true friend, from principle; especially
when it be consider, that it be not in a man's own power to reform when
he will. this, (to say nothing of my own experience,) thou, Lovelace,
hast find in the progress of thy attempt upon the divine Miss Harlowe.
for whose remorse could be deep, or more frequent, yet more transient
than thine!
now, Lovelace, let I know if the word grace can be read from my pen
without a sneer from thee and thy associate? I own that once it sound
oddly in my ear. but I shall never forget what a grave man once say on
this very word--that with he it be a rake's sibboleth.* he have always
hope of one who could bear the mention of it without ridicule it; and
ever give he up for an abandon man, who make a jest of it, or of he
who use it.
* see Judges xii. 6.
donot be disgust, that I mingle such grave reflection as these with my
narrative. it become I, in my present way of thinking, to do so, when
I see, in Miss Harlowe, how all human excellence, and in poor Belton, how
all inhuman libertinism, and be near see in this abandon woman, how
all diabolical profligacy, end. and glad should I be for your own sake,
for your splendid family's sake, and for the sake of all your intimate
and acquaintance, that you be labour under the same impression,
that so we who have be companion in (and promoter of one another's)
wickedness, might join in a general atonement to the utmost of our power.
I come home reflect upon all these thing, more edify to I than
any sermon I could have hear preach: and I shall conclude this long
letter with observe, that although I leave the wretched howler in a high
phrensy-fit, which be excessively shocking to the by-stander; yet her
phrensy must be the happy part of her dreadful condition: for when she
be herself, as it be call, what must be her reflection upon her past
profligate life, throughout which it have be her constant delight and
business, devil-like, to make other as wicked as herself! what must she
terror be (a hell already begin in her mind!) on look forward to the
dreadful state she be now upon the verge of!--But I drop my trembling
pen.
to have do with so shocking a subject at once, we shall take notice,
that Mr. Belford, in a future letter, write, that the miserable
woman, to the surprise of the operator themselves, (through hourly
increase torture of body and mind,) hold out so long as till
Thursday, Sept. 21; and then die in such agony as terrify into
a transitory penitence all the wretch about she.
LETTER XXVI
colonel MORDEN, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SUNDAY NIGHT, SEPT. 10.
DEAR SIR,
accord to my promise, I send you an account of matter here. poor
Mrs. Norton be so very ill upon the road, that, slowly as the hearse
move, and the chariot follow, I be afraid we should not have get she
to St. Albans. we put up there as I have intend. I be in hope that
she would have be well for the stop: but I be force to leave she
behind I. I order the maid-servant you be so considerately kind as
to send down with she, to be very careful of she; and leave the chariot to
attend she. she deserve all the regard that can be pay she; not only
upon my cousin's account, but on her own--she be an excellent woman.
when we be within five mile of Harlowe-place, I put on a hand-gallop.
I order the hearse to proceed more slowly still, the cross-road we be
in be rough; and have more time before we than I want; for I
wish not the hearse to be in till near dusk. I get to Harlowe-place
about four o'clock. you may believe I find a mournful house. you
desire I to be very minute.
at my entrance into the court, they be all in motion. every servant
whom I see have swell eye, and look with so much concern, that at
first I apprehend some new disaster have happen in the family. Mr.
John and Mr. Antony Harlowe and Mrs. Hervey be there. they all help
on one another's grief, as they have before do each other's hardness of
heart.
my cousin James meet I at the entrance of the hall. his countenance
express a fix concern; and he desire I to excuse his behaviour the
last time I be there.
my cousin Arabella come to I full of tear and grief.
o Cousin! say she, hang upon my arm, I dare not ask you any
questions!--about the approach of the hearse, I suppose she mean.
I myself be full of grief; and, without go far or speak, sit
down in the hall in the first chair.
the brother sit on one hand of I, the sister on the other. both be
silent. the latter in tear.
Mr. Antony Harlowe come to I soon after. his face be overspread with
all the appearance of woe. he request I to walk into the parlour;
where, as he say, be all his fellow-mourner.
I attend he in. my cousin James and Arabella follow I.
a perfect concert of grief, as I may say, break out the moment I enter
the parlour.
my cousin Harlowe, the dear creature's father, as soon as he see I,
say, o Cousin, Cousin, of all our family, you be the only one who have
nothing to reproach yourself with!--you be a happy man!
the poor mother, bow her head to I in speechless grief, sit with her
handkerchief hold to her eye with one hand. the other hand be hold by
her sister Hervey, between both her's; Mrs. Hervey weep upon it.
near the window sit Mr. John Harlowe, his face and his body turn from
the sorrow company; his eye red and swell.
my cousin Antony, at his re-enter the parlour, go towards Mrs.
Harlowe--Don't--dear Sister, say he!--Then towards my cousin harlowe--
Don't--dear Brother!--Don't thus give way--and, without be able to
say another word, go to a corner of the parlour, and, want himself
the comfort he would fain have give, sink into a chair, and audibly
sob.
Miss Arabella follow her uncle Antony, as he walk in before I, and
seem as if she would have speak to the pierced mother some word of
comfort. but she be unable to utter they, and get behind her mother's
chair; and, incline her face over it, on the unhappy lady's shoulder,
seem to claim the consolation that indulgent parent use, but then be
unable, to afford she.
Young Mr. Harlowe, with all his vehemence of spirit, be now subdue.
his self-reproach conscience, no doubt, be the cause of it.
and what, Sir, must their thought be, which, at that moment, in a
manner, deprive they of all motion, and turn their speech into sigh
and groans!--how to be pity, how greatly to be pity! all of they!
but how much to be curse that abhor Lovelace, who, as it seem, by
art uncommon, and a villany without example, have be the sole author
of a woe so complicated and extensive!--god judge I, as--but I stop--
the man (the man can I say?) be your friend!--He already suffer, you
tell I, in his intellect.--restore he, Heaven, to that--if I find the
matter come out, as I apprehend it will--indeed her own hint of his usage
of she, as in her will, be enough--nor think, my beloved cousin, thou
darling of my heart! that thy gentle spirit, breathe charity and
forgiveness to the vilest of man, shall avail him!--But once more I stop
--forgive I, Sir!--Who could behold such a scene, who could recollect it
in order to describe it, (as minutely as you wish I to relate how this
unhappy family be affect on this sad occasion,) every one of the
mourner nearly related to himself, and not to be exasperate against the
author of all?
as I be the only person (grieve as I be myself) from whom any of they,
at that instant, could derive comfort; let we not, say I, my dear
Cousin, approach the inconsolable mother, give way to a grief, which,
however just, can now avail we nothing. we hurt ourselves, and cannot
recall the dear creature for whom we mourn. nor would you wish it, if
you know with what assurance of eternal happiness she leave the world--she
be happy, madam!--depend upon it, she be happy! and comfort yourselves
with that assurance!
o Cousin, Cousin! cry the unhappy mother, withdraw her hand from
that of her sister Hervey, and press mine with it, you know not what
a child I have lost!--then in a low voice, and how lost!--That it be that
make the loss insupportable.
they all join in a kind of melancholy chorus, and each accuse he and
herself, and some of they one another. but the eye of all, in turn,
be cast upon my cousin James, as the person who have keep up the general
resentment against so sweet a creature. while he be hardly able to bear
his own remorse: nor Miss Harlowe shebe; she break out into word, how
tauntingly do I write to she! how barbarously do I insult she! yet
how patiently do she take it!--who would have think that she have be
so near her end!--o Brother, Brother! but for you!--but for you!--double
not upon I, say he, my own woe! I have every thing before I that have
pass! I think only to reclaim a dear creature that have err! I
intend not to break her tender heart! but it be the villanous
Lovelace who do that--not any of us!--Yet, Cousin, do she not attribute
all to me?--I fear she did!--tell I only, do she name I, do she speak
of I, in her last hour? I hope she, who could forgive the great
villain on earth, and plead that he may be safe from our vengeance, I
hope she could forgive I.
she die blessing you all; and justify rather than condemn your
severity to she.
then they set up another general lamentation. we see, say her father,
enough we see, in her heart-pierce letter to we, what a happy frame
she be in a few day before her death--but do it hold to the last? have
she no repining? have the dear child no heart burning?
none at all!--I never see, and never shall see, so bless a departure:
and no wonder; for I never hear of such a preparation. every hour, for
week together, be take up in it. let this be our comfort: we need
only to wish for so happy an end for ourselves, and for those who be
near to our heart. we may any of we be grieve for act of
unkindness to she: but have all happen that once she wish for, she
could not have make a happy, perhaps not so happy an end.
dear soul! and dear sweet soul! the father, uncle, sister, my cousin
Hervey, cry out all at once, in accent of anguish inexpressibly
affect.
we must for every be disturb for those act of unkindness to so sweet a
child, cry the unhappy mother!--Indeed! indeed! [softly to her sister
Hervey,] I have be too passive, much too passive in this case!--The
temporary quiet I have be so studious all my life to preserve, have cost
I everlaste disquiet!----There she stopt.
Dear Sister! be all Mrs. Hervey could say.
I have do but half my duty to the dear and most meritorious of
child, resume the sorrowing mother!--nay, not half!--how have we
harden our heart against her!----Again her tear deny passage to her
word.
my dearest, dearest sister!--again be all Mrs. Hervey could say.
would to Heaven, proceed, exclaim, the poor mother, I have but once
see she! then, turn to my cousin James, and his sister--o my son!
o my Arabella! if we be to receive as little mercy--and there again she
stopt, her tear interrupt her farth speech; every one, all the
time, remain silent; their countenance show a grief in their
heart too big for expression.
now you see, Mr. Belford, that my dear cousin could be allow all her
merit!--what a dreadful thing be after-reflection upon a conduct so
perverse and unnatural?
o this cursed friend of your's, Mr. Belford! this detest Lovelace!--To
he, to he be owing--
Pardon I, Sir. I will lay down my pen till I have recover my temper.
one in the morning.
in vain, Sir, have I endeavour to compose myself to rest. you wish
I to be very particular, and I cannot help it. this melancholy subject
fill my whole mind. I will proceed, though it be midnight.
about six o'clock the hearse come to the outward gate--the parish church
be at some distance; but the wind set fair, the afflict family be
strike, just before it come, into a fresh fit of grief, on hear the
funeral bell toll in a very solemn manner. a respect, as it prove,
and as they all guess, pay to the memory of the dear deceased, out of
officious love, as the hearse pass near the church.
Judge, when their grief be so great in expectation of it, what it must
be when it arrive.
a servant come in to acquaint we with what its lumber heavy noise up
the paved inner court-yard apprize we of before. he speak not. he
could not speak. he look, bow, and withdraw.
I stept out. no one else could then stir. her brother, however, soon
follow I. when I come to the door, I behold a sight very affect.
you have hear, Sir, how universally my dear cousin be belove. by the
poor and middling sort especially, no young lady be ever so much
beloved. and with reason: she be the common patroness of all the honest
poor in her neighbourhood.
it be natural for we, in every deep and sincere grief, to interest all we
know in what be so concern to ourselves. the servant of the family,
it seem, have tell their friend, and those their's, that though, living,
their dear young lady could not be receive nor look upon, her body be
permit to be bring home. the space of time be so confine, that
those who know when she die, must easily guess near the time the hearse
be to come. a hearse, pass through country village, and from
London, however slenderly attend, (for the chariot, as I have say,
wait upon poor Mrs. Norton,) take every one's attention. nor be it
hard to guess whose this must be, though not adorn by escutcheon, when
the cross-road to Harlowe-place be take, as soon as it come within
six mile of it; so that the hearse, and the solemn tolling of the bell,
have draw together at least fifty, or the neighbour man, woman, and
child, and some of good appearance. not a soul of they, it seem,
with a dry eye, and each lament the death of this admired lady, who,
as I be tell, never stir out, but somebody be the well for she.
these, when the coffin be take out of the hearse, crowd about it,
hinder, for a few moment, its be carry in; the young people
struggle who should bear it; and yet, with respectful whispering,
rather than clamorous contention. a mark of veneration I have never
before see pay, upon any occasion in all my travel, from the
under-breed many, from whom noise be generally inseparable in all their
emulation.
at last six maiden be permit to carry it in by the six handle.
the corpse be thus bear, with the most solemn respect, into the hall,
and place for the present upon two stool there. the plate, and
emblem, and inscription, set every one gaze upon it, and admire it.
the more, when they be tell, that all be of her own ordering. they
wish to be permit a sight of the corpse; but rather mention this
as their wish than as their hope. when they have all satisfy their
curiosity, and remark upon the emblem, they disperse with blessing
upon her memory, and with tear and lamentation; pronounce she to be
happy; and inferring, be she not so, what would become of they? while
other run over with repetition of the good she delight to do. nor
be there want those among they, who heap curse upon the man who
be the author of her fall.
the servant of the family then get about the coffin. they could not
before: and that afford a new scene of sorrow: but a silent one; for
they speak only by their eye, and by sigh, look upon the lid, and
upon one another, by turn, with hand lift up. the presence of their
young master possibly might awe they, and cause their grief to be
express only in dumb show.
as for Mr. James Harlowe, (who accompany I, but withdraw when he see
the crowd,) he stand look upon the lid, when the people have leave it,
with a fix attention: yet, I dare say, know not a symbol or letter upon
it at that moment, have the question be ask he. in a profound
reverie he stand, his arm fold, his head on one side, and mark of
stupefaction imprint upon every feature.
but when the corpse be carry into the less parlour, adjoining to the
hall, which she use to call she parlour, and put upon a table in the
midst of the room, and the father and mother, the two uncle, her aunt
hervey, and her sister, come in, join her brother and I, with
trembling foot, and eager woe, the scene be still more affect. their
sorrow be heighten, no doubt, by the remembrance of their unforgiving
severity: and now see before they the receptacle that contain the
glory of their family, who so lately be drive thence by their
indiscreet violence; never, never more to be restore to the! no wonder
that their grief be more than common grief.
they would have withhold the mother, it seem, from come in. but when
they could not, though undetermined before, they all bear her company,
lead on by an impulse they could not resist. the poor lady but just cast
her eye upon the coffin, and then snatch it away, retire with
passionate grief towards the window; yet, address herself, with
clasp hand, as if to her beloved daughter: o my child, my child! cry
she; thou pride of my hope! why be I not permit to speak pardon and
peace to thee!--o forgive thy cruel mother!
her son (his heart then soften, as his eye show,) besought she to
withdraw: and her woman look in at that moment, he call she to
assist he in conduct her lady into the middle parlour: and then
return, meet his father go out of the door, who also have but just
cast his eye on the coffin, and yield to my entreaty to withdraw.
his grief be too deep for utterance, till he see his son come in; and
then, fetch a heavy groan, never, say he, be sorrow like my sorrow!
--O Son! Son!--in a reproach accent, his face turn from he.
I attend he through the middle parlour, endeavour to console he.
his lady be there in agony. she take his eye. he make a motion
towards she: o my dear, say he--but turn short, his eye as full as
his heart, he hasten through to the great parlour: and when there, he
desire I to leave he to himself.
the uncle and sister look and turn away, very often, upon the
emblem, in silent sorrow. Mrs. Hervey would have read to they the
inscription--these word she do read, here the wicked cease from
troubling--but could read no far. her tear fall in large drop upon
the plate she be contemplate; and yet she be desirous of gratify a
curiosity that mingle impatience with her grief because she could not
gratify it, although she often wipe her eye as they flow.
judge you, Mr. Belford, (for you have great humanity,) how I must be
affect. yet be I force to try to comfort they all.
but here I will close this letter, in order to send it to you in the
morning early. nevertheless, I will begin another, upon supposition that
my doleful prolixity will be disagreeable to you. indeed I be altogether
indispose for rest, as I have mention before. so can do nothing but
write. I have also more melancholy scene to paint. my pen, if I may
say so, be untire. these scene be fresh upon my memory: and I myself,
perhaps, may owe to you the favour of a review of they, with such other
paper as you shall think proper to oblige I with, when heavy grief have
give way to milder melancholy.
my servant, in his way to you with this letter, shall call at St. Alban's
upon the good woman, that he may inform you how she do. Miss Arabella
ask I after she, when I withdraw to my chamber; to which she
complaisantly accompany I. she be much concerned at the bad way we
leave she in; and say her mother would be more so.
no wonder that the dear depart, who foresee the remorse that would fall
to the lot of this unhappy family when they come to have the news of her
death confirm to they, be so grieve for their apprehend grief, and
endeavour to comfort they by her posthumous letter. but it be still
a great generosity in she to try to excuse they to I, as she do when
we be alone together, a few hour before she die; and to aggravate
more than (as far as I can find) she ought to have do, the only error
she be ever guilty of. the more freely, however, perhaps, (exalt
creature!) that I might think the well of her friend, although at her
own expense. I be, dear Sir,
your faithful and obedient servant,
WM. MORDEN.
LETTER XXVII
COLONEL MORDEN
[in CONTINUATION.]
when the unhappy mourner be all retire, I direct the lid of the
coffin to be unscrewed, and cause some fresh aromatic and flower to
be put into it.
the corpse be very little alter, notwithstanding the journey. the
sweet smile remain.
the maid who bring the flower be ambitious of strew they about
it: they pour forth fresh lamentation over she; each wish she have
be so happy as to have be allow to attend she in London. one of
they particularly, who be, it seem, my cousin Arabella's personal
servant, be more clamorous in her grief than any of the rest; and the
moment she turn she back, all the other allow she have reason for it.
I inquire afterwards about she, and find, that this creature be set
over my dear cousin, when she be confine to her chamber by indiscreet
severity.
Good Heaven! that they should treat, and suffer thus to be treat, a
young lady, who be qualified to give law to all her family!
when my cousin be tell that the lid be unscrewed, they press in
again, all but the mournful father and mother, as if by consent. Mrs.
Hervey kiss her pale lip. Flower of the world! be all she could say;
and give place to Miss Arabella; who kiss the forehead of she whom she
have so cruelly treat, could only say, to my cousin James, (look upon
the corpse, and upon he,) o brother!--while he, take the fair,
lifeless hand, kiss it, and retreat with precipitation.
her two uncle be speechless. they seem to wait each other's
example, whether to look upon the corpse, or not. I order the lid to
be replace; and then they press forward, as the other again do, to
take a last farewell of the casket which so lately contain so rich a
jewel.
then it be that the grief of each find fluent expression; and the fair
corpse be address to, with all the tenderness that the sincere love
and warm admiration could inspire; each accord to their different
degree of relationship, as if none of they have before look upon she.
she be their very niece, both uncle say! the injure saint, her uncle
Harlowe! the same smile sister, arabella!--the dear creature, all of
them!--the same benignity of countenance! the same sweet composure! the
same natural dignity!--she be questionless happy! that sweet smile
betoken her be so! themselves most unhappy!--and then, once more,
the brother take the lifeless hand, and vow revenge upon it, on the
cursed author of all this distress.
the unhappy parent propose to take one last view and farewell of their
once darling daughter. the father be get to the parlour-door, after the
inconsolable mother: but neither of they be able to enter it. the
mother say she must once more see the child of her heart, or she should
never enjoy herself. but they both agree to refer their melancholy
curiosity till the next day; and have in hand retire inconsolable,
speechless both, their face overspread with woe, and turn from each
other, as unable each to behold the distress of the other.
when all be withdraw, I retire, and send for my cousin James, and
acquaint he with his sister's request in relation to the discourse to
be pronounce at her interment; tell he how necessary it be that the
minister, whoever he be, should have the early notice give he that
the case would admit. he lament the death of the reverend Dr. Lewen,
who, as he say, be a great admirer of his sister, as she be of he,
and would have be the fit of all man for that office. he speak
with great asperity of Mr. Brand, upon whose light inquiry after his
sister's character in town he be willing to lay some of the blame due to
himself. Mr. Melvill, Dr. Lewen's assistant, must, he say, be the man;
and he praise he for his ability; his elocution, and unexceptionable
manner; and promise to engage he early in the morning.
he call out his sister, and he be of his opinion. so I let this upon
they.
they both, with no little warmth, hint their disapprobation of you,
Sir, for their sister's executor, on the score of your intimate
friendship with the author of her ruin.
you must not resent any thing I shall communicate to you of what they say
on this occasion: depend that you will not, I shall write with the
great freedom.
I tell they how much my dear cousin be oblige to your friendship and
humanity: the injunction she have lay you under, and your own
inclination to observe they. I say, that you be a man of honour: that
you be desirous of consult I, because you would not willingly give
offence to any of they: and that I be very fond of cultivate your
favour and correspondence.
they say there be no need of an executor out of their family; and they
hop that you would relinquish so unnecessary a trust, as they call
it. my cousin James declare that he would write to you, as soon as the
funeral be over, to desire that you would do so, upon proper assurance
that all the will prescribe should be perform.
I say you be a man of resolution: that I think he would hardly
succeed; for that you make a point of honour of it.
I then show they their sister's posthumous letter to you; in which she
confess her obligation to you, and regard for you, and for your future
welfare.* you may believe, Sir, they be extremely affect with the
perusal of it.
* see Letter XII. of this volume.
they be surprised that I have give up to you the produce of her
grandfather's estate since his death. I tell they plainly that they must
thank themselves if any thing disagreeable to they occur from their
sister's devise; deserted, and throw into the hand of stranger, as she
have be.
they say they would report all I have say to their father and mother;
add, that great as their trouble be, they find they have still more
to come. but if Mr. Belford be to be the executor of her will,
contrary to their hope, they besought I to take the trouble of
transact every thing with you; that a friend of the man to whom they
owe all their calamity might not appear to they.
they be extremely move at the text their sister have choose for the
subject of their funeral discourse.* I have extract from the will that
article, suppose it probable that I might not so soon have an
opportunity to show they the will itself, as would otherwise have be
necessary, on account of the interment, which cannot be delay.
* see the will, in pg. 112 of this volume.
MONDAY MORNING, between eight and nine.
the unhappy family be prepare for a mournful meeting at breakfast.
Mr. James Harlowe, who have have as little rest as I, have write to Mr.
Melvill, who have promise to draw up a brief eulogium on the deceased.
Miss Howe be expect here by-and-by, to see, for the last time, her
beloved friend.
Miss Howe, by her messenger, desire she may not be take any notice of.
she shall not tarry six minute, be the word. her desire will be easily
grant she.
her servant, who bring the request, if it be deny, be to return,
and meet she; for she be ready to set out in her chariot, when he get on
horseback.
if he meet she not with the refusal, he be to say here till she come. I
be, Sir,
your faithful, humble servant,
WILLIAM MORDEN.
LETTER xxviii
colonel MORDEN
[in CONTINUATION.]
MONDAY AFTERNOON, SEPT. 11.
SIR,
we be such bad company here to one another, that it be some relief to
retire and write.
I be summon to breakfast about half an hour after nine. slowly do
the mournful congress meet. each, lifelessly and spiritless, take our
place, with swoln eye, inquire, without expect any tolerable
account, how each have rest.
the sorrow mother give for answer, that she should never more know
what rest be.
by the time we be well seat, the bell ringing, the outward gate
opening, a chariot rattle over the pavement of the court-yard, put they
into emotion.
I leave they; and be just time enough to give Miss Howe my hand as she
alight: she maid in tear remain in the chariot.
I think you tell I, Sir, you never see Miss Howe. she be a fine,
graceful young lady. a fixed melancholy on her whole aspect, overcloud
a vivacity and fire, which, nevertheless, dart now-and-then through the
awful gloom. I shall ever respect she for her love to my dear cousin.
never do I think, say she, as she give I her hand, to enter more these
door: but, living or dead, Clarissa bring I after she any where!
she enter with I the little parlour; and see the coffin, withdraw
her hand from mine, and with impatience push aside the lid. as
impatiently she remove the face-cloth. in a wild air, she clasp she
uplifted hand together; and now look upon the corpse, now up to
Heaven, as if appeal to that. her bosom heave and flutter
discernible through her handkerchief, and at last she break silence:--o
sir!--see you not here!--the glory of her sex?--Thus by the most
villanous of your--thus--lay low!
o my blessed friend!--said she--my sweet companion!--my lovely Monitress!
--kisse her lip at every tender appellation. and be this all!--is it
all of my CLARISSA'S story!
then, after a short pause, and a profound sigh, she turn to I, and
then to her breathless friend. but be she, can she be, really dead!--O
no!--She only sleeps.--awake, my beloved friend! my sweet clay-cold
Friend, awake: let thy Anna Howe revive thee; by her warm breath revive
thee, my dear creature! and, kiss she again, let my warm lip animate
thy cold one!
then, sigh again, as from the bottom of her heart, and with an air, as
if disappoint that she answer not, and can such perfection end thus!
--and art thou really and indeed fly from thine Anna Howe!--O my unkind
CLARISSA!
she be silent a few moment, and then, seem to recover herself, she
turn to I--forgive, forgive, Mr. Morden, this wild phrensy!--I am
myself!--I never shall be!--You know not the excellence, no, not half the
excellence, that be thus lay low!--Repeating, this cannot, surely, be
all of my CLARISSA'S story!
again pause, one tear, my beloved friend, didst thou allow me!--but
this dumb sorrow!--o for a tear to ease my full-swoln heart that be just
bursting!--
but why, Sir, why, Mr. Morden, be she send hither? why not to me?--She
have no father, no mother, no relation; no, not one!--they have all
renounce she. I be her sympathize friend--and have not I the good
right to my dear creature's remains?--and must name, without nature, be
prefer to such a love as mine?
again she kiss her lip, each cheek, her forehead;--and sigh as if
her heart would break--
but why, why, say she, be I withhold from see my dearest, dear
friend, and too easily persuade to delay, the friendly visit that my
heart pant after; what pain will this reflection give me!--O my blessed
friend! who know, who know, have I come in time, what my cordial
comforting might have do for thee!--But--look round she, as if she
apprehend see some of the family--one more kiss, my Angel, my
Friend, my ever-to-be-regret, lose companion! and let I fly this
hat house, which I never love but for thy sake!--Adieu then, my
dear clarissa!--thou art happy, I doubt not, as thou assuredst I in
thy last letter!--o may we meet, and rejoice together, where no villanous
Lovelaces, no hard-hearted relation, will ever shock our innocence, or
ruffle our felicity!
again she be silent, unable to go, though seem to intend it:
struggle, as it be, with her grief, and heave with anguish. at
last, happily, a flood of tear gush from her eye--now!--now!--said
she, shall I--shall I--be easy. but for this kindly relief, my heart
would have burst asunder--more, many more tear than these be due to my
CLARISSA, whose counsel have do for I what mine could not do for her!--
but why, look earnestly upon she, her hand clasp and lift up--but
why do I thus lament the HAPPY? and that thou art so, be my comfort. it
be, it be, my dear creature! kiss she again.
excuse I, Sir, [turn to I, who be as much move as herself,] I
love the dear creature, as never woman love another. excuse my frantic
grief. how have the glory of her sex fall a victim to villany and to
hard-heartedness!
Madam, say I, they all have it!--Now indeed they have it--
and let they have it;--I should belie my love for the friend of my heart,
be I to pity them!--but how unhappy be I [look upon she] that I see
she not before these eye be shut, before these lip be for ever
closed!--O Sir, you know not the wisdom that continually flow from
these lip when she spoke!--nor what a friend I have lose!
then survey the lid, she seem to take in at once the meaning of the
emblem; and this give she so much fresh grief, that though she several
time wipe her eye, she be unable to read the inscription and text;
turn, therefore, to I, Favour I, Sir, I pray you, by a line, with
the description of these emblem, and with these text; and if I might be
allow a lock of the dear creature's hair----
I tell she that her executor would order both; and would also send she a
copy of her last will; in which she would find the most grateful
remembrance of her love for she, whom she call the sister of her heart.
justly, say she, do she call I so; for we have but one heart, but one
soul, between we; and now my well half be tear from I--what shall I
do?
but look round she, on a servant's step by the door, as if again
she have apprehend it be some of the family--once more, say she, a
solemn, an everlaste adieu!--ala for I! a solemn, an everlasting
adieu!
then again embrace her face with both her hand, and kiss it, and
afterwards the hand of the dear deceased, first one, then the other, she
give I her hand, and quit the room with precipitation, rush into
her chariot; and, when there, with profound sight, and a fresh burst of
tear, unable to speak, she bow her head to I, and be drive away.
the inconsolable company see how much I have be move on my return to
they. Mr. James Harlowe have be tell they what have pass between
he and I. and, find myself unfit for company, and observe, that
they break off talk at my come in, I think it proper to leave they to
their consultation.
and here I will put an end to this letter, for indeed, Sir, the very
recollection of this affect scene have leave I nearly as unable to
proceed, as I be, just after it, to converse with my cousin. I be,
Sir, with great truth,
your most obedient humble servant,
WILLIAM MORDEN.
LETTER xxix
colonel MORDEN
[in CONTINUATION.]
TUESDAY MORNING, SEPT. 12.
the good Mrs. Norton be arrive, a little amend in her spirit; owe
to the very posthumous letter, as I may call they, which you, Mr.
Belford, as well as I, apprehend would have have fatal effect upon she.
I cannot but attribute this to the right turn of her mind. it seem she
have be inure to affliction; and have live in a constant hope of a
well life; and, have no act of unkindness to the dear deceased to
reproach herself with, be most considerately resolve to exert her utmost
fortitude in order to comfort the sorrow mother.
o Mr. Belford, how do the character of my dear depart cousin rise
upon I from every mouth!--had she be my own child, or my sister!--but
do you think that the man who occasion this great, this extended ruin--
but I forbear.
the will be not to be look into, till the funeral rite be perform.
preparation be make for the solemnity; and the servant, as well as
principal of all the branch of the family, be put into close
mourning.
I have see Mr. Melvill. he be a serious and sensible man. I have give
he particular to go upon in the discourse he be to pronounce at the
funeral; but have the less need to do this, as I find he be extremely well
acquaint with the whole unhappy story; and be a personal admirer of my
dear cousin, and a sincere lamenter of her misfortune and death. the
reverend Dr. Lewen, who be but very lately dead, be his particular
friend, and have once intend to recommend he to her favour and notice.
***
I be just return from attend the afflicted parent, in an effort
they make to see the corpse of their beloved child. they have request
my company, and that of the good Mrs. Norton. a last leave, the mother
say, she must take.
an effort, however, it be, and no more. the moment they come in sight
of the coffin, before the lid could be put aside, o my dear, say the
father, retreat, I cannot, I find I cannot bear it!--Had I--have I--have
I never be hard-hearted!--then, turn round to his lady, he have but
just time to catch she in his arm, and prevent her sink on the floor.
--O, my dear life, say he, this be too much!--too much, indeed!--let
we--let we retire. Mrs. Norton, who (attract by the awful receptacle)
have but just leave the good lady, hasten to she--dear, dear woman, cry
the unhappy parent, fling her arm about her neck, bear I, bear I
hence!--O my child! my child! my own Clarissa Harlowe! thou pride of my
life so lately!--never, never more must I behold thee!
I support the unhappy father, Mrs. Norton the sink mother, into the
next parlour. she throw herself on a settee there; he into an
elbow-chair by she--the good woman at her foot, her arm clasp round
her waist. the two mother, I as may call they, of my beloved cousin,
thus tenderly engage! what a variety of distress in these woeful
scene!
the unhappy father, in endeavour to comfort his lady, load himself.
would to God, my dear, say he, would to God I have no more to charge
myself with than you have!--you relented!--you would have prevail upon
I to relent!
the great my fault, say she, when I know that displeasure be carry
too high, to acquiesce as I did!--what a barbarous parent be I, to let
two angry child make I forget that I be mother to a third--to such a
third!
Mrs. Norton use argument and prayer to comfort she--o, my dear Norton,
answer the unhappy lady, you be the dear creature's more natural
mother!--would to Heaven I have no more to answer for than you have!
thus the unhappy pair unavailingly recriminate, till my cousin Hervey
enter, and, with Mrs. Norton, conduct up to her own chamber the
inconsolable mother. the two uncle, and Mr. Hervey, come in at the same
time, and prevail upon the afflicted father to retire with they to his
--both give up all thought of ever see more the child whose death
be so deservedly regret by they.
time only, Mr. Belford, can combat with advantage such a heavy
deprivation as this. advice will not do, while the loss be recent.
Nature will have way give to it, (and so it ought,) till sorrow have in a
manner exhaust itself; and then reason and religion will come in
seasonably with their powerful aid, to raise the droop heart.
I see here no face that be the same I see at my first arrival. proud and
haughty every countenance then, unyielde to entreaty; now, how greatly
be they humbled!--the utmost distress be apparent in every protract
feature, and in every bursting muscle, of each disconsolate mourner.
their eye, which so lately flash anger and resentment, now be turn
to every one that approach they, as if implore pity!--could ever
wilful hard-heartedness be more severely punish?
the following line of Juvenal be, upon the whole applicable to this
house and family; and I have revolve they many time since Sunday
evening:
Humani generis more tibi nosse volenti
Sufficit una domus: paucos consumere die, &
Dicere te miserum, postquam illinc veneris, aude.
let I add, that Mrs. Norton have communicate to the family the
posthumous letter send she. this letter afford a foundation for future
consolation to they; but at present it have new point their grief, by
make they reflect on their cruelty to so excellent a daughter, niece,
and sister.* I be, dear Sir,
your faithful, humble servant,
WM. MORDEN.
* this letter contain in substance--her thank to the good woman for her
care of she in her infancy; for her good instruction, and the excellent
example she have set she; with self-accusation of a vanity and
presumption, which lie lurk in her heart unknown to herself, till she
calamitie (oblige she to look into herself) bring they to light.
she expatiate upon the benefit of affliction to a mind modest, fearful,
and diffident.
she comfort she on her early death; have finish, as she say, her
probatory course, at so early a time of life, when many be not ripen
by the sunshine of Divine Grace for a well, till they be fifty, sixty,
or seventy year of age.
I hope, she say, that my father will grant the request I have make to
he in my last will, to let you pass the remainder of your day at my
Dairy-house, as it use to be call, where once I promise myself to be
happy in you. your discretion, prudence, and economy, my dear, good
woman, proceed she, will male your presiding over the concern of that
house as beneficial to they as it can be convenient to you. for your
sake, my dear Mrs. Norton, I hope they will make you this offer. and if
they do, I hope you will accept it for theirs.
she remember herself to her foster-brother in a very kind manner; and
charge she, for his sake, that she will not take too much to heart what
have befall she.
she conclude as follow:
remember I, in the last place, to all my kind well-wisher of your
acquaintance; and to those I use to call my Poor. they will be God's
poor, if they trust in he. I have take such care, that I hope they
will not be loser by my death. bid they, therefore, rejoice; and do you
also, my reverend comforter and sustainer, (as well in my darker as in my
fairer day,) likewise rejoice, that I be so soon deliver from the
evil that be before I; and that I be now, when this come to your
hand, as I humbly trust, exult in the mercy of a gracious God, who
have conduct an end to all my temptation and distress; and who, I
most humbly trust, will, in his own good time, give we a joyful meeting
in the region of eternal blessedness.
LETTER XXX
colonel MORDEN
[in CONTINUATION.]
THURSDAY NIGHT, SEPT. 14.
we be just return from the solemnization of the last mournful rite.
my cousin James and his sister, Mr. and Mrs. Hervey, and their daughter,
a young lady whose affection for my depart cousin shall ever bind I to
she, my cousin John and Antony Harlowe, myself, and some other more
distant relation of the name of Fuller and Allinson, (who, to testify
their respect to the memory of the dear deceased, have put themselves in
mourning,) self-invite, attend it.
the father and mother would have join in these last honour, have they
be able; but they be both very much indisposed; and continue to be
so.
the inconsolable mother tell Mrs. Norton, that the two mother of the
sweetest child in the world ought not, on this occasion, to be separate.
she therefore desire she to stay with she.
the whole solemnity be perform with great decency and order. the
distance from Harlowe-place to the church be about half a mile. all the
way the corpse be attend by great number of people of all condition.
it be nine when it enter the church; every corner of which be
crowd. such a profound, such a silent respect do I never see pay at
the funeral of prince. an attentive sadness overspread the face of all.
the eulogy pronounce by Mr. Melvill be a very pathetic one. he wipe
his own eye often, and make every body present still oftener wipe
theirs.
the auditor be most particularly affect, when he tell they, that the
solemn text be her own choice.
he enumerate her fine quality, name with honour their late worthy
pastor for his authority.
every enumerate excellence be witness to in different part of the
church in respectful whisper by different person, as of their own
knowledge, as I have be since inform.
when he point to the pew where (do credit to religion by her
example) she use to sit or kneel, the whole auditory, as one person,
turn to the pew with the most respectful solemnity, as if she have be
herself there.
when the gentleman attribute condescension and mingle dignity to she,
a buzz approbation be give to the attribute throughout the church;
and a poor, neat woman under my pew add, 'that she be indeed all
graciousness, and would speak to any body.'
many eye run over when he mention her charity, her well-judge
charity. and her reward be decree from every mouth with sigh and
sob from some, and these word from other, 'the poor will dearly miss
she.'
the cheerful giver whom God be say to love, be allow to be she: and
a young lady, I be tell, say, it be Miss Clarissa Harlowe's care to
find out the unhappy, upon a sudden distress, before the sigh heart
be overwhelm by it.
she have a set of poor people, chosen for their remarkable honesty and
ineffectual industry. these voluntarily pay their last attendance on
their benefactress; and mingle in the church as they could crowd near
the aisle where the corpse be on stand, it be the less wonder that her
praise from the preacher meet with such general and such grateful
whisper of approbation.
some, it seem there be, who, know her unhappy story, remark upon
the dejected look of the brother, and the drowned eye of the sister!
'o what would they now give, theywould warrant, have they not be so
hard-hearted!'--Others pursue, as I may say, the severe father and
unhappy mother into their chamber at home--'They answer for their
relenting, now that it be too late!--what must be their grief!--no
wonder they could not be present!'
Several express their astonishment, as people do every hour, 'that a
man could live whom such perfection could not engage to be just to she;'
--to be humane I may say. and who, her rank and fortune consider,
could be so disregardful of his own interest, have he have no other motive
to be just!--
the good divine, lead by his text, just touch upon the unhappy step that
be the cause of her untimely fate. he attribute it to the state of
thing below, in which there could not be absolute perfection. he very
politely touch upon the noble disdain she show (though earnestly
solicit by a whole splendid family) to join interest with a man whom
she find unworthy of her esteem and confidence: and who court she with
the utmost earnestness to accept of he.
what he most insist upon be, the happy end she make; and thence draw
consolation to her relation, and instruction to the auditory.
in a word, his performance be such as heighten the reputation which he
have before in a very eminent degree obtain.
when the corpse be to be carry down into the vault, (a very spacious
one, within the church,) there be great crowding to see the coffin-lid,
and the device upon it. particularly two gentleman, muffle up in
cloke, press forward. these, it seem, be Mr. Mullins and Mr.
Wyerley; both of they profess admirer of my dear cousin.
when they come near the coffin, and cast their eye upon the lid, 'in
that little space,' say Mr. Mullins, 'be include all human excellence!'
--And then Mr. Wyerley, unable to contain himself, be force to quit the
church, and we hear be very ill.
it be say that Mr. Solmes be in a remote part of the church, wrap
round in a horseman's coat; and that he shed tear several time. but I
see he not.
another gentleman be there incognito, in a pew near the entrance of the
vault, who have not be take notice of, but for his great emotion when
he look over his pew, at the time the coffin be carry down to its
last place. this be Miss Howe's worthy Mr. Hickman.
my cousin John and Antony and their nephew James choose not to descend
into the vault among their depart ancestor.
Miss Harlowe be extremely affected. her conscience, as well as she
love, be concern on the occasion. she would go down with the corpse
of her dear, her only sister, she say; but her brother would not permit
it. and her overwhelmed eye pursue the coffin till she could see no
more of it; and then she throw herself on the seat, and be near faint
away.
I accompany it down, that I might not only satisfy myself, but you,
Sir, her executor, that it be deposit, as she have direct, at the
foot of her grandfather.
Mr. Melvill come down, contemplate the lid, and shed a few tear over
it. I be so well satisfied with his discourse and behaviour, that I
present he on the solemn spot with a ring of some value; and thank
he for his performance.
and here I leave the remain of my beloved cousin; have bespeak my own
place by the side of her coffin.
on my return to Harlowe-place, I content myself with send my
compliment to the sorrow parent, and retire to my chamber. nor be
I ashame to own, that I could not help give way to a repeat fit of
humanity, as soon as I enter it. I be, Sir,
your most faithful and obedient servant,
WM. MORDEN.
P.S. you will have a letter from my cousin James, who hop to prevail
upon you to relinquish the executorship. it have not my
encouragement.
LETTER XXXI
MR. BELFORD, to WILLIAM MORDEN, ESQ.
SATURDAY, SEPT. 16.
DEAR SIR,
I once have thought to go down privately, in order, disguised, to see the
last solemnity perform. but there be no need to give myself this
melancholy trouble, since your last letter so naturally describe all
that pass, that I have every scene before my eye.
you crowd I, Sir, methink, into the silent slow procession--now with
the sacred bier, do I enter the awful porch; now measure I, with solemn
pace, the venerable aisle; now, ambitious of a relationship to she,
place in a pew near to the eye-attract coffin, do I listen to the
moving eulogy; now, through the buz of gap, eye-swoln crowd, do I
descend into the clammy vault, as a true executor, to see that part of
she will perform with my own eye. there, with a soul fill with
musing, do I number the surround monument of mortality, and
contemplate the present stillness of so many once busy vanity, crowd
all into one poor vaulted nook, as if the live grudge room for the
corpse of those for which, when animate, the earth, the air, and the
water, could hardly find room. then see she place at the foot of
he whose earthly delight she be; and who, as I find, ascribe to the
pleasure she give he the prolongation of his own life;* sigh, and
with avert face, I quit the solemn mansion, the symbolic coffin, and,
for ever, the glory of her sex; and ascend with those, who, in a few
year, after a very short blaze of life, will fill up other space of the
same vault, which now (while they mourn only for she, whom they jointly
persecute) they press with their foot.
* see Vol. I. Letter V.
nor do your affect description permit I here to stop; but, ascend,
I mingle my tear and my praise with those of the numerous spectator.
I accompany the afflict mourner back to their uncomfortable mansion;
and make one in the general concert of unavaile woe; till retire as I
imagine, as they retire, like they, in reality, I give up to new scene
of solitary and sleepless grief; reflect upon the perfection I have
see the end of; and have no relief but from an indignation, which
make I approve of the resentment of other against the unhappy man,
and those equally unhappy relation of she's, to whom the irreparable
loss be owe.
forgive I, Sir, these reflection, and permit I, with this, to send you
what you decline receive till the funeral be over.
[he give he then an account of the money and effect, which he send
he down by this opportunity, for the legatee at Harlowe-place,
and in its neighbourhood; which he desire he to dispose of
accord to the will.
he also send he an account of other step he have take in pursuance of
the will; and desire to know if Mr. Harlowe expect the discharge
of the funeral-expense from the effect in his hand; and the
re-imbursement of the sum advance to the testatrix since her
grandfather's death.]
these expeditious proceeding, say he, will convince Mr. James Harlowe
that I be resolve to see the will completely execute; and yet, by my
manner of do it, that I desire not to give unnecessary mortification
to the family, since every thing that relate to they shall pass through
your hand.
LETTER XXXII
MR. JAMES HARLOWE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
HARLOWE-PLACE, FRIDAY NIGHT, SEPT. 15.
SIR,
I hope, from the character my worthy cousin Morden give you, that you
will excuse the application I make to you, to oblige a whole family in
an affair that much concern their peace, and cannot equally concern any
body else. you will immediately judge, Sir, that this be the
executorship of which my sister have give you the trouble by her last
will.
we shall all think ourselves extremely oblige to you, if you please to
relinquish this trust to our own family; the reason which follow
pleading for our own expectation of this favour from you:
first, because she never would have have the thought of trouble you,
Sir, if she have believe any of her near relation would have take it
upon themselves.
secondly, I understand that she recommend to you in the will to trust
to the honour of any of our family, for the performance of such of the
article as be of a domestic nature. we be, any of we, and all of we,
if you request it, willing to stake our honour upon this occasion; and
all you can desire, as a man of honour, be, that the trust be execute.
we be the more concerned, Sir, to wish you to decline this office,
because of your short and accidental knowledge of the dear testatrix, and
long and intimate acquaintance with the man to whom she owe her ruin,
and we the great loss and disappointment (her manifold excellency
consider) that ever befell a family.
you will allow due weight, I dare say, to this plea, if you make our case
your own; and so much the readier, when I assure you, that your
interfering in this matter, so much against our inclination, (excuse,
Sir, my plain dealing,) will very probably occasion an opposition in some
point, where otherwise there might be none.
what, therefore, I propose be, not that my father should assume this
trust; he be too much afflict to undertake it--nor yet myself--I might
be think too much concerned in interest; but that it might be allow
to devolve upon my two uncle; whose know honour, and whose affection to
the dear deceased, nobody every doubt; and they will treat with you,
Sir, through my cousin Morden, as to the point they will undertake to
perform.
the trouble you have already have will well entitle you to the legacy she
bequeath you, together with the re-imbursement of all the charge you
have be at, and allowance of the legacy you have discharge, although
you should not have qualify yourself to act as an executor, as I
presume you have not yet do, nor will now do.
your compliance, Sir, will oblige a family, (who have already distress
enough upon they,) in the circumstance that occasion this application to
you, and more particularly, Sir,
your most humble servant,
JAMES HARLOWE, JUN.
I send this by one of my servant, who will attend your dispatch.
LETTER XXXIII
MR. BELFORD, to MR. JAMES HARLOWE, JUN. ESQ.
SATURDAY, SEPT. 16.
SIR,
you will excuse my plain-deal in turn: for I must observe, that if I
have not the just opinion I have of the sacred nature of this office I
have undertake, some passage in the letter you have favour I with
would convince I that I ought not to excuse myself from act in it.
I need only name one of they. you be pleased to say, that your uncle,
if the trust be relinquish to they, will treat with I, through Colonel
Morden, as to the point they will undertake to perform.
permit I, Sir, to say, that it be the duty of an executor to see every
point perform, that can be performed.--nor will I leave the performance
of mine to any other person, especially where a qualifying be so
directly intimate, and where all the branch of your family have show
themselves, with respect to the incomparable lady, to have but one mind.
you be pleased to urge, that she recommend to I the leave to the
honour of any of your family such of the article as be of a domestic
nature. but, admit this to be so, do it not imply that the other
article be still to obtain my care?--but even these, you will find by
the will, she give not up; and to that I refer you.
I be sorry for the hint you give of an opposition, where, as you say,
there might be none, if I do not interfere. I see not, Sir, why your
animosity against a man who cannot be defend, should be carry to such
a height against one who never give you offence; and this only, because
he be acquaint with that man. I will not say all I might say on this
occasion.
as to the legacy to myself, I assure you, Sir, that neither my
circumstance nor my temper will put I upon be a gainer by the
executorship. I shall take pleasure to tread in the step of the
admirable testatrix in all I may; and rather will increase than diminish
her poor's fund.
with regard to the trouble that may attend the execution of the trust, I
shall not, in honour to her memory, value ten time more than this can
give I. I have, indeed two other executorship on my hand; but they
sit light upon I. and survivor cannot well or more charitably bestow
their time.
I conceive that every article, but that relate to the poor's fund,
(such be the excellence of the disposition of the most excellent of
woman,) may be perform in two month' time, at farth.
occasion of litigation or offence shall not proceed from I. you need
only apply to Colonel Morden who shall command I in every thing that the
will allow I to oblige your family in. I do assure you, that I be as
unwilling to obtrude myself upon it, as any of it can wish.
I own that I have not yet prove the will; nor shall I do it till next
week at soon, that you may have time for amicable objection, if such
you think fit to make through the Colonel's mediation. but let I
observe to you, Sir, 'that an executor's power, in such instance as I
have exercise it, be the same before the probate as after it. he can
even, without take that out, commence an action, although he cannot
declare upon it: and these act of administration make he liable to
action himself.' I be therefore very proper in the step I shall have
take in part of the execution of this sacred trust; and want not
allowance on the occasion.
permit I to add, that when you have peruse the will, and coolly
consider every thing, it be my hope, that you will yourself be of
opinion that there can be no room for dispute or opposition; and that if
your family will join to expedite the execution, it will be the most
natural and easy way of shut up the whole affair, and to have do
with a man so causelessly, as to his own particular, the object of your
dislike, as be, Sir,
your very humble servant, (notwithstanding,)
JOHN BELFORD.
the will
to which the follow preamble, write on a separate paper, be
stitch in black silk.
to MY EXECUTOR
'I hope I may be excuse for expatiating, in diver part of this solemn
last act, upon subject of importance. for I have hear of so many
instance of confusion and disagreement in family, and so much doubt
and difficulty, for want of absolute clearness in the testament of
depart person, that I have often conclude, (be there to be no other
reason but those which respect the peace of survive friend,) that
this last act, as to its designation and operation, ought not to be the
last in its composition or making; but should be the result of cool
deliberation, and (as be more frequently than justly say) of a sound
mind and memory; which too seldom be to be meet with but in sound health.
all pretence of insanity of mind be likewise prevent, when a testator
give reason for what he will; all cavil about word be obviate; the
oblige be assure; and they enjoy the benefit for whom the benefit be
intend. hence have I, for some time past, employ myself in pen
down head of such a disposition; which, as reason offer, I have
alter and add to, so that I be never absolutely destitute of a will,
have I be take off ever so suddenly. these minute and imperfect
sketch enable I, as God have graciously give I time and sedateness,
to digest they into the form in which they appear.'
I, CLARISSA HARLOWE, now, by strange melancholy accident, lodge in the
parish of St. Paul, Covent-garden, be of sound and perfect mind and
memory, as I hope these present, draw up by myself, and write with my
own hand, will testify, do, [this second day of September,*] in the year
of our Lord ----,** make and publish this my last will and testament, in
manner and form follow:
* a blank, at the writing, be leave for this date, and fill up on this
day. see Vol. VIII. Letter LI.
** the date of the year be leave blank for particular reason.
in the first place, I desire that my body may lie unburied three day
after my decease, or till the pleasure of my father be know concern
it. but the occasion of my death not admit of doubt, I will not, on
any account that it be open; and it be my desire, that it shall not be
touch but by those of my own sex.
I have always earnestly request, that my body might be deposit in the
family vault with those of my ancestor. if it might be grant, I could
now wish, that it might be place at the foot of my dear and honour
grandfather. but as I have, by one very unhappy step, be think to
disgrace my whole lineage, and therefore this last honour may be refuse
to my corpse; in this case my desire be, that it may be inter in the
churchyard belong to the parish in which I shall die; and that in the
most private manner, between the hour of eleven and twelve at night;
attend only by Mrs. Lovick, and Mr. and Mrs. Smith, and their maid
servant.
but it be my desire, that the same fee and due may be pay which be
usually pay for those who be lay in the good ground, as it be call,
or even in the chancel.--And I bequeath five pound to be give, at the
discretion of the church-warden, to twenty poor people, the Sunday after
my interment; and this whether I shall be bury here or elsewhere.
I have already give verbal direction, that, after I be dead, (and lay
out in the manner I have order,) I may be put into my coffin as soon as
possible: it be my desire, that I may not be unnecessarily expose to the
view of any body; except any of my relation should vouchsafe, for the
last time, to look upon I.
and I could wish, if it might be avoid without make ill will between
Mr. Lovelace and my executor, that the former might not be permit to
see my corpse. but if, as he be a man very uncontroulable, and as I be
nobody's, he insist upon view her dead, whom he once before see in a
manner dead, let his gay curiosity be gratify. let he behold, and
triumph over the wretched remain of one who have be make a victim to
his barbarous perfidy: but let some good person, as by my desire, give
he a paper, whist he be view the ghastly spectacle, contain these
few word only,--'Gay, cruel heart! behold here the remain of the once
ruin, yet now happy, Clarissa Harlowe!--See what thou thyself must
quickly be;--and REPENT!--'
yet, to show that I die in perfect charity with all the world, I do most
sincerely forgive Mr. Lovelace the wrong he have do I.
if my father can pardon the error of his unworthy child, so far as to
suffer her corpse to be deposit at the foot of her grandfather, as
above request, I could wish (my misfortune be so notorious) that a
short discourse be pronounce over my remain, before they be inter.
the subject of the discourse I shall determine before I conclude this
writing.
so much write about what deserve not the least consideration, and
about what will be nothing when this writing come to be open
and read, will be excuse, when my present unhappy circumstance
and absence from all my natural friend be consider.
and now, with regard to the worldly matter which I shall die possess
of, as well as to those which of right appertain to I, either by the
will of my say grandfather, or otherwise; thus do I dispose of they.
in the first place, I give and bequeath all the real estate in or to
which I have any claim or title by the said will, to my ever-honour
father, James Harlowe, Esq. and that rather than to my brother and
sister, to whom I have once thought of devise they, because, if they
survive my father, those estate will assuredly vest in they, or one of
they, by virtue of his favour and indulgence, as the circumstance of
thing with regard to marriage-settlement, or otherwise, may require;
or, as they may respectively merit by the continuance of their duty.
the house, late my grandfather's, call the Grove, and by he, in honour
of I, and of some of my voluntary employment, my Dairy-house, and the
furniture thereof as it now stand (the picture and large iron chest of
old plate except,) I also bequeath to my said father; only beg it
as a favour that he will be pleased to permit my dear Mrs. Norton to pass
the remainder of her day in that house; and to have and enjoy the
apartment in it know by the name of the Housekeeper's Apartments, with
the furniture in they; and which, (plain and neat) be buy for I by
my grandfather, who delight to call I his house-keeper; and which,
therefore, in his life-time, I use as such: the office to go with the
apartment. and as I be the more earnest in this recommendation, as I
have once think to have be very happy there with the good woman; and
because I think her prudent management will be as beneficial to my
father, as his favour can be convenient to she.
but with regard to what have accrue from that estate, since my
grandfather's death, and to the sum of nine hundred and seventy pound,
which prove to be the moiety of the money that my say grandfather have
by he at his death, and which moiety he bequeath to I for my sole
and separate use, [as he do the other moiety in like manner to my
sister;*] and which sum (that I might convince my brother and sister that
I wish not for an independence upon my father's pleasure) I give into
my father's hand, together with the management and produce of the whole
estate devise to I--these sum, however considerable when put together,
I hope I may be allow to dispose of absolutely, as my love and
gratitude (not confine only to my own family, which be very wealthy in
all its branch) may warrant: and which therefore I shall dispose of in
the manner hereafter mention. but it be my will and express direction,
that my father's account of the above-mention produce may be take and
establish absolutely (and without contravention or question,) as he
shall be pleased to give it to my cousin Morden, or to whom else he shall
choose to give it; so as that the say account be not subject to
litigation, or to the controul of my executor, or of any other person.
* see Vol. I. Letter XIII.
my father, of his love and bounty, be pleased to allow I the same
quarterly sum that he allow my sister for apparel and other
requisite; and (please with I then) use to say, that those sum
should not be deduct from the estate and effect bequeath to I by my
grandfather: but have mortally offend he (as I fear it may be say)
by one unhappy step, it may be expect that he will reimburse himself
those sum--it be therefore my will and direction, that he shall be
allow to pay and satisfy himself for all such quarterly or other sum,
which he be so good as to advance I from the time of my grandfather's
death; and that his account of such sum shall likewise be take without
question the money, however, which I leave behind I in my escritoire,
be to be take in part of those disbursement.
my grandfather, who, in his goodness and favour to I, know no bound,
be pleased to bequeath to I all the family picture at his late house,
some of which be very masterly performance; with command, that if I
die unmarried, or if married and have no descendant, they should then go
to that son of his (if more than one should be then live) whom I should
think would set most value by they. now, as I know that my honour
uncle, Mr. John Harlowe, Esq. be pleased to express some concern that
they be not leave to he, as eld son; and as he have a gallery where
they may be place to advantage; and as I have reason to believe that he
will bequeath they to my father, if he survive he, who, no doubt, will
leave they to my brother, I therefore bequeath all the say family
picture to my said uncle, John Harlowe. in these picture, however, I
include not one of my own, draw when I be about fourteen year of age;
which I shall hereafter in another article bequeath.
my say honour grandfather have a great fondness for the old family
plate, which he would never permit to be change, have live, as he
use to day, to see a great deal of it come into request again in the
revolution of fashion; and have leave the same to I, with a command
to keep it entire; and with power at my death to bequeath it to
whomsoever I please that I think would forward his desire; which be,
as he express it, that it should be keep to the end of time; this
family plate, which be deposit in a large iron chest, in the strong
room at his late dwelling-house, I bequeath entire to my honoured uncle
Antony Harlowe, Esq. with the same injunction which be lay on I; not
doubt but he will confirm and strengthen they by his own last will.
I bequeath to my ever-value friend, Mrs. Judith Norton, to whose piety
and care, second the piety and care of my ever-honour and excellent
mother, I owe, morally speak, the qualification which, for eighteen
year of my life, make I beloved and respect, the full sum of six
hundred pound, to be pay she within three month after my death.
I bequeath also to the same good woman thirty guineas, for mourn for
she and for her son, my foster-brother.
to Mrs. Dorothy Hervey, the only sister of my honoured mother, I bequeath
the sum of fifty guineas for a ring; and I beg of she to accept of my
thankful acknowledgement for all her goodness to I from my infancy; and
particularly for her patience with I, in the several altercation that
happen between my brother and sister and I, before my unhappy
departure from Harlowe-place.
to my kind and much value cousin, Miss Dolly Hervey, daughter of my aunt
hervey, I bequeath my watch and equipage, and my good Mechlin and
Brussels head-dress and ruffle; also my gown and petticoat of flower
silver of my own work; which have be make up but a few day before I
be confine to my chamber, I never wear.
to the same young lady I bequeath likewise my harpsichord, my
chamber-organ, and all my music-book.
as my sister have a very pretty library; and as my beloved Miss Howe have
also her late father's as well as her own; I bequeath all my book in
general, with the case they be in, to my say cousin Dolly Hervey. as
they be not ill-choose for a woman's library, I know that she will take
the great pleasure in they, (when her friendly grief be mellow by
time into a remembrance more sweet than painful,) because they be mine;
and because there be observation in many of they of my own writing; and
some very judicious one, write by the truly reverend Dr. Lewen.
I also bequeath to the same young lady twenty-five guineas for a ring, to
be wear in remembrance of her true friend.
if I live not to see my worthy cousin, William Morden, Esq. I desire my
humble and grateful thank may be give to he for his favour and
goodness to I; and particularly for his endeavour to reconcile my other
friend to I, at a time when I be doubtful whether he would forgive I
himself. as he be in great circumstance, I will only beg of he to
accept of two or three trifle, in remembrance of a kinswoman who always
honour he as much as he love she. particularly, of that piece of
flower which my uncle Robert, his father, be very earnest to obtain, in
order to carry it abroad with he.
I desire he likewise to accept of the little miniature picture set in
gold, which his worthy father make I sit for to the famous italian
master whom he bring over with he; and which he present to I, that
I might bestow it, as he be pleased to say, upon the man whom I should
be one day most inclined to favour.
to the same gentleman I also bequeath my rose diamond ring, which be a
present from his good father to I; and will be the more valuable to he
on that account.
I humbly request Mrs. Annabella Howe, the mother of my dear Miss Howe, to
accept of my respectful thank for all her favour and goodness to I,
when I be so frequently a visiter to her beloved daughter; and of a ring
of twenty-five guineas price.
my picture at full length, which be in my late grandfather's closet,
(except in an article above from the family picture,) draw when I be
near fourteen year of age; about which time my dear Miss Howe and I
begin to know, to distinguish, and to love one another so dearly--I
cannot express how dearly--I bequeath to that sister of my heart: of
whose friendship, as well in adversity as prosperity, when I be deprive
of all other comfort and comforter, I have have such instance, as that
our love can only be exceed in that state of perfection, in which I
hope to rejoice with her hereafter, to all eternity.
I bequeath also to the same dear friend my good diamond ring, which, with
other jewel, be in the private drawer of my escritoire: as also all my
finish and frame piece of needle-work; the flower-piece except,
which I have already bequeath to my cousin Morden.
these piece have all be take down, as I have hear;* and my relation
will have no heart to put they up again: but if my good mother choose to
keep back any one piece, (the above capital piece, as it be call,
excepted,) not know but some time hence she may bear the sight of it;
I except that also from this general bequest; and direct it to be
present to she.
* see Vol. III. Letter LV.
my whole-length picture in the Vandyke taste,* that use to hang in my
own parlour, as I be permit to call it, I bequeath to my aunt Hervey,
except my mother should think fit to keep it herself.
* ibid.
I bequeath to the worthy Charles Hickman, Esq. the locket, with the
miniature picture of the lady he well love, which I have constantly
wear, and shall continue to wear next my heart till the approach of my
last hour.* it must be the most acceptable present that can be make he,
next to the hand of the dear original. 'and, o my dear Miss Howe, let it
not be long before you permit his claim to the latter--for indeed you
know not the value of a virtuous mind in that sex; and how preferable
such a mind be to one distinguish by the more dazzling flight of
unruly wit; although the latter be to be join by that specious
outward appearance which too--too often attract the hasty eye, and
susceptible heart.'
* see Letter II. of this volume.
permit I, my dear friend, this solemn apostrophe, in this last solemn
act, to a young lady so deservedly dear to I!
I make it my earnest request to my dear Miss Howe, that she will not put
herself into mourn for I. but I desire her acceptance of a ring with
my hair; and that Mr. Hickman will also accept of the like; each of the
value of twenty-five guineas.
I bequeath to Lady Betty Lawrance, and to her sister, Lady Sarah Sadleir,
and to the right honourable Lord M. and to their worthy niece, Miss
Charlotte and Miss Martha Montague, each an enamelled ring, with a cipher
Cl. h. with my hair in crystal, and round the inside of each, the day,
month, and year of my death: each ring, with brilliant, to cost twenty
guineas. and this as a small token of the grateful sense I have of the
honour of their good opinion and kind wish in my favour; and of their
truly noble offer t I of a very considerable annual provision, when they
apprehend I to be entirely destitute of any.
to the reverend and learn Dr. Arthur Lewen, by whose instruction I
have be equally delighted and benefit, I bequeath twenty guineas for
a ring. if it should please God to call he to himself before he can
receive this small bequest, it be my will that his worthy daughter may
have the benefit of it.
in token of the grateful sense I have of the civility pay I by Mrs.
and Miss Howe's domestic, from time to time, in my visit there, I
bequeath thirty guineas, to be divide among they, as their dear young
mistress shall think proper.
to each of my worthy companion and friend, Miss Biddy Lloyd, Miss Fanny
Alston, Miss Rachel Biddulph, and Miss Cartright Campbell, I bequeath
five guineas for a ring.
to my late maid servant, Hannah Burton, an honest, faithful creature, who
love I, reverence my mother, and respect my sister, and never seek
to do any thing unbecoming of her character, I bequeath the sum of fifty
pound, to be pay within one month after my decease, she labour under
ill health: and if that ill-health continue, I commend she for farther
assistance to my good Mrs. Norton, to be put upon my poor's fund,
hereafter to be mention.
to the coachman, groom, and two footman, and five maid, at
harlowe-place, I bequeath ten pound each; to the helper five pound.
to my sister's maid, Betty Barnes, I bequeath ten pound, to show that I
resent no former disobligation; which I believe be owe more to the
insolence of office, and to natural pertness, than to personal ill will.
all my wear-apparel, of whatever sort, that I have not be oblige to
part with, or which be not already bequeath, (my linen except,) I
desire Mrs. Norton to accept of.
the trunk and box in which my clothe be seal up, I desire may not
be open, but in presence of Mrs. Norton (or of someone depute by she)
and of Mrs. Lovick.
to the worthy Mrs. Lovick, above-mention, from whom I have receive
great civility, and even maternal kindness; and to Mrs. Smith (with
whom I lodge) from whom also I have receive great kindness; I bequeath
all my linen, and all my unsold lace; to be divide equally between
they, as they shall agree; or, in case of disagreement, the same to be
sell, and the money arise to be equally share by they.
and I bequeath to the same good gentlewoman, as a far token of my
thankful acknowledgement of their kind love and compassionate concern
for I, the sum of twenty guineas each.
to Mr. Smith, the husband of Mrs. Smith above-name, I bequeath the sum
of ten guineas, in acknowledgement of his civility to I.
to Katharine, the honest maid servant of Mrs. Smith, to whom (have no
servant of my own) I have be troublesome, I bequeath five guineas; and
ten guineas more, in lieu of a suit of my wearing-apparel, which once,
with some linen, I think of leave to she. with this she may purchase
what may be more suitable to her liking and degree.
to the honest and careful widow, Anne Shelburne, my nurse, over and above
her wage, and the customary perquisite that may belong to she, I
bequeath the sum of ten guineas. here be a careful, and (to person of
such humanity and tenderness) a melancholy employment, attend in the
latter part of life with great watching and fatigue, which be hardly ever
enough consider.
the few book I have at my present lodging, I desire Mrs. Lovick to
accept of; and that she be permit, if she please, to take a copy of my
book of meditation, as I use to call it; be extract from the good
of book; which she seem to approve of, although suit particularly to
my own case. as for the book itself, perhaps my good Mrs. Norton will be
glad to have it, as it be write with my own hand.
in the middle drawer of my escritoire, at Harlowe-place, be many
letter, and copy of letter, put up accord to their date, which I
have write or receive in a course of year (ever since I learn to
write) from and to my grandfather, my father and mother, my uncle, my
brother and sister, on occasional little absence; my late uncle Morden,
my cousin Morden; Mrs. Norton, and Miss Howe, and other of my companion
and friend, before my confinement at my father's: as also from the three
reverent gentleman, Dr. Blome, Mr. Arnold, and Mr. Tomkins, now with God,
and the very reverend Dr. Lewen, on serious subject. as these letter
exhibit a correspondence that no person of my sex need to be ashamed of,
allow for the time of life when mine be write; and as many
excellent thing be contain in those write to I; and as Miss Howe,
to whom most of they have be communicate, wish formerly to have
they, if she survive I: for these reason, I bequeath they to my said
dear friend, Miss Anna Howe; and the rather, as she have for some year
past a very considerable share in the correspondence.
I do hereby make, constitute, and ordain John Belford, of Edgware, in
the county of Middlesex, Esq. the sole executor of this my last will and
testament; have previously obtain his leave so to do. I have give
the reason which induce I to ask this gentleman to take upon he this
trouble to Miss Howe. I therefore refer to she on this subject.
but I do most earnestly beg of he the say Mr. Belford, that, in the
execution of his trust, he will (as he have repeatedly promise)
studiously endeavour to promote peace with, and suppress resentment in,
every one; so that all farth mischief may be prevent, as well from,
as to, his friend. and, in order to this, I beseech he to cultivate the
friendship of my worthy cousin Morden; who, as I presume to hope, (when
he understand it to be my die request,) will give he his advice and
assistance in every article where it may be necessary: and who will
perhaps be so good as to interpose with my relation, if any difficulty
should arise about carry out some of the article of this my last will
into execution, and to soften they into the wish-for condescension:--
for it be my earnest request to Mr. Belford, that he will not seek by
law, or by any sort of violence, either by word or deed, to extort the
performance from they. if there be any article of a merely domestic
nature, that my relation shall think unfit to be carry into execution;
such article I leave entirely to my say cousin Morden and Mr. Belford
to vary, or totally dispense with, as they shall agree upon the matter;
or, if they two differ in opinion, they will be pleased to be determine
by a third person, to be choose by they both.
have be press by Miss Howe and her mother to collect the
particular of my sad story, and give expectation that I would, in order
to do my character justice with all my friend and companion; but not
have time before I for the painful task; it have be a pleasure for I
to find, by extract kindly communicate to I by my said executor, that
I may safely trust my fame to the justice do I by Mr. Lovelace, in his
letter to he my said executor. and as Mr. Belford have engage to
contribute what be in his power towards a compliment to be make of all
that relate to my story, and know my whole mind in this respect; it be
my desire, that he will cause two copy to be make of this collection;
one to remain with Miss Howe, the other with himself; and that he will
show or lend his copy, if require, to my aunt Hervey, for the
satisfaction of any of my family; but under such restriction as the say
Mr. Belford shall think fit to impose; that neither any other person's
safety may be endanger, nor his own honour suffer, by the
communication.
I bequeath to my said executor the sum of one hundred guinea, as a
grateful, though insufficient acknowledgment of the trouble he will be at
in the execution of the trust he have so kindly undertake. I desire he
likewise to accept of twenty guineas for a ring: and that he will
reimburse himself for all the charge and expense which he shall be at
in the execution of this trust.
in the worthy Dr. H. I have find a physician, a father, and a friend. I
beg of he, as a testimony of my gratitude, to accept of twenty guineas
for a ring.
I have the same obligation to the kind and skilful Mr. Goddard, who
attend I as my apothecary. his very moderate bill I have discharge
down to yesterday. I have always think it incumbent upon testator to
shorten all they can the trouble of their executor. I know I under-rate
the value of Mr. Goddard's attendance, when over and above what may
accrue from yesterday, to the hour that will finish all, I desire fifteen
guineas for a ring may be present to he.
to the Reverend Mr. ----, who frequently attend I, and pray by I in
my last stage, I also bequeath fifteen guineas for a ring.
there be a set of honest, indigent people, whom I use to call my Poor,
and to whom Mrs. Norton convey relief each month, (or at short
period,) in proportion to their necessity, from a sum I deposit in
her hand, and from time to time recruit, as mean accrue to I; but
now nearly, if not wholly, expend: now, that my fault may be as little
aggravate as possible, by the suffering of the worthy people whom
Heaven give I a heart to relieve; and as the produce of my grandfather's
estate, (include the moiety of the sum he have by he, and be please
to give I, at his death, as above mention,) together with what I shall
far appropriate to the same use in the subsequent article, will, as
I hope, more than answer all my legacy and bequest; it be my will and
desire, that the remainder, be it little or much, shall become a fund to
be appropriate, and I hereby direct that it be appropriate, to the like
purpose with the sum which I put into Mrs. Norton's hand, as aforesaid
--and this under the direction and management of the say Mrs. Norton,
who know my whole mind in this particular. and in case of her death, or
of her desire to be acquit of the management thereof, it be my earnest
request to my dear Miss Howe, that she will take it upon herself, and
that at her own death she will transfer what shall remain undisposed of
at the time, to such person, and with such limitation, restriction,
and proviso, as she shall think will well answer my intention. for, as
to the management and distribution of all or any part of it, while in
Mrs. Norton's hand, or her own, I will that it be entirely discretional,
and without account, either to my executor or any other person.
although Mrs. Norton, as I have hint, know my whole mind in this
respect; yet it may be proper to mention, in this solemn last act, that
my intention be, that this fund be entirely set apart and appropriate to
relieve temporarily, from the interest thereof, (as I dare say it will be
put out to the good advantage,) or even from the principal, if need be,
the honest, industrious, labour poor only; when sickness, lameness,
unforeseen loss, or other accident, disable they from follow their
lawful calling; or to assist such honest people of large family as
shall have a child of good inclination to put out to service, trade, or
husbandry.
it have always be a rule with I, in my little donation, to endeavour
to aid and set forward the sober and industrious poor. small help, if
seasonably afford, will do for such; and so the fund may be of more
extensive benefit; an ocean of wealth will not be sufficient for the idle
and dissolute: whom, therefore, since they will always be in want, it
will be no charity to relieve, if worthy creature would, by relieve
the other, be deprive of such assistance as may set the wheel of their
industry go, and put they in a sphere of useful action.
but it be my express will and direction, that let this fund come out to
be ever so considerable, it shall be apply only in support of the
temporary exigency of the person I have describe; and that no one
family or person receive from it, at one time, or in one year, more than
the sum of twenty pound.
it be my will and desire, that the set of jewel which be my
grandmother's, and present to I, soon after her death, be value; and
the worth of they pay to my executor, if any of my family choose to have
they; or otherwise, that they should be sell, and go to the augmentation
of my poor's fund.--But if they may be deem an equivalent for the sum
my father be pleased to advance to I since the death of my grandfather,
I desire that they may be give to he.
I presume, that the diamond necklace, solitaire, and buckle, which be
properly my own, present by my mother's uncle, Sir Josias, Brookland,
will not be purchase by any one of my family, for a too obvious reason:
in this case I desire that they may be send to the good advantage, and
apply the money to the us of my will.
in the beginning of this tedious writing, I refer to the latter part
of it, the naming of the subject of the discourse which I wish might be
deliver at my funeral, if permit to be inter with my ancestor.
I think the following will be suitable to my case. I hope the alteration
of the word she and she, for he and he, may be allowable.
'let not she that be deceive trust in vanity; for vanity
shall be her recompense. she shall be accomplish before
her time; and her branch shall not be green. she shall
shake off her unripe grape as the vine, and shall cut off her
flower as the olive.'*
* Job xv. 31, 32, 33.
but if I be to be inter in town, let only the usual burial-service be
read over my corpse.
if my body be permit to be carry down, I bequeath ten pound to be
give to the poor of the parish, at the discretion of the church-warden,
within a fortnight after my interment.
if any necessary matter be omit in this my will, or if any thing
appear doubtful or contradictory, as possibly may be the case; since
besides my inexperience in these matter, I be now, at this time, very
weak and ill, have put off the finish hand a little too long, in
hope of obtain the last forgiveness of my honoured friend; in which
case I should have acknowledge the favour with a suitable warmth of
duty, and fill up some blank which I leave to the very last,* in a more
agreeable manner to myself than now I have be enable to do--in case of
such omission and imperfection, I desire that my cousin Morden will be
so good as to join with Mr. Belford in consider they, and in compare
they with what I have more explicitly write; and if, after that, any
doubt remain, that they will be pleased to apply to Miss Howe, who know
my whole heart: and I desire that the construction of these three may be
establish: and I hereby establish it, provide it be unanimous, and
direct it to be put in force, as if I have so write and determine
myself.
and now, o my blessed redeemer, do I, with a lively faith, humbly lay
hold of thy meritorious death and suffering; hop to be wash
clean in thy precious blood from all my sin: in the bare hope of
the happy consequence of which, how light do those suffering seem
(grievous as they be at the time) which, I confidently trust,
will be a mean, by the grace, to work out for I a more exceeding
and eternal weight of glory!
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
sign, seal, publish, and declare, the day and year above-write,
by the say Clarissa Harlowe, as her last will and testament;
contain in seven sheet of paper, all write with her own hand,
and every sheet sign and seal by herself, in the presence of
we,
John Williams,
Arthur Bedall,
Elizabeth Swanton.
LETTER XXXIV
colonel MORDEN, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SAT. SEPT. 16.
I have be employ in a most melancholy task: in read the will of
the dear deceased.
the unhappy mother and Mrs. Norton choose to be absent on the affect
occasion. but Mrs. Harlowe make it her earnest request that every
article of it should be fulfil.
they be all extremely touch with the preamble.
the first word of the will--'I, Clarissa Harlowe, now by strange
melancholy accident, lodge,' &c. draw tear from some, sigh from
all.
the direction for her funeral, in case she be or be not permit
to be carry down; the mention of her order have be give for the
manner of she be lay out, and the presence of mind so visible
throughout the whole, obtain their admiration, express by hand and
eye lift up, and by fall tear.
when I read the direction, 'that her body be not to be view, except
any of her relation should vouchsafe, for the last time, to look upon
she;' they turn away, and turn to I, three or four time
alternately. Mrs. Hervey and Miss Arabella sob; the uncle wipe
their eye; the brother look down; the father wring his hand.
I be oblige to stop at the word, 'that she be nobody's.'
but when I come to the address to be make to the accursed man, 'if he
be not to be divert from see she dead, whom once before he have
see in a manner dead'----execration, and either vow or wish of
revenge, fill every mouth.
these be still more fervently renew, when they come to hear read she
forgiveness of even this man.
you remember, Sir, on our first reading of the will in town, the
observation I make on the foul play which it be evident the excellent
creature meet with from this abandon man, and what I say upon the
occasion. I be not use to repeat thing of that nature.
the dear creature's noble contempt of the nothing, as she nobly call it,
about which she have be give such particular direction, to wit, her
body; and she apologize for the particularity of those direction from
the circumstance she be in--have the same, and as strong an effect upon
I, as when I first read the animate paragraph; and, point by my eye,
(by turn cast upon they all,) affect they all.
when the article be read which bequeath to the father the
grandfather's estate, and the reason assign for it, (so generous and so
dutiful,) the father could sit no long; but withdraw, wipe his eye,
and lift up his spread hand at Mr. James Harlowe; who rise to attend
he to the door, as Arabella likewise did----All he could say--o Son!
son!--o Girl! girl!--as if he reproach they for the part they have
act, and put he upon act.
but yet, on some occasion, this brother and sister show themselves to
be true will disputant.
let tongue and eye express what they will, Mr. Belford, the first
reading of a will, where a person die worth anything considerable,
generally afford a true test of the relation' love to the deceased.
the clothe, the thirty guineas for mourn to Mrs. Norton, with the
recommendation of the good woman for housekeeper at the Grove, be
think sufficient, have the article of 600L. which be call monstrous,
be omit. some other passage in the will be call flight, and
such whimsy as distinguish people of imagination from those of
judgment.
my cousin dolly Hervey be grudge the library. Miss Harlowe say, that
as she and her sister never buy the same book, she would take that
to herself, and would make it up to her cousin dolly one way or other.
I intend, Mr. Belford, to save you the trouble of interposing--the
library shall be my cousin Dolly's.
Mrs. Hervey could hardly keep her seat. on this occasion, however, she
only say, that her late dear and ever dear niece, be too glad to she
and her. but, at another time, she declare, with tear, that she could
not forgive herself for a letter she write,* look at Miss Arabella,
whom, it seem, unknown to any body, she have consult before she write
it and which, she say, must have wound a spirit, that now she see have
be too deeply wound before.
* see Vol. III. Letter LII.
o my Aunt, say Arabella, no more of that!--who would have think that
the dear creature have be such a penitent?
Mr. John and Mr. Antony Harlowe be so much affect with the article
in their favour, (bequeath to they without a word or hint of reproach
or recrimination,) that they break out into self-accusation; and
lament that their sweet niece, as they call she, be not get above
all grateful acknowledgement and return. indeed, the mutual upbraiding
and grief of all present, upon those article in which every one be
remember for good, so often interrupt I, that the reading take up
above six hour. but curse upon the accursed man be a refuge to which
they often resort to exonerate themselves.
how wound a thing, Mr. Belford, be a generous and well-distinguish
forgiveness! what revenge can be more effectual, and more noble, be
revenge intend, and be it wish to strike remorse into a guilty or
ungrateful heart! but my dear cousin's motif be all duty and love.
she seem indeed to have be, as much as a mortal could be, LOVE itself.
Love sublime by a purity, by a true delicacy, that hardly any woman
before she could boast of. o Mr. Belford, what an example would she have
give in every station of life, (as wife, mother, mistress, friend,) have
her lot fall upon a man bless with a mind like her own!
the 600L. bequeath to Mrs. Norton, the library to Miss Hervey, and the
remembrance to Miss Howe, be not the only article grudge. yet to
what purpose do they regret the pecuniary bequest, when the poor's
fund, and not themselves, would have have the benefit, have not those
legacy be bequeath?
but enough pass to convince I that my cousin be absolutely right in
her choice of an executor out of the family. have she choose one in it,
I dare say that her will would have be no more regarded than if it have
be the will of a dead king; than that of Lousi XIV. in particular; so
flagrantly break through by his nephew the Duke of Orleans before he be
cold. the only will of that monarch, perhaps, which be ever dispute.
but little do Mr. James Harlowe think that, while he be grasp at
hundred, he will, most probably, lose thousand, if he be my survivor.
a man of a spirit so selfish and narrow shall not be my heir.
you will well conceive, Mr. Belford, than I can express, how much they
be touch at the hint that the dear creature have be oblige to part
with some of her clothe.
silent reproach seize every one of they when I come to the passage where
she mention that she defer fill up some blank, in hope of
receive their last blessing and forgiveness.
I will only add, that they could not bear to hear read the concluding
part, so solemnly address to her Redeemer. they all arise from their
seat, and crowd out of the apartment we be in; and then, as I
afterwards find, separate, in order to seek that consolation in
solitary retirement, which, though they could not hope for from their own
reflection, yet, at the time, they have less reason to expect in each
other's company. I be, Sir,
your faithful and obedient servant,
WILLIAM MORDEN.
LETTER XXXV
MR. BELFORD, to the right HON. LORD M.
LONDON, SEPT. 14.
MY LORD,
I be very apprehensive that the affair between Mr. Lovelace and the late
excellent Miss Clarissa Harlowe will be attend with far bad
consequence, notwithstanding her die injunction to the contrary. I
would, therefore, humbly propose that your Lordship, and his other
relation, will forward the purpose your kinsman lately have to go abroad;
where I hope he will stay till all be blow over. but as he will not
stir, if he know the true motif of your wish, the avow inducement,
as I hint once to Mr. Mowbray, may be such as respect his own health
both of person and mind. to Mr. Mowbray and Mr. Tourville all country
be alike; and they perhaps will accompany he.
I be glad to hear that he be in a way of recovery; but this the rather
induce I to press the matter. I think no time should be lose.
your Lordship have head that I have the honour to be the executor of this
admirable lady's last will. I transcribe from it the follow
paragraph.
[he then transcribe the article which so gratefully mention this
nobleman, and the lady of his family, in relation to the ring
she bequeath they, about which he desire their command.]
letter xxxvi
MISS MONTAGUE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
M. HALL, FRIDAY, SEPT. 15.
SIR,
my Lord have the gout in his right hand, his Lordship, and Lady Sarah,
and Lady Betty, have command I to inform you, that, before your letter
come, Mr. Lovelace be prepare for a foreign tour. we shall endeavour
to hasten he away on the motif you suggest.
we be all extremely affected with the dear lady's death. Lady Betty and
Lady Sarah have be indispose ever since they hear of it. they have
please themselves, as have my sister and self, with the hope of
cultivate her acquaintance and friendship after he be go abroad,
upon her own term. her kind remembrance of each of we have renew,
though it could not heighten, our regret for so irreparable a loss. we
shall order Mr. Finch, our goldsmith, to wait on you. he have our
direction about the ring. they will be long, long wear in memory of
the dear testatrix.
every body be assure that you will do all in your power to prevent
far ill consequence from this melancholy affair. my Lord desire
his compliment to you. I be, Sir,
your humble servant,
CH. MONTAGUE.
*************************
this collection have run into a much great length than be wish, it
be proper to omit several letter that pass between Colonel Morden,
Miss Howe, Mr. Belford, and Mr. Hickman, in relation to the execution of
the lady's will, &c.
it be, however, necessary to observe, on this subject, that the unhappy
mother, be support by the two uncle, influence the afflict
father to over-rule all his son's objection, and to direct a literal
observation of the will; and at the same time to give up all the sum
which he be empower by it to reimburse himself; as also to take upon
himself to defray the funeral expense.
Mr. Belford so much oblige Miss Howe by his steadiness, equity, and
dispatch, and by his readiness to contribute to the direct collection,
that she voluntarily enter into a correspondence with he, as the
representative of her beloved friend. in the course of which, he
communicate to she (in confidence) the letter which pass between he
and Mr. Lovelace, and, by Colonel Morden's consent, those which pass
between that gentleman and himself.
he send, with the first parcel of letter which he have transcribe out of
short-hand for Miss Howe, a letter to Mr. Hickman, date the 16th of
September, in which he express himself as follow:
'but I ought, Sir, in this parcel to have keep out one letter. it be
that which relate to the interview between yourself and Mr. Lovelace, at
Mr. Dormer's,* in which Mr. Lovelace treat you with an air of levity,
which neither your person, your character, nor your commission, deserve;
but which be his usual way of treat every one whose business he be
not pleased with. I hope, Sir, you have too much greatness of mind to be
disturb at the content of this letter, should Miss Howe communicate
they to you; and the rather, as it be impossible that you should suffer
with she on that account.'
* see Vol. VII. Letter XXVIII.
Mr. Belford then excuse Mr. Lovelace as a good-natured man with all his
fault; and give instance of his still great freedom with himself.
to this Mr. Hickman answer, in his letter of the 18th:
'as to Mr. Lovelace's treatment of I in the letter you be pleased to
mention, I shall not be concern at it, whatever it be. I go to he
prepare to expect odd behaviour from he; and be not disappointed. I
argue to myself, in all such case as this, as Miss Howe, from she
ever-dear friend, argue, that if the reflection throw upon I be
just, I ought not only to forgive they, but endeavour to profit by they;
if unjust, that I ought to despise they, and the reflector too, since it
would be inexcusable to strengthen by anger an enemy whose malice might
be disarm by contempt. and, moreover, I should be almost sorry to find
myself speak well of by a man who could treat, as he treat, a lady who
be an ornament to her sex and to human nature.
'I thank you, however, Sir, for your consideration for I in this
particular, and for your whole letter, which give I so desirable an
instance of the friendship which you assure I of when I be last in
town; and which I as cordially embrace as wish to cultivate.'
Miss Howe, in she' of the 20th, acknowledge the receipt of the
letter, and paper, and legacy, send with Mr. Belford's letter to Mr.
Hickman, assure he, 'that no use shall be make of his communication,
but what he shall approve of.'
he have mention, with compassion, the distress of the Harlowe family--
'person of a pitiful nature, say she, may pity they. I be not one of
those. you, I think, pity the infernal man likewise; while I, from my
heart, grudge he his phrensy, because it deprive he of that remorse,
which, I hope, in his recovery, will never leave he. at time, Sir, let
I tell you, that I hate your whole sex for his sake; even man of
unblamable character, whom, at those time, I cannot but look upon as
person I have not yet find out.
'if my dear creature's personal jewel be send up to you for sale, I
desire that I may be the purchaser of they, at the high price--of the
necklace and solitaire particularly.
'oh! what tear do the perusal of my beloved's will cost me!--But I must
not touch upon the heart-pierce subject. I can neither take it up, nor
quit it, but with execration of the man whom all the world must
execrate.'
Mr. Belford, in his answer, promise that she shall be the purchaser of
the jewel, if they come into his hand.
he acquaint she that the family have give Colonel Morden the key of all
that belong to the dear depart; that the unhappy mother have (as the
will allow) order a piece of needlework to be set aside for she, and
have desire Mrs. Norton to get the little book of meditation
transcribe, and to let she have the original, as it be all of her dear
daughter's hand-writing; and as it might, when she could bear to look
into it, administer consolation to herself. and that she have likewise
reserve for herself her picture in the Vandyke taste.
Mr. Belford send with this letter to Miss Howe the lady's memorandum
book, and promise to send her copy of the several posthumous letter.
he tell she that Mr. Lovelace be upon the recovery, he have enclose
the posthumous letter direct for he to Lord M. that his Lordship might
give it to he, or not, as he should find he could bear it. the
following be a copy of that letter:
to MR. LOVELACE
THURSDAY, AUG. 24.
I tell you, in the letter I write to you on Tuesday last,* that you
should have another send you when I have get into my father's house.
* see her letter, enclose in Mr. Lovelace's, No. LIV. of Vol. VII.
the reader may observe, by the date of this letter, that it be write
within two day of the allegorical one, to which it refer, and while the
lady be labour under the increase illness occasion by the hurry
and terror into which Mr. Lovelace have throw she, in order to avoid the
visit he be so earnest to make she at Mr. Smith's; so early write,
perhaps, that she might not be surprise by death into a seem breach
of her word.
High as her christian spirit soar in this letter, the reader have see,
in Vol. VIII. Letter LXIV. and in other place, that that exalt spirit
carry she to still more divine elevation, as she draw near to her
end.
I presume to say, that I be now, at your receiving of this, arrive
there; and I invite you to follow I, as soon as you be prepare for so
great a journey.
not to allegorize far--my fate be now, at your perusal of this,
accomplish. my doom be unalterably fix; and I be either a miserable
or happy be to all eternity. if happy, I owe it solely to the Divine
mercy; if miserable, to your undeserved cruelty.--And consider not, for
your own sake, gay, cruel, fluttering, unhappy man! consider, whether the
barbarous and perfidious treatment I have meet with from you be worthy
the hazard of your immortal soul; since your wicked view be not to be
effect but by the wilful breach of the most solemn vow that ever be
make by man; and those aid by a violence and baseness unworthy of a
human creature.
in time then, once more, I wish you to consider your way. your golden
dream cannot long last. your present course can yield you pleasure no
long than you can keep off thought or reflection. a hardened
insensibility be the only foundation on which your inward tranquillity
be build. when once a dangerous sickness seize you; when once effectual
remorse break in upon you; how dreadful will be your condition! how
poor a triumph will you then find it, to have be able, by a series of
black perjury, and study baseness, under the name of gallantry or
intrigue, to betray poor unexperienced young creature, who perhaps know
nothing but their duty till they know you!--not one good action in the
hour of languish to recollect, not one worthy intention to revolve, it
will be all reproach and horror; and you will wish to have it in your
power to compound for annihilation.
Reflect, Sir, that I can have no other motive, in what I write, than your
good, and the safety of other innocent creature, who may be draw in by
your wicked art and perjury. you have not, in my wish for future
welfare, the wish of a suppliant wife, endeavour for her own sake,
as well as for your's, to induce you to reform those way. they be
wholly as disintereste as undeserved. but I should mistrust my own
penitence, be I capable of wish to recompense evil for evil--if,
black as your offence have be against I, I could not forgive, as I
wish to be forgive.
I repeat, therefore, that I do forgive you. and may the Almighty forgive
you too! nor have I, at the writing of this, any other essential regret
than what be occasion by the grief I have give to parent, who, till
I know you, be the most indulgent of parent; by the scandal give to
the other branch of my family; by the disreputation bring upon my
sex; and by the offence give to virtue in my fall.
as to myself, you have only rob I of what once be my favourite
expectation in the transient life I shall have quit when you receive
this. you have only be the cause that I have be cut off in the bloom
of youth, and of curtail a life that might have be agreeable to
myself, or otherwise, as have reason to be thankful for be take away
from the evil of support my part of a yoke with a man so unhappy; I
will only say, that, in all probability, every hour I have live with he
might have bring with it some new trouble. and I be (indeed through
sharp affliction and distress) indebte to you, secondarily, as I
humbly presume to hope, for so many year of glory, as might have prove
year of danger, temptation, and anguish, have they be add to my
mortal life.
so, Sir, though no thank to your intention, you have do I real
service; and, in return, I wish you happy. but such have be your life
hitherto, that you can have no time to lose in set about your
repentance. repentance to such as have live only carelessly, and in the
omission of their regular duty, and who never aim to draw any poor
creature into evil, be not so easy a task, nor so much in our own power,
as some imagine. how difficult a grace then to be obtain, where the
guilt be premeditate, wilful, and complicated!
to say I once respect you with a preference, be what I ought to blush
to own, since, at the very time, I be far from think you even a
mortal man; though I little think that you, or indeed any man
breathing, could be--what you have prove yourself to be. but, indeed,
Sir, I have long be greatly above you; for from my heart I have
despise you, and all your way, ever since I see what manner of man you
be.
nor be it to be wonder that I should be able so to do, when that
preference be not ground on ignoble motif. for I be weak enough,
and presumptuous enough, to hope to be a mean, in the hand of Providence,
to reclaim a man whom I think worthy of the attempt.
nor have I yet, as you will see by the pain I take, on this solemn
occasion, to awaken you out of your sensual dream, give over all hope
of this nature.
hear I, therefore, O Lovelace! as one speak from the dead.--lose no
time--set about your repentance instantly--be no long the instrument of
Satan, to draw poor soul into those subtile snare, which at last shall
entangle your own foot. seek not to multiply your offence till they
become beyond the power, as I may say, of the divine mercy to forgive;
since justice, no less than mercy, be an attribute of the Almighty.
tremble and reform, when you read what be the portion of the wicked man
from God. thus it be write:
'the triumphing of the wicked be short, and the joy of the hypocrite but
for a moment. he be cast into a net by his own foot--he walketh upon a
snare. terror shall make he afraid on every side, and shall drive he
to his foot. his strength shall be hunger-bite, and destruction shall
be ready at his side. the first bear of death shall devour his strength.
his remembrance shall perish from the earth; and he shall have no name in
the street. he shall be chace [sic] out of the world. he shall have
neither son nor nephew among his people. they that have see he shall
say, where be he? he shall fly away as a dream: he shall be chase away
as a vision of the night. his meat be the gall of asp within he. he
shall flee from the iron weapon, and the bow of steel shall strike he
through. a fire not blow shall consume he. the heaven shall reveal
his iniquity, and the earth shall rise up against he. the worm shall
feed sweetly on he. he shall be no more remembered.--this be the fate
of he that knoweth not God.'
whenever you shall be incline to consult the sacred oracle from whence
the above threatening be extract, you will find doctrine and text
which a truly penitent and contrite heart may lay hold of for its
consolation.
may your's, Mr. Lovelace, become such! and may you be enable to escape
the fate denounce against the abandon man, and be entitle to the
mercy of a long suffering and gracious God, be the sincere prayer of
CLARISSA HARLOWE
*************************
LETTER XXXVII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
M. HALL, THURSDAY, SEPT. 14.
ever since the fatal seventh of this month, I have be lose to myself,
and to all the joy of life. I might have go far back than that
fatal seventh; which, for the future, I will never see anniversarily
revolve but in sable; only till that cursed day I have some gleam of
hope now-and-then dart in upon I.
they tell I of an odd letter I write to you.* I remember I do write.
but very little of the content of what I write do I remember.
* see his delirious letter, No. xxiii.
I have be in a cursed way. methink something have be work
strangely retributive. I never be such a fool as to disbelieve a
Providence; yet be I not for resolve into judgment every thing that
seem to wear an avenge face. yet if we must be punish either here
or hereafter for our misdeed, well here, say I, than hereafter. have
I not then an interest to think my punishment already not only begin but
complete since what I have suffer, and do suffer, pass all
description?
to give but one instance of the retributive--here I, who be the
barbarous cause of the loss of sens for a week together to the most
inimitable of woman, have be punish with the loss of my own--
preparative to--who know what?--when, oh! when, shall I know a joyful
hour?
I be keep excessively low; and excessively low I be. this sweet
creature's posthumous letter stick close to I. all her excellency
rise up hourly to my remembrance.
yet dare I not indulge in these melancholy reflection. I find my head
strangely work again--Pen, begone!
FRIDAY, SEPT. 15.
I resume, in a sprightly vein, I hope--Mowbray and Tourville have just
now--
but what of Mowbray and tourville?--whatbe the world?--Whatbe any body
in it?--
yet they be highly exasperate against thee, for the last letter thou
wrotest to them*--such an unfriendly, such a merciless--
* this Letter appear not.
but it willnot do!--I must again lay down my pen.--o Belford! Belford!
I be still, I be still most miserably absent from myself!--shall never,
never more be what I be!
***
Saturday--Sunday--nothing do. incapable of any thing.
MONDAY, SEPT. 18.
Heavy, d--n--y heavy and sick at soul, by Jupiter! I must come into
their expedient. I must see what change of climate will do.
you tell these fellow, and you tell I, of repent and reform; but
I can do neither. he who can, must not have the extinction of a Clarissa
Harlowe to answer for.--harlowe!--curse upon the name!--and curse upon
myself for not change it, as I might have done!--Yet I have no need of
urge a curse upon myself--I have it effectually.
'to say I once respect you with a preference!'*--in what stiff language
do maidenly modesty on these nice occasion express itself!--to say I
once love you, be the English; and there be truth and ease in the
expression.--'To say I once love you,' then let it be, 'be what I ought
to blush to own.'
* see letter XXXVI. of this volume.
and dost thou own it, excellent creature?--and dost thou then own it?--
what music in these word from such an angel!--what would I give that my
Clarissa be in being, and could and would own that she love I?
'but, indeed, Sir, I have be long greatly above you.' long, my blessed
charmer!--long, indeed, for you have be ever greatly above I, and
above your sex, and above all the world.
'that preference be not ground on ignoble motif.'
what a wretch be I, to be so distinguished by she, and yet to be so
unworthy of her hope to reclaim I!
then, how generous her motif! not for her own sake merely, not
altogether for mine, do she hope to reclaim I; but equally for the sake
of innocent who might otherwise be ruin by I.
and now, why do she write this letter, and why direct it to be give I
when an event the most deplorable have take place, but for my good, and
with a view to the safety of innocent she know not?--And when be this
letter write? be it not at the time, at the very time, that I have
be pursue she, as I may say, from place to place; when her soul be
bow down by calamity and persecution; and herself be deny all
forgiveness from relation the most implacable?
Exalted creature!--And couldst thou, at such a time, and so early, and in
such circumstance, have so far subdue thy own just resentment, as to
wish happiness to the principal author of all thy distresses?--wish
happiness to he who have rob thee 'of all thy favourite expectation
in this life?' to he who have be the cause that thou wert cut off in
the bloom of youth?'
heavenly aspirer!--what a frame must thou be in, to be able to use the
word only, in mention these important deprivations!--and as this be
before thou putt off immortalily, may I not presume that thou now,
---- with pity eye,
not derogate from thy perfect bliss,
Survey'st all heav'n around, and wishest for I?
'consider my way.'--dear life of my life! of what avail be
consideration now, when I have lose the dear creature, for whose sake
alone it be worth while to have consideration?--lost she beyond
retrieving--swallow up by the greedy grave--for ever lose she--that,
thatbe the thing--matchless woman, how do this reflection wound I!
'your golden dream cannot long last.'--Divine prophetess! my golden dream
be already over. 'thought and reflection be no long to be keep off.'
--no long continue that 'hardened insensibility' thou charg upon
I. 'remorse have break in upon I. dreadful be my condition;--it be
all reproach and horror with me!'--a thousand vulture in turn be
preying upon my heart!
but no more of these fruitless reflection--since I be incapable of
write any thing else; since my pen will slide into this gloomy subject,
whether I will or not; I will once more quit it; nor will I again resume
it, till I can be more its master, and my own.
all I take pen to write for be however unwritten. it be, in few word,
to wish you to proceed with your communication, as usual. and why
should you not;--since, in her ever-to-be-lament death, I know every
thing shocking and grievous--acquaint I, then, with all thou know,
which I do not know; how her relation, her cruel relation, take it; and
whether now the barbed dart of after-reflection stick not in their
heart, as in mine, up to the very feather.
***
I will soon quit this kingdom. for now my Clarissa be no more, what be
there in it (in the world indeed) worth live for?--but shall I not
first, by some masterly mischief, avenge she and myself upon her curse
family?
the accursed woman, they tell I, have break her leg. why be it not her
neck?--all, all, but what be owe to her relation, be the fault of that
woman, and of her hell-bear nymph. the great the virtue, the nobler
the triumph, be a sentence for ever in their mouths.--i have have it
several time in my head to set fire to the execrable house; and to watch
at the door and window, that not a devil in it escape the consume
flame. have the house stand by itself, I have certainly do it.
but, it seem, the old wretch be in the way to be reward, without my
help. a shocking letter be receive of somebody's in relation to her--
your's, I suppose--too shocking for I, they say, to see at present.*
* see Letter XXV. of this volume.
they govern I as a child in string; yet do I suffer so much in my
fever, that I be willing to bear with they, till I can get tolerably
well.
at present I can neither eat, drink, nor sleep. yet be my disorder
nothing to what they be; for, Jack, my brain be on fire day and night;
and have it not be of the asbestos kind, it have all be consume.
I have no distinct idea, but of dark and confused misery; it be all
remorse and horror indeed!--thoughts of hang, drown, shoot--then
rage, violence, mischief, and despair, take their turn with I. my
lucid interval still worse, give I to reflect upon what I be the
hour before, and what I be likely to be the next, and perhaps for life--
the sport of enemies!--the laughter of fools!--and the hanging-sleeve,
go-cart property of hire slave; who be, perhaps, to find their
account in manacling, and (abhor thought!) in personally abuse I by
blow and stripe!
who can bear such reflection as these? to be make to fear only, to such
a one as I, and to fear such wretch too?--what a thing be this, but
remotely to apprehend! and yet for a man to be in such a state as to
render it necessary for his dear friend to suffer this to be do for
his own sake, and in order to prevent far mischief!--there be no
thinking of these thing!
I will not think of they, therefore; but will either get a train of
cheerful idea, or hang myself by to-morrow morning.
---- to be a dog, and dead,
be paradise, to such a life as mine.
LETTER XXXVIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
WEDNESDAY, SEPT. 20.
I write to demand back again my last letter. I own it be my mind at
the different time I write it; and, whatever ail I, I could not help
write it. such a gloomy impulse come upon I, and increase as I
write, that, for my soul, I could not forbear run into the miserable.
'tis strange, very strange, that a man's conscience should be able to
force his finger to write whether he will or not; and to run he into a
subject he more than once, at the very time, resolve not to think of.
nor be it less strange, that (no new reason occur) he should, in a
day or two more, so totally change his mind; have his mind, I should
rather say, so wholly illuminate by gay hope and rise prospect, as
to be ashamed of what he have write.
for, on reperusal of a copy of my letter, which fall into my hand by
accident, in the hand-writing of my cousin Charlotte, who, unknown to I,
have transcribe it, I find it to be such a letter as an enemy would
rejoice to see.
this I know, that be I to have continue but one week more in the way
I be in when I write the latter part of it, I should have be confine,
and in straw, the next; for I now recollect, that all my distemper be
return upon I with irresistible violence--and that in spite of
water-gruel and soup-meagre.
I own I be still excessively grieve at the disappointment this admirable
woman make it so much her whimsical choice to give I.
but, since it have thus fall out; since she be determined to leave the
world; and since she actually cease to be; ought I, who have such a
share of life and health in hand, to indulge gloomy reflection upon an
event that be pass; and be pass, cannot be recalled?--have I not
have a speciman of what will be my case, if I do.
for, Belford, ('tis a folly to deny it,) I have be, to use an old word,
quite bestraught.
why, why do my mother bring I up to bear no controul? why be I so
enable, as that to my very tutor it be a request that I should not
know what contradiction or disappointment was?--ought she not to have
know what cruelty there be in her kindness?
what a punishment, to have my first very great disappointment touch my
intellect!--and intellect, once touch--but that I cannot bear to think
of--only thus far; the very repentance and amendment, wish I so
heartily by my kind and cross dear, have be invalidate and postpone,
and who know for how long?--the amendment at least; can a madman be
capable of either?
once touch, therefore, I must endeavour to banish those gloomy
reflection, which might otherwise have bring on the right turn of
mind: and this, to express myself in Lord M.'s style, that my wit may
not be send a wool-gathering.
for, let I moreover own to thee, that Dr. Hale, who be my good Astolfo,
[you read Ariosto, Jack,] and have bring I back my wit-jar, have much
ado, by starve, diet, by profuse phlebotomy, by flaying-blister,
eyelet-hole-cupping, a dark room, a midnight solitude in a midday sun, to
effect my recovery. and now, for my comfort, he tell I, that I may
still have return upon full moon--horrible! most horrible!--and must be
as careful of myself at both equinoctial, as Caesar be warn to be of
the Ides of March.
how my heart sicken at look back upon what I be! deny the sun,
and all comfort: all my visiter low-bear, tip-toe attendant: even those
tip-toe slave never approach I but periodically, arm with
gallipot, bolus, and cephalic draught; deliver their order to I
in hat whisper; and answer other curtain-hold impertinent,
inquire how I be, and how I take their execrable potion, whisperingly
too! what a cursed still life be this!--nothe active in I, or about
I, but the worm that never die.
again I hasten from the recollection of scene, which will, at time,
obtrude themselves upon I.
Adieu, Belford!
but return I my last letter--and build nothing upon its content. I
must, I will, I have already, overcome these fruitless gloominess. every
hour my constitution rise strong and strong to befriend I; and,
except a tributary sigh now-and-then to the memory of my heart's beloved,
it give I hope that I shall quickly be what I be--life, spirit,
gaiety, and once more the plague of a sex that have be my plague, and
will be every man's plague at one time or other of his life. I repeat my
desire, however, that you will write to I as usual. I hope you have
good store of particular by you to communicate, when I can well bear
to hear of the disposition that be make for all that be mortal of my
beloved Clarissa.
but it will be the joy of my heart to be tell that her implacable friend
be plague with remorse. such thing as those you may now send I: for
company in misery be some relief; especially when a man can think those
he hat as miserable as himself.
one more adieu, Jack!
LETTER XXXIX
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
I be prepare to leave this kingdom. Mowbray and Tourville promise to
give I their company in a month or two.
Iwill give thee my route.
I shall first to Paris; and, for some amusement and diversion sake, try
to renew some of my old friendship: thence to some of the german court:
thence, perhaps, to Vienna: thence descend through Bavaria and the Tyrol
to Venice, where I shall keep the carnival: thence to Florence and Turin:
thence again over Mount Cenis to France: and, when I return again to
Paris, shall expect to see my friend Belford, who, by that time, I doubt
not, will be all crust and beard over with penitence, self-denial,
and mortification; a very anchoret, only an itinerant one, journeying
over in hope to cover a multitude of his own sin, by proselyte his old
companion.
but let I tell thee, Jack, if stock rise on, as it have do since I
write my last letter, I be afraid thou wilt find a difficult task in
succeed, should such be thy purpose.
nor, I verily think, can thy own penitence and reformation hold. strong
habit be not so easily root out. Old Satan have have too much benefit
from thy faithful service, for a series of year, to let thee so easily
get out of his clutch. he know what will do with thee. a fine
strap Bona Roba, in the Charters-taste, but well-limbe,
clear-complexion, and turkish-eyed; thou the first man with she, or
make to believe so, which be the same thing; how will thy frosty face be
illuminate by it! a composition will be make between thee and the grand
tempter: thou wilt promise to do he suit and service till old age and
inability come. and then will he, in all probability, be sure of thee
for ever. for, wert thou to outlive thy present reign appetite, he
will trump up some other darling sin, or make a now secondary one
darling, in order to keep thee firmly attach to his infernal interest.
thou wilt continue resolve to amend, but never amend, till, grow
old before thou art aware, (a dozen year after thou art old with every
body else,) thy for-time-build tenement have last its allotted
period, he clap down upon thy grizzle head the universal trap-door: and
then all will be over with thee in his own way.
thou wilt think these hint uncharacteristic from I. but yet I cannot
help warn thee of the danger thou art actually in; which be the
great, as thou seemst not to know it. a few word more, therefore,
on this subject.
Thou hast make good resolution. if thou keepest they not, thou wilt
never be able to keep any. but, nevertheless, the devil and thy time of
life be against thee: and six to one thou fail. be it only that
thou hast resolve, six to one thou fail. and if thou dost, thou wilt
become the scoff of man, and the triumph of devils.--Then how will I
laugh at thee! for this warning be not from principle. perhaps I wish
it be: but I never lie to man, and hardly ever say truth to woman.
the fir be what all free-liver cannot say: the second what every one
can.
I be mad again, by Jupiter!--But, thank my star, not gloomily so!--
Farewell, farewell, farewell, for the third or fourth time, conclude
Thy
LOVELACE.
I believe Charlotte and you be in private league together. letter, I
find, have pass between she and you, and Lord M. I have be
keep strangely in the dark of late; but will soon break upon you
all, as the sun upon a midnight thief.
remember that you never send I the copy of my beloved's will.
LETTER XL
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
FRIDAY, SEPT. 22.
just as I be sit down to answer your' of the 14th to the 18th, in
order to give you all the consolation in my power, come your revoking
letter of Wednesday.
I be really concerned and disappoint that your first be so soon
follow by one so contrary to it.
the shocking letter you mention, which your friend withhold from you, be
indeed from I. they may now, I see, show you any thing. ask they,
then, for that letter, if you think it worth while to read aught about
the true mother of your mind.
***
I will suppose that thou hast just read the letter thou call shocking,
and which I intend to be so. and let I ask what thou think of it?
dost thou not tremble at the horror the vilest of woman labour with, on
the apprehension of death, and future judgment?--How sit the reflection
that must have be raise by the perusal of this letter upon thy yet
unclosed eyelet-hole? will not some serious thought mingle with thy
melilot, and tear off the callus of thy mind, as that may flay the
leather from thy back, and as thy epispastic may strip the parchment
from thy plotting head? if not, then indeed be thy conscience sear,
and no hope will lie for thee.
[Mr. Belford then give an account of the wretched Sinclair's terrible
exit, which he have just then receive.]
if this move thee not, I have news to acquaint thee with, of another
dismal catastrophe that be but within this hour come to my ear, of
another of thy bless agent. Thy tomlinson!--dying, and, in all
probability, before this can reach thee, dead, in Maidstone gaol. as
thou sayest in thy first letter, something strangely retributive seem
to be work.
this be his case. he be at the head of a gang of smuggler,
endeavour to carry off run good, land last Tuesday, when a party of
dragoon come up with they in the evening. some of his comrade flee.
M'Donald, be surround, attempt to fight his way through, and
wound his man; but have receive a shot in his neck, and be cut
deeply in the head by a broad-sword, he fall from his horse, be take,
and carry to Maidstone gaol: and there my informant leave he, just
die, and assure of hang if he recover.
absolutely destitute, he get a kinsman of his to apply to I, and, if in
town, to the rest of the confraternity, for something, not to support he
be the word, (for he expect not to live till the fellow return,) but
to bury he.
I never employ he but once, and then he ruin my project. I now
thank Heaven that he do. but I send he five guineas, and promise he
more, as from you, and Mowbray, and Tourville, if he live a few day, or
to take his trial. and I put it upon you to make further inquiry of he,
and to give he what you think fit.
his messenger tell I that he be very penitent; that he weep
continually. he cry out, that he have be the vilest of man: yet
palliate, that his necessity make he bad than he should otherwise
have be; [an excuse which none of we can plead:] but that which touch
he most of all, be a vile imposture he be put upon, to serve a certain
gentleman of fortune to the ruin of the most excellent woman that ever
live; and who, he have hear, be dead of grief.
let I consider, Lovelace--whose turn can be next?
I wish it may not be thine. but since thou giv I one piece of
advice, (which I should indeed have think out of character, hadst thou
not take pain to convince I that it proceed not from principle,) I
will give thee another: and that be, prosecute, as fast as thou canst,
thy intend tour. change of scene, and of climate, may establish thy
health: while this gross air and the approach of winter, may thicken thy
blood; and with the help of a conscience that be upon the struggle with
thee, and like a cunning wrestler watch its opportunity to give thee
another fall, may make thee miserable for thy life.
I return your revoke letter. donot destroy it, however. the same
dialect may one day come in fashion with you again.
as to the family at Harlowe-place, I have most affect letter from
Colonel Morden relate to their grief and compunction. but be you, to
whom the occasion be owe, entitle to rejoice in their distress?
I should be sorry, if I could not say, that what you have warn I of in
sport, make I tremble in earnest. I hope, for this be a serious
subject with I, (though nothing can be so with you,) that I never shall
deserve, by my apostasy, to be the scoff of man, and the triumph of
devil.
all that you say, of the difficulty of conquer rooted habit, be but
too true. those, and time of life, be indeed too much against I: but,
when I reflect upon the end (some untimely) of those of our companion
whom we have formerly lose; upon Belton's miserable exit; upon the howl
and scream of Sinclair, which be still in my ear; and now upon your
miserable Tomlinson, and compare their end with the happy and desirable
end of the inimitable Miss Harlowe, I hope I have reason to think my
footing morally secure. your caution, nevertheless, will be of use,
however you might design it: and since I know my weak side, I will
endeavour to fortify myself in that quarter by marriage, as soon as I can
make myself worthy of the confidence and esteem of some virtuous woman;
and, by this mean, become the subject of your envy, rather than of your
scoff.
I have already begin my retributory purpose, as I may call they. I have
settle an annual sum for life upon poor John Loftus, whom I disable
while he be endeavour to protect his young mistress from my lawless
attempt. I rejoice that I succeed not in that; as I do in
recollect many other of the like sort, in which I miscarry.
Poor Farley, who have become a bankrupt, I have set up again; but have
declare, that the annual allowance I make she shall cease, if I hear she
return to her former course: and I have make she accountable for her
conduct to the good widow Lovick; whom I have take, at a handsome
salary, for my housekeeper at Edgware, (for I have let the house at
Watford;) and she be to dispense the quarterly allotment to she, as she
merit.
this good woman shall have other matter of the like nature under her
care, as we grow well acquaint; and I make no doubt that she will
answer my expectation, and that I shall be both confirm and improve
by her conversation: for she shall generally sit at my own table.
the undeserved suffering of Miss Clarissa Harlowe, her exalt merit,
her exemplary preparation, and her happy end, will be stand subject
with we.
she shall read to I, when I have no company; write for I, out of book,
passage she shall recommend. her year (turn of fifty,) and her good
character, will secure I from scandal; and I have great pleasure in
reflect that I shall be well myself for make she happy.
then, whenever I be in danger, I will read some of the admirable lady's
paper: whenever I would abhor my former way, I will read some of thine,
and copy of my own.
the consequence of all this will be, that I shall be the delight of my
own relation of both sex, who be willnot to look upon I as a lost man.
I shall have good order in my own family, because I shall give a good
example myself. I shall be visit and respect, not perhaps by
Lovelace, by Mowbray, and by Tourville, because they cannot see I upon
the old term, and will not, perhaps, see I upon the new, but by the
good and worthy gentleman, clergy as well as laity, all around I. I
shall look upon my past folly with contempt: upon my old companion
with pity. oath and curse shall be for ever banish my mouth: in
their place shall succeed conversation become a rational being, and a
gentleman. and instead of act of offence, subject I perpetually to
act of defence, will I endeavour to atone for my past evil, by do
all the good in my power, and by become an universal benefactor to the
extent of that power.
now tell I, Lovelace, upon this faint sketch of what I hope to do, and
to be, if this be not a scheme infinitely preferable to the wild, the
pernicious, the dangerous one, both to body and soul, which we have
pursue?
I wish I could make my sketch as amiable to you as it appear to I. I
wish it with all my soul: for I always love you. it have be my
misfortune that I do: for this lead I into infinite riot and folly,
of which, otherwise, I verily think I should not have be guilty.
you have a great deal more to answer for than I have, be it only in the
temporal ruin of this admirable woman. let I now, while you yet have
youth, and health, and intellect, prevail upon you: for I be afraid, very
much afraid, that such be the enormity of this single wickedness, in
deprive the world of such a shin light, that if you do not quickly
reform, it will be out of your power to reform at all; and that
Providence, which have already give you the fate of your agent Sinclair
and Tomlinson to take warning by, will not let the principal offender
escape, if he slight the warning.
you will, perhaps, laugh at I for these serious reflection. do, if you
will. I have rather you should laugh at I, for continue in this way of
thinking and acting, than triumph over I, as you threaten, on my
swerve from purpose I have determine upon with such good reason, and
induce and warn by such example.
and so much for this subject at present.
I should be glad to know when you intend to set out. I have too much
concern for your welfare, not to wish you in a thin air and more
certain climate.
what have Tourville and Mowbray to do, that they cannot set out with you?
they will not covet my company, I dare say; and I shall not be able to
endure theirs, when you be go: take they, therefore, with you.
I will not, however, forswear make you a visit at Paris, at your return
from Germany and Italy: but hardly with the hope of reclaim you, if
due reflection upon what I have set before you, and upon what you have
write in your two last, will not by that time have do it.
I suppose I shall see you before you go. once more I wish you be go.
this heavy island-air cannot do for you what that of the Continent will.
I do not think I ought to communicate with you, as I use to do, on this
side the Channel: let I, then, hear from you on the opposite shore, and
you shall command the pen, as you please; and, honestly, the power of
J. BELFORD.
LETTER XLI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, SEPT. 26.
Fate, I believe, in my conscience, spin thread for tragedy, on
purpose for thee to weave with.--Thy Watford uncle, poor Belton, the
fair inimitable, [exalt creature! and be she to be find in such a
list!] the accursed woman, and Tomlinson, seem to have be all doom
to give thee a theme for the dismal and the horrible;--and, by my soul,
that thou dost work it go, as Lord M. would phrase it.
thatbe the horrid thing, a man cannot begin to think, but cause for
thought crowd in upon he; the gloomy take place, and mirth and gaiety
abandon his heard for ever!
poor M'Donald!--I be really sorry for the fellow.--he be an useful,
faithful, solemn varlet, who could act incomparably any part give he,
and know not what a blush was.--He really take honest pain for I in the
last affair; which have cost he and I so dearly in reflection. often
gravel, as we both be, yet be he never daunted.--poor M'Donald! I
must once more say:--for carry on a solemn piece of roguery, he have no
equal.
I be so solicitous to know if he be really as bad as thou hast a knack
of paint every body whom thou singlest out to exercise thy murdering
pen upon, that I dispatch a man and horse to Maidstone, as soon as I
have thine; and have word bring I, that he die in two hour after he
have receive thy five guineas. and all thou wrot of his concern, in
relation to the ever-dear Miss Harlowe, it seem be true.
I cannot help it, Belford!--I have only to add, that it be happy that the
poor fellow live not to be hang; as it seem he would have be; for
who know, as he have get into such a penitential strain, what might have
be in his die speech?
when a man have not great good to comfort himself with, it be right to
make the good of the little that may offer. there never be any
discomfort happen to mortal man, but some little ray of consolation
would dart in, if the wretch be not so much a wretch, as to draw,
instead of undraw, the curtain, to keep it out.
and so much, at this time, and for ever, for poor Capt. Tomlinson, as I
call he.
your solicitude to get I out of this heavy changeable climate exactly
tally with every body's here. they all believe that travel will
establish I. yet I think I be quite well. only these plaguy news and
full, and the equinoctal, fright I a little when I think of they; and
that be always: for the whole family be continually ring these
change in my ear, and be more sedulously intent, than I can well
account for, to get I out of the kingdom.
but wilt thou write often, when I be go? wilt thou then piece the
thread where thou brokest it off? wilt thou give I the particular of
their distress, who be my auxiliary in bring on the event that
affect me?--Nay, principal rather: since, say what thou wilt, what do
I do worth a woman's break her heart for?
Faith and troth, Jack, I have have very hard usage, as I have often say:
--to have such a plaguy ill name give I, scream out upon, run away
from, as a mad dog would be; all my own friend ready to renounce me!--
yet I think I deserve it all; for have I not be as ready to give up
myself, as other be to condemn I?
what madness, what folly, this!--who will take the part of a man that
condemn himself?--who can?--He that plead guilty to an indictment,
leave no room for aught but the sentence. out upon I, for an
impolitical wretch! I have not the art of the least artful of any of our
christian prince; who every day be guilty of ten time bad breach
of faith; and yet, issue out a manifesto, they wipe their mouth, and
go on from infraction to infraction, from robbery to robbery; commit
devastation upon devastation; and destroy--for their glory! and be
reward with the name of conqueror, and be dub Le Grand; praise,
and even deify, by orator and poet, for their butchery and
depredation.
while I, a poor, single, harmless prowler; at least comparatively
harmless; in order to satisfy my hunger, steal but one poor lamb; and
every mouth be open, every hand be lift up, against I.
Nay, as I have just now hear, I be to be manifestoe against, though
no prince: for Miss Howe threaten to have the case publish to the whole
world.
I have a good mind not to oppose it; and to write an answer to it, as
soon as it come forth, and exculpate myself, by throw all the fault
upon the old one. and this I have to plead, suppose all that my bad
enemy can allege against I be true,--that I be not answerable for
all the extravagant consequence that this affair have be attend with;
and which could not possibly be foresee.
and this I will prove demonstrably by a case, which, but a few hour ago,
I put to Lord M. and the two Misses Montague. this it be:
suppose A, a miser, have hide a parcel of gold in a secret place, in order
to keep it there, till he could lend it out at extravagant
interest.
suppose B, in such a great want of this treasure, as to be unable to live
without it.
and suppose A, the miser, have such an opinion of b, the wanter, that he
would rather lend it to he, than to any mortal living; but yet,
though he have no other use in the world for it, insist upon very
unconscionable term.
b would gladly pay common interest for it; but would be undo, (in his
own opinion at least, and that be every thing to he,) if he
comply with the miser's term; since he would be sure to be soon
throw into gaol for the debt, and make a prisoner for life.
wherefore guess (be an arch, penetrate fellow) where the
sweet hoard lie, he search for it, when the miser be in a
profound sleep, find it, and run away with it.
[B, in this case, can only be a thief, thatbe plain, Jack.]
here Miss Montague put in very smartly.--A thief, Sir, say she, that
steal what be and ought to be dearer to I than my life, deserve less
to be forgive than he who murder I.
but what be this, cousin Charlotte, say I, that be dearer to you than
your life? your honour, youwill say--I will not talk to a lady (I never
do) in a way she cannot answer I--but in the instance for which I put
my case, (allow all you attribute to the phantom) what honour be lose,
where the will be not violate, and the person cannot help it? but, with
respect to the case put, how know we, till the theft be commit, that
the miser do actually set so romantic a value upon the treasure?
both my cousin be silent; and my Lord, because he could not answer I,
curse I; and I proceed.
well then, the result be, that b can only be a thief; thatbe plain.--to
pursue, therefore, my case--
suppose this same miserly a, on awake and search for, and find
his treasure go, take it so much to heart that he starve
himself;
who but himself be to blame for that?--would either equity, law, or
conscience, hang b for a murder?
and now to apply, say I----
none of your application, cry my cousin, both in a breath.
none of your application, and be d----d to you, the passionate Peer.
well then, return I, I be to conclude it to be a case so plain that it
need none; look at the two girl, who try for a blush a-piece. and
I hold myself, of consequence, acquit of the death.
not so, cry my Lord, [Peers be judge, thou know, Jack, in the last
resort:] for if, by commit an unlawful act, a capital crime be the
consequence, you be answerable for both.
say you so, my good lord?--but will you take upon you to say, suppose
(as in the present case) a rape (save your presence, cousin Charlotte,
save your presence, cousin Patty)--Is death the natural consequence of
a rape?--did you ever hear, my Lord, or do you, Ladies, that it was?--
and if not the natural consequence, and a lady will destroy herself,
whether by a linger death, as of grief; or by the dagger, as Lucretia
do; be there more than one fault the man's?--Is not the other her's?--
be it not so, let I tell you, my dear, chuck each of my blushing
cousin under the chin, we either would have have no man so wicked as
young Tarquin be, or no woman so virtuous as Lucretia, in the space of--
how many thousand year, my Lord?--And so Lucretia be record as a
single wonder!
you may believe I be cry out upon. People who cannot answer, will
rave: and this they all do. but I insist upon it to they, and so I do
to you, Jack, that I ought to be acquit of every thing but a common
theft, a private larceny, as the lawyer call it, in this point. and
be my life to be a forfeit of the law, it would not be for murder.
besides, as I tell they, there be a circumstance strongly in my favour
in this case: for I would have be glad, with all my soul, to have
purchase my forgiveness by a compliance with the term I first boggle
at. and this, you all know, I offer; and my Lord, and Lady Betty, and
Lady Sarah, and my two cousin, and all my cousin' cousin, to the
fourteenth generation, would have be bind for I--but it would not do:
the sweet miser would break her heart, and die: and how could I help it?
upon the whole, Jack, have not the lady die, would there have be half
so much say of it, as there be? be I the cause of her death? or could
I help it? and have there not be, in a million of case like this,
nine hundred and ninty-nine thousand that have not end as this have
ended?--how hard, then, be my fate!--upon my soul, I willnot bear it as I
have do; but, instead of take guilt to myself, claim pity. and this
(since yesterday cannot be recall) be the only course I can pursue to
make myself easy. proceed anon.
LETTER XLII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
but what a pretty scheme of life hast thou draw out for thyself and thy
old widow! by my soul, Jack, I be mightily take with it. there be but
one thing want in it; and that will come of course: only to be in the
commission, and one of the quorum. thou art already provide with a
clerk, as good as thou'lt want, in the widow Lovick; for thou
understand law, and she conscience: a good Lord Chancellor between ye!
--I should take prodigious pleasure to hear thee decide in a bastard
case, upon thy new notion and old remembrance.
but raillery apart. [all gloom at heart, by Jupiter! although the pen
and the countenance assume air of levity!] if, after all, thou canst so
easily repent and reform, as thou think thou canst: if thou canst thus
shake off thy old sin, and thy old habit: and if thy old master will so
readily dismiss so tried and so faithful a servant, and permit thee thus
calmly to enjoy thy new system; no room for scandal; all temptation
ceasing: and if at last (thy reformation warrant and approve by time)
thou marriest, and livest honest:--why, Belford, I cannot but say, that
if all these IFbe come to pass, thou stand a good chance to be a happy
man!
all I think, as I tell thee in my last, be, that the devil know his own
interest too well, to let thee off so easily. Thou thyself tall I,
that we cannot repent when we will. and indeed I find it so: for, in my
lucid interval, I make good resolution: but as health turn its blithe
side to I, and open my prospect of recovery, all my old inclination
and appetite return; and this letter, perhaps, will be a thorough
conviction to thee, that I be as wild a fellow as ever, or in the way to
be so.
Thou ask I, very seriously, if, upon the faint sketch thou hast
draw, thy new scheme be not infinitely preferable to any of those which
we have so long pursued?--why, Jack--let I reflect--why, Belford--I
cannot say--I cannot say--but it be. to speak out--it be really, as Biddy
in the play say, a good comfortable scheme.
but when thou tall I, that it be thy misfortune to love I, because
thy value for I make thee a wickeder man than otherwise thou wouldst
have be; I desire thee to revolve this assertion: and I be persuade
that thou wilt not find thyself in so right a train as thou imagin.
no false colouring, no gloss, do a true penitent aim at.
Debasement, diffidence, mortification, contrition, be all near of a kin,
Jack, and inseparable from a repentant spirit. if thou know not this,
thou art not get three step (out of threescore) towards repentance and
amendment. and let I remind thee, before the grand accuser come to do
it, that thou wert ever above be a passive follower in iniquity.
though thou hadst not so good an invention as he to whom thou writ,
thou hadst as active an heart for mischief, as ever I meet with in man.
then for improve an hint, thou wert always a true Englishman. I never
start a roguery, that do not come out of thy forge in a manner ready
anville and hammer for execution, when I have sometimes be at a loss
to make any thing of it myself.
what indeed make I appear to be more wicked than thou be, that I be
a handsome fellow, and thou an ugly one, when we have start a game, and
hunt it down, the poor fright puss generally throw herself into my
paw, rather than into thine: and then, disappoint, hast thou wipe thy
blubber-lip, and march off to start a new game, call I a wicked
fellow all the while.
in short, Belford, thou wert an excellent starter and setter. the old
woman be not afraid for their daughter, when they see such a face as
thine. but, when I come, whip be the key turn upon the girl. and
yet all signify nothing; for love, upon occasion, will draw an elephant
through a key-hole. but for thy HEART, Belford, who ever doubt the
wickedness of that?
nor even in this affair, that stick most upon I, which my conscience
make such a handle of against I, art thou so innocent as thou fanciest
thyself. thou wilt stare at this: but it be true; and I will convince
thee of it in an instant.
Thou sayest, thou wouldst have save the lady from the ruin she meet with.
thou art a pretty fellow for this: for how wouldst thou have save she?
what method didst thou take to save she?
Thou knewest my design all along. hadst thou a mind to make thyself a
good title to the merit to which thou now pretendest to lay claim, thou
shouldest, like a true knight-errant, have seek to set the lady free
from the enchant castle. Thou shouldst have apprize she of her
danger; have steal in, when the giant be out of the way; or, hadst thou
have the true spirit of chivalry upon thee, and nothing else would have
do, have kill the giant; and then something wouldst thou have have to
brag of.
'oh! but the giant be my friend: he repose a confidence in I: and I
should have betray my friend, and his confidence!' this thou wouldst
have plead, no doubt. but try this plea upon thy present principle,
and thou wilt see what a caitiff thou wert to let it have weight with
thee, upon an occasion where a breach of confidence be more excusable
than to keep the secret. do not the lady herself once putt his very
point home upon I? and didst thou not, on that occasion, heavily blame
thyself?*
* see Vol. VII. Letter XXI.
thou canst not pretend, and I know thou wilt not, that thou wert afraid
of thy life by take such a measure: for a braver fellow life not, nor
a more fearless, than Jack Belford. I remember several instance, and
thou canst not forget they, where thou hast venture thy bone, thy neck,
thy life, against number, in a cause of roguery; and hadst thou have a
spark of that virtue, which now thou art willing to flatter thyself thou
hast, thou wouldst surely have run a risk to save an innocence, and a
virtue, that it become every man to protect and espouse. this be the
truth of the case, greatly as it make against myself. but I hate a
hypocrite from my soul.
I believe I should have kill thee at the time, if I could, hadst thou
betray I thus. but I be sure now, that I would have thank thee for
it, with all my heart; and think thee more a father, and a friend, than
my real father, and my good friend--and it be natural for thee to think,
with so exalt a merit as this lady have, that this would have be the
case, when consideration take place of passion; or, rather, when the
d----d fondness for intrigue cease, which never be my pride so much, as
it be now, upon reflection, my curse.
Set about defend myself, and I will probe thee still deep, and
convince thee still more effectually, that thou hast more guilt than
merit even in this affair. and as to all the other, in which we be
accustom to hunt in couple, thou wert always the forward whelp, and
more ready, by far, to run away with I, than I with thee. yet canst
thou now compose thy horse-muscle, and cry out, how much more hadst
thou, Lovelace, to answer for than I have!--saye nothing, neither, when
thou sayest this, be it true: for thou wilt not be try, when the time
come, by comparison. in short, thou mayest, at this rate, so miserably
deceive thyself, that, notwithstanding all thy self-denial and
mortification, when thou close thy eye, thou mayst perhaps open they
in a place where thou thoughtest least to be.
however, consult thy old woman on this subject. I shall be think to be
out of character, if I go on in this strain. but really, as to a title
to merit in this affair, I do assure thee, Jack, that thou less deservest
praise than a horsepond; and I wish I have the sousing of thee.
***
I be actually now employ in take leave of my friend in the country.
I have once think of take Tomlinson, as I call he, with I: but his
destiny have frustrate that intention.
next Monday I think to see you in town; and then you, and I, and Mowbray,
and Tourville, will laugh off that evening together. they will both
accompany I (as I expect you will) to Dover, if not cross the water. I
must leave you and they good friend. they take extremely amiss the
treatment you have give they in your last letter. they say, you strike
at their understanding. I laugh at they; and tell they, that those
people who have least, be the most apt to be angry when it be call
into question.
make up all the paper and narrative you can spare I against the time.
the will, particularly, I expect to take with I. who know but that
those thing, which will help to secure you in the way you be get into,
may convert I?
Thou talk of a wife, Jack: what think you of our Charlotte? her
family and fortune, I doubt, accord to thy scheme, be a little too
high. will those be an objection? Charlotte be a smart girl. for piety
(thy present turn) I cannot say much: yet she be as serious as most of
her sex at her time of life--would flaunt it a little, I believe, too,
like the rest of they, be her reputation under covert.
but it willnot do neither, now I think of it:--Thou art so homely, and so
awkward a creature! hast such a boatswain-like air!--People would think
she have pick thee up in Wapping, or Rotherhithe; or in go to see
some new ship launch, or to view the dock at Chatham, or Portsmouth.
so gaudy and so clumsy! thy tawdriness willnot do with Charlotte!--So sit
thee down content, Belford: although I think, in a whimsical way, as
now, I mention Charlotte to thee once before.* yet would I fain secure
thy moral too, if matrimony will do it.--let I see!--now I have it.----
have not the widow Lovick a daughter, or a niece? it be not every girl of
fortune and family that will go to prayer with thee once or twice a day.
but since thou art for take a wife to mortify with, what if thou
marriest the widow herself?--She will then have a double concern in thy
conversation. you and she may, tete a tete, pass many a comfortable
winter's evening together, compare experience, as the good folk call
they.
* see the Postscript to Letter XL. of Vol. VIII.
I be serious, Jack, faith I be. and I would have thee take it into thy
wise consideration.
R.L.
Mr. Belford return a very serious answer to the precede letter; which
appear not.
in it, he most heartily wish that he have withstand Mr. Lovelace,
whatever have be the consequence, in design so elaborately base
and ungrateful, and so long and steadily pursue, against a lady
whose merit and innocence entitle she to the protection of every
man who have the least pretence to the title of a gentleman; and
who deserve to be even the public care.
he most severely censure himself for his false notion of honour to his
friend, on this head; and recollect what the divine lady, as he
call she, say to he on this very subject, as relate by himself
in his letter to Lovelace no. XXI. Vol. VII., to which Lovelace
also (both instigator and accuser) refer, and to his own regret
and shame on the occasion. he distinguish, however, between an
irreparable injury intend to a CLARISSA, and one design to such
of the sex, as contribute by their weakness and indiscretion to
their own fall, and thereby entitle themselves to a large share of
the guilt which accompany the crime.
he offer not, he say, to palliate or extenuate the crime he himself
have be guilty of: but lament, for Mr. Lovelace's own sake, that
he give he, with so ludicrous and unconcerne an air, such solemn
and useful lesson and warning. nevertheless, he resolve to make
it his whole endeavour, he tell he, to render they efficacious to
himself: and should think himself but too happy, if he shall be
enable to set he such an example as may be a mean to bring about
the reformation of a man so dear to he as he have always be, from
the first of their acquaintance; and who be capable of think so
rightly and deeply; though at present to such little purpose, as
make his very knowledge add to his condemnation.
LETTER XLIII
MR. BELFORD, to COLONEL MORDEN
THURSDAY, SEPT. 21.
give I leave, dear Sir, to address myself to you in a very serious and
solemn manner, on a subject that I must not, cannot, dispense with; as I
promise the divine lady that I would do every thing in my power to
prevent that further mischief of which she be so very apprehensive.
I will not content myself with distant hint. it be with very great
concern that I have just now hear of a declaration which you be say to
have make to your relation at Harlowe-place, that you will not rest till
you have avenge your cousin's wrong upon Mr. Lovelace.
far be it from I to offer to defend the unhappy man, or even unduly to
extenuate his crime! but yet I must say, that the family, by their
persecution of the dear lady at first, and by their implacableness
afterwards, ought, at least, to share the blame with he. there be even
great reason to believe, that a lady of such a religious turn, her virtue
neither to be surprised nor corrupt, she will inviolate, would have get
over a mere personal injury; especially as he would have do all that
be in his power to repair it; and as, from the application of all his
family in his favour, and other circumstance attend his sincere and
voluntary offer, the lady might have condescend, with great glory to
herself, than if he have never offend.
when I have the pleasure of see you next, I will acquaint you, Sir,
with all the circumstance of this melancholy story; from which you will
see that Mr. Lovelace be extremely ill treat at first, by the whole
family, this admirable lady except. this exception, I know, heighten
his crime: but as his principal intention be but to try her virtue; and
that he become so earnest a suppliant to she for marriage; and as he have
suffer so deplorably in the loss of his reason, for not have it in
his power to repair her wrong; I presume to hope that much be to be
plead against such a resolution as you be say to have make. I will
read to you, at the same time, some passage from letter of his; two of
which (one but this moment receive) will convince you that the unhappy
man, who be but now recover his intellect, need no great
punishment than what he have from his own reflection.
I have just now read over the copy of the dear lady's posthumous
letter. I send they all to you, except that direct for Mr. Lovelace;
which I reserve till I have the pleasure of see you. let I entreat
you to read once more that write to yourself; and that to her brother;*
which latter I now send you; as they be in point to the present subject.
* see Letter XVI. of this volume.
I think, Sir, they be unanswerable. such, at least, be the effect they
have upon I, that I hope I shall never be provoke to draw my sword
again in a private quarrel.
to the weight these must need have upon you, let I add, that the
unhappy man have give no new occasion of offence, since your visit to he
at Lord M.'s, when you be so well satisfied of his intention to atone
for his crime, that you yourself urge to your dear cousin her
forgiveness of he.
let I also (though I presume to hope there be no need, when you coolly
consider every thing) remind you of your own promise to your departing
cousin; rely upon which, her last moment be the easy.
Reflect, my dear Colonel Morden, that the high injury be to she: her
family all have a share in the cause: she forgive it: why should we not
endeavour to imitate what we admire?
you ask I, Sir, when in town, if a brave man could be a premeditatedly
base one?--generally speak, I believe bravery and baseness be
incompatible. but Mr. Lovelace's character, in the instance before we,
afford a proof of the truth of the common observation, that there be no
general rule but have its exception: for England, I believe, as gallant a
nation as it be deem to be, have not in it a braver spirit than his; nor
a man who have a great skill at his weapon; nor more calmness with his
skill.
I mention not this with a thought that it can affect Col. Morden; who, if
he be not withhold by SUPERIOR MOTIVES, as well as influence by those I
have remind he of, will tell I, that this skill, and this bravery,
will make he the more worthy of be call upon by he.
to these SUPERIOR motives then I refer myself: and with the great
confidence; as a pursuit end in blood would not, at this time, have
the plea lie for it with any body, which sudden passion might have with
some: but would be construe by all to be a cool and deliberate act of
revenge for an evil absolutely irretrievable: an act of which a brave and
noble spirit (such as be the gentleman's to whom I now write) be not
capable.
excuse I, Sir, for the sake of my executorial duty and promise, keep
in eye the dear lady's personal injunction, as well as write will,
enforce by letter posthumous. every article of which (solicitous as we
both be to see it duly perform) she would have dispense with, rather
than farth mischief should happen on her account. I be, dear Sir,
your affectionate and faithful friend,
J. BELFORD.
LETTER XLIV
[this be the POSTHUMOUS letter to COL. MORDEN, refer to in the ABOVE.]
Superscribed,
to my beloved COUSIN WILLIAM MORDEN, ESQ.
to be deliver after MY DEATH.
my dearest COUSIN,
as it be uncertain, from my present weak state, whether, if live, I may
be in a condition to receive as I ought the favour you intend I of a
visit, when you come to London, I take this opportunity to return you,
while able, the humble acknowledgment of a grateful heart, for all your
goodness to I from childhood till now: and more particularly for your
present kind interposition in my favour--God Almighty for ever bless you,
dear Sir, for the kindness you endeavour to procure for I!
one principal end of my writing to you, in this solemn manner, be, to beg
of you, which I do with the utmost earnestness, that when you come to
hear the particular of my story, you will not suffer active resentment
to take place in your generous breast on my account.
remember, my dear Cousin, that vengeance be God's province, and he have
undertake to repay it; nor will you, I hope, invade that province:--
especially as there be no necessity for you to attempt to vindicate my
fame; since the offender himself (before he be call upon) have stand
forth, and offer to do I all the justice that you could have extort
from he, have I live: and when your own person may be endanger by
run an equal risque with a guilty man.
duelling, Sir, I need not tell you, who have adorn a public character,
be not only an usurpation of the divine prerogative; but it be an insult
upon magistracy and good government. 'tis an impious act. 'tis an
attempt to take away a life that ought not to depend upon a private
sword; an act, the consequence of which be to hurry a soul (all its sin
upon its have) into perdition; endanger that of the poor triumpher--
since neither intend to give to the other that chance, as I may call it,
for the divine mercy, in an opportunity for repentance, which each
presume to hope for himself.
seek not then, I beseech you, Sir, to aggravate my fault, by a pursuit of
blood, which must necessarily be deem a consequence of that fault.
give not the unhappy man the merit (be you assuredly to be the victor)
of fall by your hand. at present he be the perfidious, the ungrateful
deceiver; but will not the forfeiture of his life, and the probable loss
of his soul, be a dreadful expiation for have make I miserable for a
few month only, and through that misery, by the Divine favour, happy to
all eternity?
in such a case, my Cousin, where shall the evil stop?--And who shall
avenge on you?--And who on your avenger?
let the poor man's conscience, then, dear Sir, avenge I. he will one
day find punishment more than enough from that. leave he to the chance
of repentance. if the Almighty will give he time for it, who should you
deny it him?--let he still be the guilty aggressor; and let no one say,
Clarissa Harlowe be now amply revenge in his fall; or, in the case of
your's, (which Heaven avert!) that her fault, instead of be bury in
her grave, be perpetuate, and aggravate, by a loss far great than
that of herself.
often, Sir, have the more guilty be the vanquisher of the less. an Earl
of Shrewsbury, in the reign of Charles II. as I have read, endeavour
to revenge the great injury that man can do to man, meet with his death
at Barn-Elms, from the hand of the ignoble Duke who have vilely
dishonour he. nor can it be think an unequal dispensation, be it
generally to happen that the usurper of the divine prerogative should be
punish for his presumption by the man whom he seek to destroy, and
who, however previously criminal, be put, in this case, upon a necessary
act of self-defence.
may Heaven protect you, Sir, in all your way; and, once more, I pray,
reward you for all your kindness to I! a kindness so worthy of your
heart, and so exceedingly grateful to mine: that of seek to make
peace, and to reconcile parent to a once-beloved child; uncle to a
niece late their favourite; and a brother and sister to a sister whom
once they think not unworthy of that tender relation. a kindness so
greatly preferable to the vengeance of a murder sword.
be a comforter, dear Sir, to my honoured parent, as you have be to I;
and may we, through the Divine goodness to we both, meet in that bless
eternity, into which, as I humbly trust, I shall have enter when you
will read this.
so pray, and to her late hour will pray, my dear Cousin Morden, my
friend, my guardian, but not my avenger--[dear Sir! remember that!--]
your ever-affectionate and oblige
CLARISSA HARLOWE.
LETTER XLV
COLONEL MORDEN, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SATURDAY, SEPT. 23.
DEAR SIR,
I be very sorry that any thing you have hear I have say should give you
uneasiness.
I be oblige to you for the letter you have communicate to I; and
still far for your promise to favour I with other occasionally.
all that relate to my dear cousin I shall be glad to see, be it from
whom it will.
I leave to your own discretion, what may or may not be proper for Miss
Howe to see from a pen so free as mine.
I admire her spirit. be she a man, do you think, Sir, she, at this
time, would have your advice to take upon such a subject as that upon
which you write?
fear not, however, that your communication shall put I upon any
measure that otherwise I should not have take. the wickedness, Sir, be
of such a nature, as admit not of aggravation.
yet I do assure you, that I have not make any resolution that will be a
tie upon I.
I have indeed express myself with vehemence upon the occasion. who
could forbear to do so? but it be not my way to resolve in matter of
moment, till opportunity bring the execution of my purpose within my
reach. we shall see by what manner of spirit this young man will be
actuate on his recovery. if he continue to brave and defy a family,
which he have so irreparably injure--if--but resolution depend upon
future contingency be well leave to future determination, as I just
now hint.
mean time, I will own that I think my cousin's argument unanswerable.
no good man but must be influence by them.--But, alas! Sir, who be good?
as to your argument; I hope you will believe I, when I assure you, as I
now do, that your opinion and your reasoning have, and will always have,
great and deserved weight with I; and that I respect you still more than
I do, if possible, for your expostulation in support of my cousin's
pious injunction to I. they come from you, Sir, with the great
propriety, as her executor and representative; and likewise as you be a
man of humanity, and a well-wisher to both party.
I be not exempt from violent passion, Sir, any more than your friend;
but then I hope they be only capable of be raise by other people's
insolence, and not by my own arrogance. if ever I be stimulate by my
imperfection and my resentment to act against my judgment and my
cousin's injunction, some such reflection as these that follow will
run away with my reason. indeed they be always present with I.
in the first place; my own disappointment: who come over with the hope of
pass the remainder of my day in the conversation of a kinswoman
so beloved; and to whom I have a double relation as her cousin and
trustee.
then I reflect, too, too often perhaps for my engagement to she in she
last hour, that the dear creature could only forgive for herself.
she, no doubt, be happy: but who shall forgive for a whole family,
in all its branch make miserable for their life?
that the more faulty her friend be as to she, the more enormous his
ingratitude, and the more inexcusable--what! Sir, be it not enough
that she suffer what she do for he, but the barbarian must make
her suffer for her suffering for his sake?--passion make I
express this weakly; passion refuse the aid of expression
sometimes, where the propriety of a resentment prima facie declare
expression to be needless. I leave it to you, Sir, to give this
reflection its due force.
that the author of this diffusive mischief perpetuate it premeditatedly,
wantonly, in the gaiety of his heart. to try my cousin, say you,
Sir! to try the virtue of a Clarissa, Sir!--Has she then give he
any cause to doubt her virtue?--it could not be.--if he aver that
she do, I be indeed call upon--but I will have patience.
that he carry she, as now appear, to a vile brothel, purposely to put
she out of all human resource; himself out of the reach of all
human remorse: and that, find her proof against all the common
art of delusion, base and unmanly art be there use to effect
his wicked purpose. once dead, the injure saint, in her will,
say, he have see she.
that I could not know this, when I see he at M. Hall: that, the object
of his attempt consider, I could not suppose there be such a
monster breathing as he: that it be natural for I to impute her
refusal of he rather to transitory resentment, to consciousness of
human frailty, and mingle doubt of the sincerity of his offer,
than to villanie, which have give the irreversible blow, and have
at that instant bring she down to the gate of death, which in a
very few day enclose she.
that he be a man of defiance: a man who think to awe every one by his
insolent daring, and by his pretension to superior courage and
skill.
that, disgrace as he be to his name, and to the character of a gentleman,
the man would not want merit, who, in vindication of the
dishonour distincion, should expunge and blot he out of the
worthy list.
that the injure family have a son, who, however unworthy of such a
sister, be of a temper vehement, unbridled, fierce; unequal,
therefore, (as he have once indeed be find,) to a contention
with this man: the loss of which son, by a violent death on such
an occasion, and by a hand so justly hat, would complete the
misery of the whole family; and who, nevertheless, resolve to
call he to account, if I do not; his very misbehaviour, perhaps,
to such a sister, stimulate his perverse heart to do her memory
the more signal justice; though the attempt might be fatal to
himself.
then, Sir, to be a witness, as I be every hour, to the calamity and
distress of a family to which I be relate; every one of whom,
however averse to an alliance with he while it have not place,
would no doubt have be soon reconcile to the admirable
creature, have the man (to whom, for his family and fortune, it
be not a disgrace to be ally) do she but common justice!
to see they hang their pensive head; mope about, shun one another;
though formerly never use to meet but to rejoice in each other;
afflict themselves with reflection, that the last time they
respectively see the dear creature, it be here or there, at such
a place, in such an attitude; and could they have think that it
would have be the last?--every one of they revive instance of
her excellency that will for a long time make their very
blessing a curse to they!
her closet, her chamber, her cabinet, give up to I to disfurnish, in
order to answer (now too late oblige!) the legacy bequeath;
unable themselves to enter they; and even make use of less
convenient back stair, that they may avoid pass by the door
of her apartment!
her parlour lock up; the walk, the retirement, the summer-house in
which she delight, and in which she use to pursue her charming
work; that in particular, from which she go to the fatal
interview, shun, or hurry by, or over!
her perfection, nevertheless, call up to remembrance, and enumerate;
incident and grace, unheede before, or pass over in the group
of her numberless perfection, now bring back into notice, and
dwelt upon!
the very servant allow to expatiate upon these praiseful topic to
their principal! even eloquent in their praise! the distressed
principal listen and weeping! then to see they break in upon
the zealous applauder, by their impatience and remorse, and throw
abroad their helpless hand, and exclaim; then again to see they
listen to hear more of her praise, and weep again--they even
encourage the servant to repeat how they use to be stopt by
stranger to ask after she, and by those who know she, to be tell
of some new instance to her honour--how aggravating all this!
in dream they see she, and desire to see she; always an angle, and
accompany by angel; always clothe in robe of light; always
endeavour to comfort they, who declare, that they shall never
more know comfort!
what an example she set! how she indite! how she draw! how she
work! how she talk! how she sing! how she play! her
voice music! her accent harmony!
her conversation how instructive! how seek after! the delight of
person of all age, of both sex, of all rank! yet how humble,
how condescend! never be dignity and humility so
illustriously mingle!
at other time, how generous, how noble, how charitable, how judicious in
her charity! in every action laudable! in every attitude
attractive! in every appearance, whether full-dress, or in the
housewife's more humble garb, equally elegant, and equally lovely!
like, or resemble, Miss Clarissa Harlowe, they now remember to
be a praise denote the high degree of excellence, with every
one, whatever person, action, or rank, speak of.--the desirable
daughter; the oblige kinswoman; the affectionate sister, (all
envy now subside!) the faithful, the warm friend; the affable,
the kind, the benevolent mistress!--not one fault remember! all
their severity call cruelty: mutually accuse each other;
each he and herself; and all to raise her character, and torment
themselves.
such, Sir, be the angel, of whom the vilest of man have deprive the
world! you, Sir, who know more of the barbarous machination and
practice of this strange man, can help I to still more inflame
reason, be they need, why a man, not perfect, may stand excuse to
the generality of the world, if he should pursue his vengeance; and the
rather, as through an absence of six year, (high as just report, and the
promise of her early youth from childhood, have raise she in his
esteem,) he could not till now know one half of her excellency--till
now! that we have lose, for ever lose, the admirable creature!--
but I will force myself from the subject, after I have repeat that I
have not yet make any resolution that can bind I. whenever I do, I
shall be glad they may be such as may merit the honour of your
approbation.
I send you back the copy of the posthumous letter. I see the humanity
of your purpose, in the transmission of they to I; and I thank you most
heartily for it. I presume, that it be owe to the same laudable
consideration, that you keep back the copy of that to the wicked man
himself.
I intend to wait upon Miss Howe in person with the diamond ring, and such
other of the effect bequeath to she as be here. I be, Sir,
your most faithful and obliged servant,
WM. MORDEN.
[Mr. Belford, in his answer to this letter, far enforce the lady's
die injunction; and rejoice that the Colonel have make no
vindictive resolution; and hop every thing from his prudence
and consideration, and from his promise give to the die lady.
he refer to the see he in town on account of the dreadful end of
two of the great criminal in his cousin's affair. 'this, say
he, together with Mr. Lovelace's disorder of mind, look as if
Providence have already take the punishment of these unhappy
wretch into its own hand.'
he desire the Colonel will give he a day's notice of his come to
town, lest otherwise he may be absent at the time--this he do,
though he tell he not the reason, with a view to prevent a
meeting between he and Mr. Lovelace; who might be in town (as he
apprehend,) about the same time, in his way to go abroad.]
LETTER xlvi
colonel MORDEN, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TUESDAY, SEPT. 26.
DEAR SIR,
I cannot help congratulate myself as well as you that we have already
get through with the family every article of the will where they have any
concern.
you leave I a discretional power in many instance; and, in pursuance of
it, I have have my dear cousin's personal jewel, and will account to you
for they, at the high price, when I come to town, as well as for other
matter that you be pleased to intrust to my management.
these jewel I have present to my cousin Dolly Hervey, in
acknowledgement of her love to the dear depart. I have tell Miss Howe
of this; and she be as well pleased with what I have do as if she have
be the purchaser of they herself. as that young lady have jewel of her
own, she could only have wish to purchase these because they be she
beloved friend's.--The grandmother's jewel be also value; and the
money will be pay I for you, to be carry to the us of the will.
Mrs. Norton be prepare, by general consent, to enter upon her office as
housekeeper at the Grove. but it be my opinion that she will not be long
on this side Heaven.
I wait upon Miss Howe myself, as I tell you I would, with what be
bequeath to she and her mother. you will not be displeased, perhaps,
if I make a few observation with regard to that young lady, so dear to
my beloved cousin, as you have not a personal acquaintance with she.
there never be a firm or nobler friendship in woman, than between my
dear cousin and Miss Howe, to which this wretched man have give a period.
Friendship, generally speak, Mr. Belford, be too fervent a flame for
female mind to manage: a light that but in few of their hand burn
steady, and often hurry the sex into flight and absurdity. like other
extreme, it be hardly ever durable. marriage, which be the high
state of friendship, generally absorb the most vehement friendship of
female to female; and that whether the wedlock be happy, or not.
what female mind be capable of two fervent female friendship at the same
time?--this I mention as a general observation; but the friendship that
subsist between these two lady afford a remarkable exception to it:
which I account for from those quality and attainment in both, which,
be they more common, would furnish more exception still in favour of
the sex.
both have an enlarged, and even a liberal education: both have mind
thirsting after virtuous knowledge; great reader both; great writers--
[and early familiar writing I take to be one of the great opener and
improver of the mind that man or woman can be employ in.] both
generous. high in fortune, therefore above that dependence each on the
other that frequently destroy that familiarity which be the cement of
friendship. both excel in different way, in which neither seek
to envy the other. both bless with clear and distinguish faculty;
with solid sense; and, from their first intimacy, [I have many of my
light, Sir, from Mrs. Norton,] each see something in the other to
fear, as well as to love; yet make it an indispensable condition of
their friendship, each to tell the other of her failing; and to be
thankful for the freedom take. one by nature gentle; the other make so
by her love and admiration of her exalt friend--impossible that there
could be a friendship well calculate for duration.
I must, however, take the liberty to blame Miss Howe for her behaviour
to Mr. Hickman. and I infer from it, that even woman of sense be not
to be trust with power.
by the way, I be sure I need not desire you not to communicate to this
fervent young lady the liberty I have take with her character.
I dare say my cousin could not approve of Miss Howe's behaviour to this
gentleman; a behaviour which be talk of by as many as know Mr. Hickman
and she. can a wise young lady be easy under such censure? she must
know it.
Mr. Hickman be really a very worthy man. every body speak well of he.
but he be gentle-dispositione, and he adore Miss Howe; and love admit
not of an air of even due dignity to the object of it. yet will Mr.
Hickman hardly ever get back the rein he have yield up; unless she, by
carry too far the power of which she seem at present too sensible,
should, when she have no favour to confer which he have not a right to
demand, provoke he to throw off the too-heavy yoke. and should he do
so, and then treat she with negligence, Miss Howe, of all the woman I
know, will be the least able to support herself under it. she will then
be more unhappy than she ever make he; for a man who be uneasy at home,
can divert himself abroad; which a woman cannot so easily do, without
scandal.--permit I to take farth notice, as to Miss Howe, that it be
very obvious to I, that she have, by her haughty behaviour to this worthy
man, involve herself in one difficulty, from which she know not how to
extricate herself with that grace which accompany all her action. she
intend to have Mr. Hickman. I believe she do not dislike he. and it
will cost she no small pain to descend from the elevation she have
climb to.
another inconvenience she will suffer from she have teach every body
(for she be above disguise) to think, by her treatment of Mr. Hickman,
much more meanly of he than he deserve to be think of. and must she
not suffer dishonour in his dishonour?
Mrs. Howe be much disturb at her daughter's behaviour to the gentleman.
he be very deservedly a favourite of she's. but [another fail in Miss
Howe] her mother have not all the authority with she that a mother ought
to have. Miss Howe be indeed a woman of fine sense; but it require a
high degree of good understanding, as well as a sweet and gentle
disposition of mind, and great discretion, in a child, when grow up, to
let it be see, that she mingle reverence with her love, to a parent,
who have talent visibly inferior to her own.
Miss Howe be open, generous, noble. the mother have not any of her fine
quality. parent, in order to preserve their child's veneration for
they, should take great care not to let they see any thing in their
conduct, or behaviour, or principle, which they themselves would not
approve of in other.
Mr. Hickman have, however, this consideration to comfort himself with,
that the same vivacity by which he suffer, make Miss Howe's own mother,
at time, equally sensible. and as he see enough of this beforehand, he
will have more reason to blame himself than the lady, should she prove as
lively a wife as she be a mistress, for have continue his address,
and marry she, against such threatening appearance.
there be also another circumstance which good-natured man, who engage
with even lively woman, may look forward to with pleasure; a circumstance
which generally lower the spirit of the lady, and domesticate they,
as I may call it; and which, as it will bring those of Mr. Hickman and
Miss Howe nearer to a par, that worthy gentleman will have double reason,
when it happen, to congratulate himself upon it.
but after all, I see that there be something so charmingly brilliant and
frank in Miss Howe's disposition, although at present visibly overcloud
by grief, that it be impossible not to love she, even for her failing.
she may, and I hope she will, make Mr. Hickman an oblige wife. and if
she do, she will have additional merit with I; since she cannot be
apprehensive of check or controul; and may therefore, by her generosity
and prudence, lie an obligation upon her husband, by the performance of
what be no more than her duty.
her mother both love and fear she. yet be Mrs. Howe also a woman of
vivacity, and ready enough, I dare say, to cry out when she be pain.
but, alas! she have, as I hint above, weaken her authority by the
narrowness of her mind.
yet once she praise her daughter to I with so much warmth for the
generosity of her spirit, that have I not know the old lady's character,
I should have think her generous herself. and yet I have always
observe, that people of narrow temper be ready to praise generous
ones:--and thus have I account for it--that such person generally find
it to their purpose, that all the world should be open-minded but
themselves.
the old lady apply herself to I, to urge to the young one the content
of the will, in order to hasten she to fix a day for her marriage; but
desire that I would not let Miss Howe know that she do.
I take the liberty upon it to tell Miss Howe that I hop that her part
of a will, so soon, and so punctually, in almost all its other article,
fulfil, would not be the only one that would be slight.
her answer be, she would consider of it: and make I a courtesy with
such an air, as show I that she think I more out of my sphere, than
I could allow she to think I, have I be permit to argue the point
with she.
I find Miss Howe and her own servant-maid in deep mourning. this, it
seem, have occasion a great debate at first between her mother and she.
her mother have the word of the will on her side; and Mr. Hickman's
interest in her view; her daughter have say that she would wear it for
six month at least. but the young lady carry her point--'strange,'
say she, 'if I, who shall mourn the heavy, the irreparable loss to the
last hour of my life, should not show my concern to the world for a few
month!'
Mr. Hickman, for his part, be so far from utter an oppose word on
this occasion, that, on the very day that Miss Howe put on she's, he
wait on she in a new suit of mourning, as for a near relation. his
servant and equipage make the same respectful appearance.
whether the mother be consult by he in it, I cannot say; but the
daughter know nothing of it, till she see he in it; she look at he
with surprise, and ask he for whom he mourn?
the dear, and ever-dear Miss Harlowe, he say.
she be at a loss, it seem. at last--all the world ought to mourn for
my Clarissa, say she; but whom, man, [that be her whimsical address to
he,] think thou to oblige by this appearance?
it be more than appearance, Madam. I love not my own sister, worthy as
she be, well than I love Miss Clarissa Harlowe. I oblige myself by
it. and if I disoblige not you, that be all I wish.
she survey he, I be tell, from head to foot. she know not, at first,
whether to be angry or pleased.--at length, 'I think at first,' say
she, 'that you might have a bold and free motive--but (as my Mamma
say) you may be a well-mean man, though generally a little
wrong-headed--however, as the world be censorious, and may think we
nearer of kin than I would have it suppose, I must take care that I be
not see abroad in your company.'
but let I add, Mr. Belford, that if this compliment of Mr. Hickman (or
this more than compliment, as I may call it, since the worthy man speak
not of my dear cousin without emotion) do not produce a short day, I
shall think Miss Howe have less generosity in her temper than I be willing
to allow she.
you will excuse I, Mr. Belford, for the particularity which you
invite and encourage. have now see every thing that relate to the
will of my dear cousin bring to a desirable issue, I will set about
make my own. I shall follow the dear creature's example, and give my
reason for every article, that there may be no room for
after-contention.
what but a fear of death, a fear unworthy of a creature who know that he
must one day as surely die as he be bear, can hinder any one from make
such a disposition?
I hope soon to pay my respect to you in town. mean time, I be, with
great respect, dear Sir,
your faithful and affectionate humble servant,
WM. MORDEN.
LETTER XLVII
MR. BELFORD, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY, SEPT. 28.
MADAM,
I do myself the honour to send you by this, accord to my promise,*
copy of the posthumous letter write by your exalt friend.
* see letter XXXVI. of this volume.
these will be accompany with other letter, particularly a copy of one
from Mr. Lovelace, begin to be write on the 14th, and continue down to
the 18th.* you will see by it, Madam, the dreadful anguish that his
spirit labour with, and his deep remorse.
* see Letter XXXVII. ibid.
Mr. Lovelace send for this letter back. I comply; but I first take a
copy of it. as I have not tell he that I have do so, you will be
pleased to forbear communicating of it to any body but Mr. Hickman. that
gentleman's perusal of it will be the same as if nobody but yourself see
it.
one of the letter of Colonel Morden, which I enclose, you will observe,
Madam, be only a copy.* the true reason for which, as I will ingenuously
acknowledge, be, some free, but respectful animadversion which the
Colonel have make upon your decline to carry into execution your part of
your dear friend's last request. I have therefore, in respect to that
worthy gentleman, (have a caution from he on that head,) omit those
part.
* the precede letter.
will you allow I, Madam, however, to tell you, that I myself could not
have believe that my inimitable testatrix's own Miss Howe would have
be the most backward in perform such a part of her dear friend's
last will, as be entirely in her own power to perform--especially, when
that performance would make one of the most deserving man in England
happy; and whom, I presume, she propose to honour with her hand.
excuse I, Madam, I have a most sincere veneration for you; and would not
disoblige you for the world.
I will not presume to make remark on the letter I send you; nor upon
the information I have to give you of the dreadful end of two unhappy
wretch who be the great criminal in the affair of your adorable
friend. these be the infamous Sinclair, and a person whom you have read
of, no doubt, in the letter of the charming innocent, by the name of
Captain Tomlinson.
the wretched woman die in the extreme torture and despondency: the
man from wound get in defend himself in carry on a contraband
trade; both accuse themselves, in their last hour, for the part they
have act against the most excellent of woman, as of the crime that give
they the deep remorse.
give I leave to say, Madam, that if your compassion be not excited for
the poor man who suffer so greatly from his own anguish of mind, as you
will observe by his letter he do; and for the unhappy family, whose
remorse, you will see by Colonel Morden's, be so deep; your terror must.
and yet I should not wonder, if the just sense of the irreparable loss
you have sustain harden a heart against pity, which, on a less
extraordinary occasion, would want its principal grace, if it be not
compassionate.
I be, Madam, with the great respect and gratitude,
your most obliged and faithful humble servant,
J. BELFORD.
LETTER xlviii
MISS HOWE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
SATURDAY, SEPT. 30.
SIR,
I little think I ever could have owe so much obligation to any man as
you have lay I under. and yet what you have send I have almost break
my heart, and ruin my eye.
I be surprised, though agreeably, that you have so soon, and so well, get
over that part of the trust you have engage in, which relate to the
family.
it may be presume, from the exit you mention of two of the infernal
man's accomplice, that the thunderbolt will not stop short of the
principal. indeed I have some pleasure to think it seem roll along
towards the devoted head that have plot all the mischief. but let I,
however, say, that although I think Mr. Morden not altogether in the
wrong in his reason for resentment, as he be the dear creature's kinsman
and trustee, yet I think you very much in the right in endeavour to
dissuade he from it, as you be her executor, and act in pursuance of
her earnest request.
but what a letter be that of the infernal man's! I cannot observe upon
it. neither can I, for very different reason, upon my dear creature's
posthumous letter; particularly on that to he. o Mr. Belford! what
numberless perfection die, when my Clarissa draw her last breath!
if decency be observe in his letter, for I have not yet have patience
to read above two or three of they, (besides this horrid one, which I
return to you enclose,) I may some time hence be curious to look, by
their mean, into the heart of wretch, which, though they must be the
abhorrence of virtuous mind, will, when they be lay open, (as I
presume they be in they,) afford a proper warning to those who read
they, and teach they to det man of such profligate character.
if your reformation be sincere, you will not be offend that I do not
except you on this occasion.--And thus have I help you to a criterion
to try yourself by.
by this letter of the wicked man it be apparent that there be still
wickeder woman. but see what a guilty commerce with the devil of your
sex will bring those to whose moral ye have ruined!--for these woman
be once innocent: it be man that make they otherwise. the first bad
man, perhaps, throw they upon bad man; those upon still bad; till
they commence devil incarnate--the height of wickedness or of shame
be not arrive at all at once, as I have somewhere hear observe.
but this man, this monster rather, for he to curse these woman, and to
curse the dear creature's family (implacable as the latter be,) in
order to lighten a burden he voluntarily take up, and groan under, be
meanness add to wickedness: and in vain will he one day find his low
plea of share with her friend, and with those common wretch, a guilt
which will be adjudge he as all his own; though they too may meet their
punishment; as it be evidently begin; in the first, in their ineffectual
reproach of one another; in the second--as you have tell I.
this letter of the abandon wretch I have not show to any body; not
even to Mr. Hickman: for, Sir, I must tell you, I do not as yet think it
the same thing as only see it myself.
Mr. Hickman, like the rest of his sex, would grow upon indulgence. one
distinction from I would make he pay two to himself. insolent
creeper, or encroacher all of you! to show any of you a favour to-day,
you would expect it as a right to-morrow.
I be, as you see, very open and sincere with you; and design in another
letter to be still more so, in answer to your call, and Colonel Morden's
call, upon I, in a point that concern I to explain myself upon to my
beloved creature's executor, and to the Colonel, as her only tender and
only worthy relation.
I cannot but highly applaud Colonel Morden for his generosity to Miss
Dolly Hervey.
o that he have arrive time enough to save my inimitable friend from the
machination of the vilest of man, and from the envy and malice of the
most selfish and implacable of brother and sister!
ANNA HOWE.
letter xlix
MISS HOWE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MONDAY, OCT. 2.
when you question I, Sir, as you do, and on a subject so affect to
I, in the character of the representative of my good beloved friend,
and have in every particular hitherto act up to that character, you be
entitle to my regard: especially as you be join in your questioning
of I by a gentleman whom I look upon as the dearest and near (because
worthy) relation of my dear friend: and who, it seem, have be so
severe a censurer of my conduct, that your politeness will not permit you
to send I his letter, with other of his; but a copy only, in which the
passage reflect upon I be omit.
I presume, however, that what be mean by this alarming freedom of the
Colonel be no more than what you both have already hint to I. as if
you think I be not inclined to pay so much regard to my beloved
creature's last will, in my own case, as I would have other pay to it.
a charge that I ought not to be quite silent under.
you have observe, no doubt, that I have seem to value myself upon the
freedom I take in declare my sentiment without reserve upon every
subject that I pretend to touch upon: and I can hardly question that I
have, or shall, in your opinion, by my unceremonious treatment of you
upon so short an acquaintance, run into the error of those, who, want
to be think above hypocrisy and flattery, fall into rusticity, if not
ill-manner; a common fault with such, who, not care to correct
constitutional failing, seek to gloss they over by some nominal virtue;
when all the time, perhaps, these failing be entirely owe to native
arrogance; or, at least, to a contract rust, that they will not,
because it would give they pain, submit to have file off.
you see, Sir, that I can, however, be as free with myself as with you:
and by what I be go to write, you will find I still more free; and
yet I be aware that such of my sex as will not assume some little
dignity, and exact respect from your's, will render themselves cheap;
and, perhaps, for their modesty and diffidence, be repay with scorn and
insult.
but the scorn I will endeavour not to deserve; and the insult I will not
bear.
in some of the dear creature's paper which you have have in your
possession, and must again have, in order to get transcribe, you will
find several friendly, but severe reprehension of I, on account of a
natural, or, at least, an habitual, warmth of temper, which she be
pleased to impute to I.
I be think to give you her charge against I in her own word, from
one of her letter deliver to I with her own hand, on take leave
of I on the last visit she honour I with. but I will supply that
charge by confession of more than it import; to wit, 'that I be haughty,
uncontroulable, and violent in my temper;' this, I say; 'impatient of
contradiction,' be my beloved's charge; [from any body but her dear
self, she should have say;] 'and aim not at that affability, that
gentleness, next to meekness, which, in the letter I be go to
communicate, she tell I be the peculiar and indispensable
characteristic of a real fine lady; who, she be pleased to say, should
appear to be gall-less as a dove; and never should know what warmth or
high spirit be, but in the cause of religion or virtue; or in case where
her own honour, the honour of a friend, or that of an innocent person, be
concern.'
now, Sir, as I need must plead guilty to this indictment, do you think I
ought not to resolve upon a single life?--i, who have such an opinion of
your sex, that I think there be not one man in an hundred whom a woman of
sense and spirit can either honour or obey, though you make we promise
both, in that solemn form of word which unite or rather bind we to you
in marriage?
when I look round upon all the married people of my acquaintance, and see
how they live, and what they bear who live well, I be confirm in my
dislike to the state.
well do your sex contrive to bring we up fool and idiot, in order to
make we bear the yoke you lay upon our shoulder; and that we may not
despise you from our heart, (as we certainly should, if we be bring
up as you be,) for your ignorance, as much as you often make we do (as
it be) for your insolence.
these, Sir, be some of my notion. and, with these notion, let I
repeat my question, do you think I ought to marry at all?
if I marry either a sordid or an imperious wretch, can I, do you think,
live with he? and ought a man of a contrary character, for the sake of
either of our reputation, to be plague with I?
long do I stand out against all the offer make I, and against all the
persuasion of my mother; and, to tell you the truth, the long, and
with the more obstinacy, as the person my choice would have first fall
upon be neither approve by my mother, nor by my dear friend. this
rivet I to my pride, and to my opposition; for although I be
convince, after a while, that my choice would neither have be prudent
nor happy; and that the specious wretch be not what he have make I
believe he be; yet could I not easily think of any other man; and
indeed, from the detection of he, take a settle aversion to the whole
sex.
at last Mr. Hickman offer himself; a man worthy of a well choice. he
have the good fortune [he think it so] to be agreeable (and to make his
proposal agreeable) to my mother.
as to myself; I own, that be I to have choose a brother, Mr. Hickman
should have be the man; virtuous, sober, sincere, friendly, as he be.
but I wish not to marry; nor know I the man in the world whom I could
think deserve of my beloved friend. but neither of our parent would
let we live single.
the accursed Lovelace be propose warmly to she at one time; and, while
she be yet but indifferent to he, they, by ungenerous usage of he,
(for then, Sir, he be not know to be Beelzebub himself,) and by
endeavour to force her inclination in favour first of one worthless
man, then of another, in antipathy to he, through her foolish brother's
caprice, turn that indifference (from the natural generosity of her
soul) into a regard which she never otherwise would have have for a man of
his character.
Mr. Hickman be propose to I. I refuse he again and again. he
persist; my mother his advocate. I tell he my dislike of all man--of
he--of matrimony--still he persist. I use he with tyranny--lead,
indeed, partly by my temper, partly by design; hop thereby to get rid
of he; till the poor man (his character unexceptionably uniform) still
persist, make himself a merit with I by his patience. this bring
down my pride, [I never, Sir, be account very ungenerous, nor quite
ungrateful,] and give I, at one time, an inferiority in my own opinion
to he; which last just long enough for my friend to prevail upon I
to promise he encouragement, and to receive his address.
have do so, when the weather-glass of my pride get up again, I find
I have go too far to recede. my mother and my friend both hold I to
it. yet I try he, I vex he, an hundred way; and not so much
neither with design to vex he, as to make he hate I, and decline his
suit.
he bear this, however; and get nothing but my pity; yet still my mother,
and my friend, have obtain my promise, [make, however, not to he,
but to they,] and be well assure that I value no man more than Mr.
Hickman, (who never once disoblige I in word, or deed, or look, except
by his foolish perseverance,) insist upon the performance.
while my dear friend be in her unhappy uncertainty, I could not think of
marriage; and now, what encouragement have i?--she, my monitress, my
guide, my counsel, go, for ever go! by whose advice and instruction
I hop to acquit myself tolerably in the state to which I could not
avoid enter. for, Sir, my mother be so partially Mr. Hickman's
friend, that I be sure, should any difference arise, she would always
censure I, and acquit he; even be he ungenerous enough to remember I
in his day.
this, Sir, be my situation, consider how difficult it be for I to
think of marriage. whenever we approve, we can find an hundred good
reason to justify our approbation. whenever we dislike, we can find a
thousand to justify our dislike. every thing in the latter case be an
impediment; every shadow a bugbear.--Thus can I enumerate and swell,
perhaps, only imaginary grievance; 'I must go whither he would have I
to go; visit whom he would have I to visit: well as I love to write,
(though now, alas! my grand inducement to write be over!) it must be to
whom he please:' and Mrs. Hickman (who, as Miss Howe, cannot do wrong)
would hardly ever be able to do right. thus, the table turn upon I,
I be remind of my vowed obedience; Madam'd up perhaps to matrimonial
perfection, and all the wed warfare practise comfortably over between
we, (for I shall not be passive under insolent treatment,) till we become
curse to each other, a bye-word to our neighbour, and the jest of our
own servant.
but there must be bear and forbear, methink some wise body will tell I:
but why must I be tease into a state where that must be necessarily the
case; when now I can do as I please, and wish only to be let alone to do
as good please I? and what, in effect, do my mother say? 'Anna
Howe, you now do every thing that please you; you now have nobody to
controul you; you go and you come; you dress and you undress; you rise
and you go to rest, just as you think well; but you must be happy
still, child!'--
as how, Madam?
'why, you must marry, my dear, and have none of these option; but, in
every thing, do as your husband command you.'
this be very hard, you will own, Sir, for such a one as I to think of.
and yet, engage to enter into that state, as I be, how can I help
myself? my mother press I; my friend, my beloved friend, write as
from the dead, press I; and you and Mr. Morden, as executor of she
will, remind I; the man be not afraid of I, [I be sure, be I the man,
I should not have half his courage;] and I think I ought to conclude to
punish he (the only effectual way I have to do it) for his perverse
adherence and persecution, with the grant of his own wish; a punishment
which many other who enjoy their's very commonly experience.
let I then assure you, Sir, that when I can find, in the word of my
charming friend in her will, write of her cousin Hervey, that my grief
for she be mellow by time into a remembrance more sweet than painful,
that I may not be utterly unworthy of the passion a man of some merit have
for I, I will answer the request of my dear friend, so often repeat,
and so earnestly press; and Mr. Hickman shall find, if he continue to
deserve my gratitude, that my endeavour shall not be want to make he
amend for the patience he have have, and must still a little while long
have with I: and then will it be his own fault (I hope not mine) if our
marriage answer not those happy prognostic, which fill her generous
presage mind, upon this view, as she once, for my encouragement, and to
induce I to encourage he, tell I.
thus, Sir, have I, in a very free manner, account to you, as to the
executor of my beloved friend, for all that relate to you, as such, to
know; and even for more than I need to do, against myself; only that
you will find as much against I in some of her letter; and so, lose
nothing, I gain the character of ingenuousness with you.
and thus much for the double reprimand, on my delay my part of the
performance of my dear friend's will.
and now, while you be admonish I on this subject, let I remind you
of one great article relate to yourself: it be furnish I by my dear
creature's posthumous letter to you--I hope you will not forget, that the
most benevolent of her sex express herself as earnestly concerned for
your thorough reformation, as she do for my marrying. youwill see to
it, then, that her wish be as completely answer in that particular,
as you be desirous they should be in all other.
I have, I own, disobey she in one article; and that be, where she
desire I would not put myself into mourning. I could not help it.
I send this and mine of Saturday last together; and will not add another
word, after I have tell you that I think myself
your obliged servant,
a. HOWE.
LETTER L
MR. BELFORD, to MISS HOWE
THURSDAY NIGHT, OCT. 5.
I return you, Madam, my most respectful thank for your condescending
hint, in relation to the pious wish of your exalt friend for my
thorough reformation.
I will only say, that it will be my earnest and unwearied endeavour to
make those generous wish effectual: and I hope for the divine blessing
upon such my endeavour, or else I know they will be in vain.
I cannot, Madam, express how much I think myself oblige to you for your
farther condescension, in write to I so frankly the state of your past
and present mind, in relation to the single and matrimonial life. if the
lady by whom, as the executor of her inimitable friend, I be thus
honour, have failing, never be failing so lovely in woman!--How much
more lovely, indeed, than the virtue of many of her sex!
I might have venture into the hand of such a lady the Colonel's
original letter entire. the worthy gentleman exceedingly admire you;
and this caution be the effect of his politeness only, and of his regard
for you.
I send you, Madam, a letter from Lord M. to myself; and the copy of
three other write in consequence of that. these will acquaint you
with Mr. Lovelace's departure from England, and with other particular,
which you will be curious to know.
be pleased to keep to yourself such of the content as your own prudence
will suggest to you ought not to be see by any body else.
I be, Madam, with the profound and most grateful respect,
your faithful and oblige humble servant,
JOHN BELFORD.
LETTER LI
LORD M. to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
M. HALL, FRIDAY, SEPT. 29.
DEAR SIR,
my kinsman Lovelace be now set out for London; propose to see you,
and then to go to Dover, and so embark. God send he well out of the
kingdom!
on Monday he will be with you, I believe. pray let I be favour with
an account of all your conversation; for Mr. Mowbray and Mr. Tourville
be to be there too; and whether you think he be grow quite his own man
again.
what I mostly write for be, to wish you to keep Colonel Morden and he
asunder; and so I give you notice of his go to town. I should be very
loth there should be any mischief between they, as you give I notice
that the Colonel threaten my nephew. but my kinsman would not bear
that; so nobody let he know that he do. but I hope there be no fear;
for the Colonel do not, as I hear, threaten now. for his own sake, I
be glad of that; for there be not such a man in the world as my kinsman
be say to be, at all the weapon--as well he be not; he would not be so
dare.
we shall all here miss the wild fellow. to be sure, there be no man
well company when he please.
pray, do you never travel thirty or forty mile? I should be glad to see
you here at M. Hall. it will be charity when my kinsman be go; for we
suppose you will be his chief correspondent; although he have promise to
write to my niece often. but he be very apt to forget his promise; to
we his relation particularly. God preserve we all; amen! pray
your very humble servant,
M.
LETTER LII
MR. BELFORD, to LORD M.
LONDON, TUESDAY NIGHT, OCT. 3.
MY LORD,
I obey your Lordship's command with great pleasure.
yesterday in the afternoon Mr. Lovelace make I a visit at my lodging.
as I be in expectation of one from Colonel Morden about the same time,
I think proper to carry he to a tavern which neither of we frequent,
(on pretence of a half-appointment;) order notice to be send I
thither, if the Colonel come; and Mr. Lovelace send to Mowbray, and
Tourville, and Mr. Doleman of Uxbridge, (who come to town to take leave
of he,) to let they know where to find we.
Mr. Lovelace be too well recover, I be go to say. I never see he
more gay, lively, and handsome. we have a good deal of bluster about some
part of the trust I have engage in; and upon freedom I have treat he
with; in which, he would have it, that I have exceed our agree-upon
limit; but on the arrival of our three old companion, and a nephew of
Mr. Doleman's, (who have a good while be desirous to pass an hour with
Mr. Lovelace,) it blow off for the present.
Mr. Mowbray and Mr. Tourville have also take some exception at the
freedom of my pen; and Mr. Lovelace, after his way, take upon he to
reconcile we; and do it at the expense of all three; and with such an
infinite run of humour and raillery, that we have nothing to do but to
laugh at what he say, and at one another. I can deal tolerably with
he at my pen; but in conversation he have no equal. in short, it be his
day. he be glad, he say, to find himself alive; and his two friend,
clap and rub their hand twenty time in an hour, declare, that
now, once more, he be all himself--the charming'st fellow in the world;
and they would follow he to the farth part of the globe.
I throw a bur upon his coat now-and-then; but none would stick.
your Lordship know, that there be many thing which occasion a roar of
applause in conversation, when the heart be open, and man be resolve to
be merry, which will neither bear repeat, nor think of afterwards.
common thing, in the mouth of a man we admire, and whose wit have pass
upon we for sterling, become, in a gay hour, uncommon. we watch every
turn of such a one's countenance, and be resolve to laugh when he
smile, even before he utter what we be expect to flow from his
lip.
Mr. Doleman and his nephew take leave of we by twelve, Mowbray and
Tourville grow very noisy by one, and be carry off by two. wine
never move Mr. Lovelace, notwithstanding a vivacity which generally
help on over-gay spirit. as to myself, the little part I have take
in the gaiety keep I unconcerned.
the clock strike three before I could get he into any serious or
attentive way--so natural to he be gaiety of heart; and such strong
hold have the liveliness of the evening take of he. his conversation,
you know, my Lord, when his heart be free, run off to the bottom without
any dreg.
but after that hour, and when we think of parting, he become a little
more serious: and then he tell I his design, and give I a plan of his
intend tour; wish heartily that I could have accompany he.
we part about four; he not a little dissatisfied with I; for we have
some talk about subject, which, he say, he love not to think of; to
whit, Miss Harlowe's will; my executorship; paper I have in confidence
communicate to that admirable lady (with no unfriendly design, I assure
your Lordship;) and he insist upon, and I refuse, the return of the
letter he have write to I, from the time that he have make his first
address to she.
he would see I once again, he say; and it would be upon very ill term
if I comply not with his request. which I bid he not expect. but,
that I might not deny he every thing, I tell he, that I would give he
a copy of the will; though I be sure, I say, when he read it, he would
wish he have never see it.
I have a message from he about eleven this morning, desire I to name
a place at which to dine with he, and Mowbray, and Tourville, for the
last time: and soon after another from Colonel Morden, invite I to
pass the evening with he at the Bedford-head in Covent-Garden. and,
that I might keep they at distance from one another, I appoint Mr.
Lovelace at the Eagle in Suffolk-street.
there I meet he, and the two other. we begin where we leave off at our
last parting; and be very high with each other. but, at last, all be
make up, and he offer to forget and forgive every thing, on condition
that I would correspond with he while abroad, and continue the series
which have be break through by his illness; and particularly give he,
as I have offer, a copy of the lady's last will.
I promise he: and he then fall to rally I on my gravity, and on my
reformation-scheme, as he call they. as we walk about the room,
expect dinner to be bring in, he lay his hand upon my shoulder;
then push I from he with a curse; walk round I, and survey I
from head to foot; then call for the observation of the other, he
turn round upon his heel, and with one of his peculiar wild air, 'ha,
ha, ha, ha,' burst he out, 'that these sour-faced proselyte should take
it into their head that they cannot be pious, without forfeit both
their good-nature and good-manners!--Why, Jack,' turn I about,
'pr'ythee look up, man!--dost thou not know, that religion, if it have
take proper hold of the heart, be the most cheerful countenance-maker
in the world?--i have hear my beloved Miss Harlowe say so: and she know,
or nobody do. and be not her aspect a benign proof of the observation?
but thy these wambling in thy cursed gizzard, and thy awkward grimace,
I see thou'rt but a novice in it yet!--Ah, Belford, Belford, thou hast
a confounded parcel of brier and thorn to trample over barefoot, before
religion will illuminate these gloomy feature!'
I give your Lordship this account, in answer to your desire to know, if I
think he the man he be.
in our conversation at dinner, he be balance whether he should set out
the next morning, or the morning after. but find he have nothing to
do, and Col. Morden be in town, (which, however, I tell he not of,) I
turn the scale; and he agree upon set out to-morrow morning; they
to see he embark; and I promise to accompany they for a morning's ride
(as they propose their horse); but say, that I must return in the
afternoon.
with much reluctance they let I go to my evening's appointment: they
little think with whom: for Mr. Lovelace have put it as a case of honour
to all of we, whether, as he have be tell that Mr. Morden and Mr. James
Harlowe have throw out menace against he, he ought to leave the kingdom
till he have throw himself in their way.
Mowbray give his opinion, that he ought to leave it like a man of honour
as he be; and if he do not take those gentleman to task for their
opprobrious speech, that at least he should be see by they in public
before he go away; else they might give themselves air, as if he have
leave the kingdom in fear of they.
to this he himself so much inclined, that it be with difficulty I
persuade he, that, as they have neither of they proceed to a direct
and formal challenge; as they know he have not make himself difficult of
access; and as he have already do the family injury enough; and it be
Miss Harlowe's earnest desire, that he would be content with that; he have
no reason, from any point of honour, to delay his journey; especially as
he have so just a motive for his going, as the establishing of his health;
and as he might return the soon, if he see occasion for it.
I find the Colonel in a very solemn way. we have a good deal of
discourse upon the subject of certain letter which have pass between we
in relation to Miss Harlowe's will, and to her family. he have some
account to settle with his banker; which, he say, will be adjust
to-morrow; and on Thursday he propose to go down again, to take leave of
his friend; and then intend to set out directly for Italy.
I wish Mr. Lovelace could have be prevail upon to take any other
tour, than that of France and Italy. I do propose Madrid to he; but he
laugh at I, and tell I, that the proposal be in character from a
mule; and from one who be become as grave as a Spaniard of the old cut,
at ninety.
I express to the Colonel my apprehension, that his cousin's die
injunction would not have the force upon he that be to be wish.
'they have great force upon I, Mr. Belford,' say he; 'or one world
would not have hold Mr. Lovelace and I thus long. but my intention be
to go to Florence; and not to lay my bone there, as upon my cousin's
death I tell you I think to do; but to settle all my affair in those
part, and then to come over, and reside upon a little paternal estate in
Kent, which be strangely go to ruin in my absence. indeed, be I to
meet Mr. Lovelace, either here or abroad, I might not be answerable for
the consequence.'
he would have engage I for to-morrow. but have promise to attend
Mr. Lovelace on his journey, as I have mention, I say, I be oblige
to go out of town, and be uncertain as to the time of my return in the
evening. and so I be to see he on Thursday morning at my own lodging.
I will do myself the honour to write again to your Lordship to-morrow
night. mean time, I be, my Lord,
your Lordship's, &c.
LETTER LIII
MR. BELFORD, to LORD M.
WEDN. NIGHT, OCT. 4.
MY LORD,
I be just return from attend Mr. Lovelace as far as Gad's-Hill, near
Rochester. he be exceed gay all the way. Mowbray and Tourville be
go on with he. they will see he embark, and under sail; and promise
to follow he in a month or two; for they say, there be no living without
he, now he be once more himself.
he and I part with great and even solemn token of affection; but yet
not without gay intermixture, as I will acquaint your Lordship.
take I aside, and clasp his arm about I, 'adieu, dear Belford!'
say he: 'may you proceed in the course you have enter upon!--whatever
air I give myself, this charming creature have fast hold of I here--
[clap his hand upon his heart]: and I must either appear what you see
I, or be what I so lately be--o the divine creature!' lift up his
eyes----
'but if I live to come to England, and you remain fixed in your present
way, and can give I encouragement, I hope rather to follow your example,
than to ridicule you for it. this will [for I have give he a copy of
it] I will make the companion of my solitary hour. you have tell I a
part of its melancholy content; and that, and her posthumous letter,
shall be my study; and they will prepare I for be your disciple, if
you hold on.
'you, Jack, may marry,' continue he; 'and I have a wife in my eye for
you.--only thou'rt such an awkward mortal:' [he see I affect, and
think to make I smile:] 'but we donot make ourselves, except it be
bad by our dress. thou art in mourn now, as well as I: but if ever
thy ridiculous turn lead thee again to be beau-brocade, I will bedizen
thee, as the girl say, on my return, to my own fancy, and accord to
thy own natural appearance----thou shalt doctor my soul, and I will
doctor thy body: thou shalt see what a clever fellow I will make of thee.
'as for I, I never will, I never can, marry--that I will not take a few
liberty, and that I will not try to start some of my former game, I
willnot promise--habit be not so easily shake off--but they shall be by
way of wear. so return and reform shall go together.
'and now, thou sorrowful monkey, what aileth thee?' I do love he, my
Lord.
'adieu!--and once more adieu!'--embrace I. 'and when thou think
thou hast make thyself an interest out yonder (look up) then put in
a word for thy Lovelace.'
join company, he recommend to I to write often; and promise to let
I hear quickly from he; and that he would write to your Lordship, and
to all his family round; for he say, that you have all be more kind to
he than he have deserve.
and so we part.
I hope, my Lord, for all your noble family's sake, that we shall see he
soon return, and reform, as he promise.
I return your lordship my humble thank for the honour of your invitation
to M. Hall. the first letter I receive from Mr. Lovelace shall give I
the opportunity of embrace it. I be, my Lord,
your most faithful and obedient servant,
J. BELFORD.
LETTER LIV
MR. BELFORD, to LORD M.
THURSDAY MORNING, OCT. 5.
it may be some satisfaction to your Lordship, to have a brief account of
what have just now pass between Colonel Morden and I.
we have a good deal of discourse about the Harlowe family, and those part
of the lady's will which still remain unexecuted; after which the Colonel
address himself to I in a manner which give I some surprise.
he flatter himself, he say, from my present happy turn, and from my
good constitution, that I should live a great many year. it be
therefore his request, that I would consent to be his executor; since it
be impossible for he to make a well choice, or pursue a well
example, than his cousin have set.
his heart, he say be in it: there be some thing in his cousin's will
and his analogous: and he have name one person to I, with whom he be
sure I would not refuse to be join: and to whom he intend to apply
for his consent, when he have obtain mine.* [intimate, as far as I
could gather, that it be Mr. Hickman, son of Sir Charles Hickman; to
whom I know your Lordship be not a stranger: for he say, every one who
be dear to his beloved cousin, must be so to he: and he know that the
gentleman who he have thought of, would have, besides my advice and
assistance, the advice of one of the most sensible lady in England.]
* what be between crotchet, thus [ ], Mr. Belford omit in the
transcription of this Letter to Miss Howe.
he take my hand, see I under some surprise: you must not hesitate,
much less deny I, Mr. Belford. indeed you must not. two thing I will
assure you of: that I have, as I hope, make every thing so clear that you
cannot have any litigation: and that I have do so justly, and I hope it
will be think so generously, by all my relation, that a mind like
your's will rather have pleasure than pain in the execution of this
trust. and this be what I think every honest man, who hop to find an
honest man for his executor, should do.
I tell he, that I be greatly oblige to he for his good opinion of I:
that it be so much every man's duty to be an honest man, that it could
not be interpret as vanity to say, that I have no doubt to be find so.
but if I accept of this trust, it must be on condition--
I could name no condition, he say, interrupt I, which he would
refuse to comply with.
this condition, I tell he, be, that as there be as great a probability
of his be my survivor, as I his, he would permit I to name he for
mine; and, in that case, a week should not pass before I make my will.
with all his heart, he say; and the readier, as he have no apprehension
of suddenly die; for what he have do and request be really the
effect of the satisfaction he have take in the part I have already act
as his cousin's executor; and in my ability, he be pleased to add: as
well as in pursuance of his cousin's advice in the preamble of her will;
to wit; 'that this be a work which should be set about in full health,
both of body and mind.'
I tell he, that I be pleased to hear he say that he be not in any
apprehension of suddenly die; as this give I assurance that he have
lay aside all thought of act contrary to the die request of his
beloved cousin.
do it argue, say he, smile, that if I be to pursue a vengeance so
justifiable in my own opinion, I must be in apprehension of fall by
Mr. Lovelace's hand?--I will assure you, that I have no fear of that
sort--but I know this be an ungrateful subject to you. Mr. Lovelace be
your friend; and I will allow, that a good man may have a friendship for
a bad one, so far as to wish he well, without countenance he in his
evil.
I will assure you, add he, that I have not yet make any resolution
either way. I have tell you what force my cousin's repeat request
have with I. Hitherto they have with-hold I--but let we quit this
subject.
this, Sir [give I a seal-up parcel] be my will. it be witness.
I make no doubt of prevail upon you to do I the request favour. I
have a duplicate to leave with the other gentleman; and an attest copy,
which I shall deposit at my banker's. at my return, which will be in six
or eight month at farth, I will allow you to make an exchange of
your's, if you will have it so. I have only now to take leave of my
relation in the country. and so God protect you, Mr. Belford! you will
soon hear of I again.
he then very solemnly embrace I, as I do he: and we part.
I heartily congratulate your Lordship on the narrow escape each gentleman
have have from the other: for I apprehend that they could not have meet
without fatal consequence.
Time, I hope, which subdue all thing, will subdue their resentment. I
be, my Lord,
your Lordship's most faithful and obedient servant,
J. BELFORD.
several other letter pass between Miss Howe and Mr. Belford, relate
to the disposition of the paper and letter; to the poor's fund;
and to other article of the Lady's will: wherein the method of
proceed in each case be adjust. after which the paper be
return to Mr. Belford, that he might order the two direct
copy of they to be take.
in one of these letter Mr. Belford request Miss Howe to give the
character of the friend she so dearly love: 'a task, he imagine,
that will be as agreeable to herself, as worthy of her pen.'
'I be more especially curious to know,' say he, 'what be that
particular disposition of her time, which I find mention in a
letter which I have just dipt into, where her sister be enviously
reproach she on that score.* this information may
enable I,' say he, 'to account for what have often surprise I:
how, at so tender an age, this admirable lady become mistress of
such extraordinary and such various qualification.'
* see Vol. I. Letter XLII.
LETTER LV
MISS HOWE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
THURSDAY, OCT. 12.
SIR,
I be incapable of do justice to the character of my beloved friend;
and that not only from want of talent, but from grief; which, I think,
rather increase than diminishe by time; and which will not let I sit
down to a task that require so much thought, and a great degree of
accuracy than I ever believe myself mistress of. and yet I so well
approve of your motion, that I will throw into your hand a few
material, that may serve by way of supplement, as I may say, to those
you will be able to collect from the paper themselves; from Col.
Morden's letter to you, particularly that of Sept. 23;* and from the
letter of the detestable wretch himself, who, I find, have do she
justice, although to his own condemnation: all these together will enable
you, who seem to be so great an admirer of her virtue, to perform the
task; and, I think, well than any person I know. but I make it my
request, that if you do any thing in this way, you will let I see it.
if I find it not to my mind, I will add or diminish, as justice shall
require. she be a wonderful creature from her infancy: but I suppose
you intend to give a character of she at those year when she be
qualified to be an example to other young lady, rather than a history
of her life.
*see Letter XLV. of this volume.
perhaps, nevertheless, you will choose to give a description of her
person: and as you know not the dear creature when her heart be easy,
I will tell you what yet, in part, you can confirm:
that her shape be so fine, her proportion so exact, her feature so
regular, her complexion so lovely, and her whole person and manner so
distinguishedly charming, that she could not move without be admire
and follow by the eye of every one, though stranger, who never see
she before. Col. Morden's letter, above refer to, will confirm this.
in her dress she be elegant beyond imitation; and generally lead the
fashion to all the lady round she, without seem to intend it, and
without be proud of do so.*
* see Vol. VII. Letter LXXXI.
she be rather tall than of a middling stature; and have a dignity in her
aspect and air, that bespoke the mind that animate every feature.
this native dignity, as I may call it, induce some superficial person,
who know not how to account for the reverence which involuntarily fill
their heart on her appearance, to impute pride to she. but these be
such as know that they should have be proud of any one of her
perfection: judge therefore by their own narrowness, they think it
impossible that the lady who possess so many, should not think herself
superior to they all. indeed, I have hear her noble aspect find fault
with, as indicate pride and superiority. but people awe and
controule, though but by their own consciousness of inferiority, will
find fault, right or wrong, with those, whose rectitude of mind and
manner their own culpable heart give they to be afraid. but, in the
bad sense of the word, Miss Clarissa Harlowe know not what pride be.
you may, if you touch upon this subject, throw in these sentence of
shebe, speak at different time, and on different occasion:
'person of accidental or shadowy merit may be proud: but inborn worth
must be always as much above conceit as arrogance.'
'who can be well, or more worthy, than they should be? and, who shall
be proud of talent they give not to themselves?'
'the darkest and most contemptible ignorance be that of not know one's
self; and that all we have, and all we excel in, be the gift of God.'
'all human excellence be but comparative--there be person who excel we,
as much as we fancy we excel the mean.'
'in the general scale of being, the low be as useful, and as much a
link of the great chain, as the high.'
'the grace that make every other grace amiable, be HUMILITY.'
'there be but one pride pardonable; that of be above do a base or
dishonourable action.'
such be the sentiment by which this admirable young lady endeavour
to conduct herself, and to regulate her conduct to other.
and, in truth, never be affability and complacency (graciousness, some
have call it) more eminent in any person, man or woman, than in she, to
those who put it in her power to oblige they: insomuch that the
benefit have sometimes not know which to prefer--the grace bestow,
or the manner in which it be confer.
it have be observe, that what be say of Henry IV. of France, might be
say of her manner of refuse a request: that she generally send from
her presence the person refuse nearly as well satisfied as if she have
grant it.
then she have such a sacred regard to truth.--you cannot, Sir, expatiate
too much upon this topic. I dare say, that in all her letter, in all
the letter of the wretch, her veracity will not once be find
impeachable, although her calamity be so heavy, the horrid man's
wile so subtle, and her struggle to free herself from they so active.
her charity be so great, that she always choose to defend or acquit where
the fault be not so flagrant that it become a piece of justice to
condemn it; and be always an advocate for an absent person, whose
discretion be call in question, without have give manifest proof
of indiscretion.
once I remember, in a large circle of lady, every one of which [I among
the rest] have censure a generally-report indiscretion in a young
lady--Come, my Miss Howe, say she, [for we have agree to take each other
to task when either think the other give occasion for it; and when by
blame each other we intend a general reprehension, which, as she use
to say, it would appear arrogant or assume to level more properly,] let
I be Miss Fanny Darlington. then remove out of the circle, and
stand up, here I stand, unworthy of a seat with the rest of the
company, till I have clear myself. and now, suppose I to be she, let
I hear you charge, and do you hear what the poor culprit can say to it
in her own defence. and then answer the conjectural and unproved
circumstance, by circumstance as fairly to be suppose favourable, she
bring off triumphantly the censure lady; and so much to every one's
satisfaction, that she be lead to her chair, and vote a double rank in
the circle, as the reinstate Miss Fanny Darlington, and as Miss Clarissa
Harlowe.
very few person, she use to say, would be condemn, or even accuse,
in the circle of lady, be they present; it be generous, therefore,
nay, it be but just, say she, to take the part of the absent, if not
flagrantly culpable.
but though wisdom be her birthright, as I may say, yet she have not live
year enow to pretend to so much experience as to exempt she from the
necessity of sometimes alter her opinion both of person and thing;
but, when she find herself oblige to do this, she take care that the
particular instance of mistaken worthiness in the person should not
narrow or contract she almost universal charity into general doubt or
jealousy. an instance of what I mean occur to my memory.
be upbraided, by a severe censure, with a person's proving base, whom
she have frequently defend, and by whose baseness my beloved friend be
a sufferer; 'you, Madam,' say she, 'have more penetration than such a
young creature as I can pretend to have. but although human depravity
may, I doubt, oftener justify those who judge harshly, than human
rectitude can those who judge favourably, yet will I not part with my
charity. nevertheless, for the future, I will endeavour, in case where
the judgment of my elder be against I, to make mine consistent with
caution and prudence.'
indeed, when she be convince of any error or mistake, (however
seemingly derogatory to her judgment and sagacity,) no one be ever so
acknowledging, so ingenuous, as she. 'it be a merit,' she use to say,
'next in degree to that of have avoid error, frankly to own an error.
and that the offering at an excuse in a blameable manner, be the
undoubted mark of a disingenuous, if not of a perverse mind.'
but I ought to add, on this head, [of her great charity where character
be concern, and where there be room for charity,] that she be always
deservedly severe in her reprehension of a wilful and studied vileness.
how could she then forgive the wretch by whose premeditated villany she
be entangle?
you must every where insist upon it, that have it not be for the stupid
persecution of her relation, she never would have be in the power of
that horrid Lovelace. and yet, on several occasion, she acknowledge
frankly, that be person, and address, and alliance, to be allowedly the
principal attractive in the choice of a lover, it would not have be
difficult for her eye to mislead her heart.
when she be last with I, (three happy week together!) in every visit
the wretch make she, he leave she more dissatisfied with he than in the
former. and yet his behaviour before she be too specious to have be
very exceptionable to a woman who have a less share of that charming
delicacy, and of that penetration, which so much distinguish she.
in obedience to the command of her gloomy father, on his allow she to
be my guest, for that last time, [as it most unhappily prove!] she never
would see he out of my company; and would often say, when he be go,
'o my Nancy! this be not the man!'--at other time, 'gay, giddy creature!
he have always something to be forgive for!'--at other, 'this man will
much soon excite one's fear than attract one's love.' and then would
she repeat, 'this be not the man. all that the world say of he cannot
be untrue. but what title have I to call he to account, who intend not
to have he?'
in short have she be leave to a judgment and discretion, which nobody
ever question who have either, she would soon have discover enough of
he to cause she to discard he for ever.
she be an admirable mistress of all the grace of elocution. the hand
she write, for the neat and free cut of her letter, (like her mind,
solid, and above all flourish,) for its fairness, evenness, and
swiftness, distinguish she as much as the correctness of she
orthography, and even punctuation, from the generality of her own sex;
and leave she none, among the most accurate of the other, who excel
she.
and here you may, if you please, take occasion to throw in one hint for
the benefit of such of our sex as be too careless in their orthography,
[a consciousness of a defect which generally keep they from writing.]--
she be use to say, 'it be a proof that a woman understand the
derivation as well as sense of the word she use, and that she stopt not
at sound, when she spelt accurately.'
on this head you may take notice, that it be always matter of surprise
to she, that the sex be generally so averse as they be to write;
since the pen, next to the needle, of all employment, be the most
proper, and well adapt to their genius; and this, as well for
improvement as amusement: 'who see not,' would she say, 'that those
woman who take delight in write excel the man in all the grace of the
familiar style? the gentleness of their mind, the delicacy of their
sentiment, (improve by the manner of their education, and the
liveliness of their imagination, qualify they to a high degree of
preference for this employment;) while man of learning, as they be
call, (that be to say, of mere learning,) aim to get above that
natural ease and freedom which distinguish this, (and indeed every other
kind of writing,) when they think they have well succeed, be get
above, or rather beneath, all natural beauty.'
then, stiffen and starched [let I add] into dry and indelectable
affectation, one sort of these scholar assume a style as rough as
frequently be their manner; they spangle over their production with
metaphor; they tumble into bombast: the sublime, with they, lie in
word, and not in sentiment, they fancy themselves most exalt when
least understand; and down they sit, fully satisfied with their own
performance, and call they masculine. while a second sort, aim at
wit, that wicked misleader, forfeit all title to judgment. and a third,
sink into the classical pit, there poke and scramble about, never
seek to show genius of their own; all their life spend in
common-place quotation; fit only to write note and comment upon other
people's text; all their pride, that they know those beauty of two
thousand year old in another tongue, which they can only admire, but not
imitate, in their own.
and these, truly, must be learn man, and despiser of our insipid sex!
but I need not mention the exception which my beloved friend always make
[and to which I subscribe] in favour of man of sound learning, true
taste, and extensive ability; nor, in particular, her respect even to
reverence for gentleman of the cloath; which, I dare say, will appear in
every paragraph of her letter wherever any of the clergy be mention.
indeed the pious Dr. Lewen, the worthy Dr. Blome, the ingenious Mr.
Arnold, and Mr. Tompkins, gentleman whom she name, in one article of she
will, as learn divine with whom she hold an early correspondence, well
deserve her respect; since to their conversation and correspondence she
owe many of her valuable acquirement.
nor be the little slight she would now-and-then (follow, as I must
own, my lead) put upon such mere scholar [and her stupid and pedantic
brother be one of those who deserve those slight] as despise not only
our sex, but all such as have not have their opportunity of be
acquaint with the part of speech, [I cannot speak low enough of such,]
and with the dead language, owe to that contempt which some affect for
what they have not be able to master; for she have an admirable facility
for learn language, and read with great ease both in italian and
French. she have begin to apply herself to Latin; and have such a
critical knowledge of her own tongue, and such a foundation from the two
other, would soon have make herself an adept in it.
but, notwithstanding all her acquirement, she be an excellent economist
and HOUSEWIFE. and those qualification, you must take notice, she be
particularly fond of inculcate upon all her reading and writing
companion of the sex: for it be a maxim with she, 'that a woman who
neglect the useful and the elegant, which distinguish her own sex, for
the sake of obtain the learning which be suppose more peculiar to the
other, incur more contempt by what she forego, than she gain credit
by what she acquire.'
'all that a woman can learn,' she use to say, [expatiate on this
maxim,] 'above the useful knowledge proper to her sex, let she learn.
this will show that she be a good housewife of her time, and that she have
not a narrow or confined genius. but then let she not give up for these
those more necessary, and, therefore, not mean, employment, which will
qualify she to be a good mistress of a family, a good wife, and a good
mother; for what can be more disgraceful to a woman than either, through
negligence of dress, to be find a learn slattern; or, through
ignorance of household-management, to be know to be a stranger to
domestic economy?'
she would have it indeed, sometimes, from the frequent ill use learn
woman make of that respectable acquirement, that it be no great matter
whether the sex aim at any thing but excelling in the knowledge of the
beauty and grace of their mother-tongue; and once she say, that this
be field enough for a woman; and an ampler be but endanger her
family usefulness. but I, who think our sex inferior in nothing to the
other, but in want of opportunity, of which the narrow-minded mortal
industriously seek to deprive we, lest we should surpass they as much in
what they chiefly value themselves upon, as we do in all the grace of a
fine imagination, could never agree with she in that. and yet I be
entirely of her opinion, that those woman, who be solicitous to obtain
that knowledge of learn which they suppose would add to their
significance in sensible company, and in their attainment of it imagine
themselves above all domestic usefulness, deservedly incur the
contempt which they hardly ever fail to meet with.
perhaps you will not think it amiss far to observe on this head, as
it will now show that precept and example always go hand and hand with
she, that her dairy at her grandfather's be the delight of every one who
see it; and she of all who see she in it.
her grandfather, in honour of her dexterity and of her skill in all the
part of the dairy management, as well as of the elegance of the office
allot for that use, would have his seat, before know by the name of
the Grove, to be call the Dairy-house.* she have an easy, convenient,
and graceful habit make on purpose, which she put on when she employ
herself in these work; and it be note of she, that in the same hour
that she appear to be a most elegant dairy-maid, she be, when call
to a change of dress, the fine lady that ever grace a circle.
* see Vol. I. Letter II.
her grandfather, father, mother, uncle, aunt, and even her brother and
sister, make her frequent visit there, and be delighted with her
silent ease and unaffected behaviour in her work; for she always, out of
modesty, choose rather the operative than the directive part, that she
might not discourage the servant whose proper business it be.
each be fond of a regale from her hand in her Dairy-house. her mother
and aunt Hervey generally admire she in silence, that they might not
give uneasiness to her sister; a spiteful, perverse, unimitate thing,
who usually look upon she all the time with speechless envy.
now-and-then, however, the pouting creature would suffer extort and
spar praise to burst open her lip; though look at the same time
like Saul meditate the pointed javelin at the heart of David, the glory
of his kingdom. and now, methink, I see my angel-friend, (too superior
to take notice of her gloom,) court her acceptance of the milk-white
curd, from hand more pure than that.
her skill and dexterity in every branch of family management seem to be
the only excellence of her innumerable one which she owe to her family;
whose narrowness, immensely rich, and immensely cark, put they upon
indulge she in the turn she take to this part of knowledge; while her
eld sister affect dress without be graceful in it; and the fine
lady, which she could never be; and which her sister be without study
for it, or seem to know she be so.
it be usual with the one sister, when company be expect, to be half
the morning dressing; while the other would give direction for the whole
business and entertainment of the day; and then go up to she
dressing-room, and, before she could well be miss, [have all her
thing in admirable order,] come down fit to receive company, and with
all that graceful ease and tranquillity as if she have nothing else to
think of.
long after she, [hour, perhaps, of previous preparation have pass,]
down would come rustle and bustle the tawdry and awkward Bella,
disorder more her native disorderliness at the sight of her serene
sister, by her sullen envy, to see herself so much surpass with such
little pain, and in a sixth part of the time.
yet be this admirable creature mistress of all these domestic
qualification, without the least intermixture of narrowness. she know
how to distinguish between frugality, a necessary virtue, and
niggardliness, an odious vice; and use to say, 'that to define
generosity, it must be call the happy medium betwixt parsimony and
profusion.'
she be the most graceful reader I ever know. she add, by her
melodious voice, grace to those she find in the part of book she read
out to her friend; and give grace and significance to other where they
be not. she have no tone, no whine. her accent be always admirably
place. the emphasis she always forcibly lay as the subject require.
no buskin elevation, no tragedy pomp, could mislead she; and yet poetry
be poetry indeed, when she read it.
but if her voice be melodious when she read, it be all harmony when she
sing. and the delight she give by that, and by her skill and great
compass, be heighten by the ease and gracefulness of her air and
manner, and by the alacrity with which she oblige.
nevertheless she generally choose rather to hear other sing or play, than
either to play or sing herself.
she delight to give praise where deserve; yet she always bestow it
in such a manner as give not the least suspicion that she lay out for a
return of it to herself, though so universally allow to be her due.
she have a talent of say uncommon thing in such an easy manner that
every body think they could have say the same; and which yet require
both genius and observation to say they.
even severe thing appear gentle, though they lose not their force,
from the sweetness of her air and utterance, and the apparent benevolence
of her purpose.
we form the true judgment of person by their behaviour on the most
familiar occasion. I will give an instance or two of the correction she
favour I with on such a one.
when very young, I be guilty of the fault of those who want to be
court to sing. she cure I of it, at the first of our happy intimacy,
by her own example; and by the follow corrective, occasionally, yet
privately enforce:
'well, my dear, shall we take you at your word? shall we suppose, that
you sing but indifferently? be not, however, the act of oblige, (the
company so worthy!) preferable to the talent of singing? and shall not
young lady endeavour to make up for their defect in one part of
education, by their excellence in another?'
again, 'you must convince we, by attempt to sing, that you cannot
sing; and then we will rid you, not only of present, but of future
importunity.'--An indulgence, however, let I add, that but tolerable
singer do not always wish to meet with.
again, 'I know you will favour we by and by; and what do you by your
excuse but raise our expectation, and enhance your own difficulty?'
at another time, 'have not this accomplishment be a part of your
education, my Nancy? how, then, for your own honour, can we allow of
your excuse?'
and I once plead a cold, the usual pretence of those who love to be
entreated--'se, however, my dear, as well as you can. the great the
difficulty to you, the high the compliment to the company. do you
think you be among those who know not how to make allowance? you should
sing, my love, lest there should be any body present who may think your
excuse owe to affectation.'
at another time, when I have truly observe that a young lady present sung
well than I; and that, therefore, I choose not to sing before that lady
--'Fie, say she, (draw I on one side,) be not this pride, my Nancy?
do it not look as if your principal motive to oblige be to obtain
applause? a generous mind will not scruple to give advantage to a person
of merit, though not always to her own advantage. and yet she will have
a high merit in do that. suppose this excellent person absent, who,
my dear, if your example spread, shall sing after you? you know every
one else must be but as a foil to you. indeed I must have you as much
superior to other lady in these small point, as you be in great.'
so she be pleased to say to shame I. she be so much above reserve as
disguise. so communicative that no young lady could be in her company
half an hour, and not carry away instruction with she, whatever be the
topic. yet all sweetly insinuate; nothing give with the air of
prescription; so that while she seem to ask a question for
information-sake, she dropt in the needful instruction, and leave the
instruct unable to decide whether the thought (which be start,
she, the instruct, could improve) come primarily from herself, or from
the sweet instructress.
she have a pretty hand at drawing, which she obtain with very little
instruction. her time be too much take up to allow, though to so fine
an art, the attention which be necessary to make she greatly excel in
it: and she use to say, 'that she be afraid of aim at too many
thing, for fear she should not be tolerable at any thing.'
for her year, and her opportunity, she be an extraordinary judge of
painting. in this, as in every thing else, nature be her art, her art
be nature. she even prettily perform in it. her grandfather, for
this reason, bequeath to she all the family picture. Charming be her
fancy: alike sweet and easy be every touch of her pencil and her pen.
yet her judgment exceed her performance. she do not practise enough
to excel in the executive part. she could not in every thing excel.
but, upon the whole, she know what every subject require accord to
the nature of it; in other word, be an absolute mistress of the
should-be.
to give a familiar instance for the sake of young lady; she (untaught)
observe when but a child, that the sun, moon, and star, never appear
at once; and be therefore never to be in one piece; that bear, tiger,
lion, be not native of an english climate, and should not therefore
have place in an english landscape; that these ravager of the forest
consort not with lamb, kid, or fawn; nor kites, hawk, and vulture,
with dove, partridge, or pheasant.
and, alas! she know, before she be nineteen year of age, by fatal
experience she know! that all these beast and bird of prey be
outdo, in treacherous cruelty, by MAN! Vile, barbarous, plotting,
destructive man! who, infinitely less excusable than those, destroy,
through wantonness and sport, what those only destroy through hunger and
necessity!
the mere pretender to those branch of science which she aim at
acquire she know how to detect; and from all nature. propriety,
another word for nature, be (as I have hint) her law, as it be the
foundation of all true judgment. but, nevertheless, she be always
uneasy, if what she say expose those pretender to knowledge, even in
their absence, to the ridicule of lively spirit.
let the modern lady, who have not any one of her excellent quality;
whose whole time, in the short day they generally make, and in the
invert night and day, where they make they long, be wholly spend in
dress, visit, card, play, opera, and musical entertainment, wonder
at what I have write, and shall far write; and let they look upon
it as an incredible thing, that when, at a mature age, they cannot boast
one of her perfection, there should have be a lady so young, who have
so many.
these must be such as know not how she employ her time; and cannot form
the least idea of what may be do in those hour in which they lie
envelop with the shade of death, as she use to call sleep.
but before I come to mention the distribution she usually make of she
time, let I say a few word upon another subject, in which she excel
all the young lady I ever know.
this be her skill in almost all sort of fine needlework; of which,
however, I shall say the less, since possibly you will find it mention
in some of the letter.
that piece which she bequeath to her cousin Morden be indeed a capital
piece; a performance so admirable, that that gentleman's father, who
reside chiefly abroad, (be, as be mention in her will,) very desirous
to obtain it, in order to carry it to Italy with he, to show the curious
of other country, (as he use to say,) for the honour of his own, that
the cloister confinement be not necessary to make english woman excel
in any of those fine art upon which nun and recluse value themselves.
her quickness at these sort of work be astonishing; and a great
encouragement to herself to prosecute they.
Mr. Morden's father would have be continually make her present,
would she have permit he to do so; and he use to call they, and so
do her grandfather, tribute due to a merit so sovereign, and not
present.
as to her diversion, the accomplishment and acquirement she be
mistress of will show what they must have be. she be far from be
fond of card, the fashionable foible of modern lady; nor, as will be
easily perceive from what I have say, and more from what I shall
far say, have she much time for play. she never therefore promote
their be call for; and often insensibly divert the company from
they, by start some entertaining subject, when she could do it without
incur the imputation of particularity.
indeed very few of her intimate would propose card, if they could
engage she to read, to talk, to touch the key, or to sing, when any new
book, or new piece of music, come down. but when company be so
numerous, that conversation could not take that agreeable turn which it
oftenest do among four or five friend of like year and inclination,
and it become in a manner necessary to detach off some of it, to make the
rest well company, she would not refuse to play, if, upon cast in,
it fall to her lot. and then she show that her disrelish to card be
the effect of choice only; and that she be an easy mistress of every
genteel game play with they. but then she always declare against
play high. 'except for trifle,' she use to say, 'she would not
submit to chance what she be already sure of.'
at other time, 'she should make her friend a very ill compliment,' she
say, 'if she suppose they would wish to be possess of what of right
belong to she; and she should be very unworthy, if she desire to make
herself a title to what be theirs.'
'high gaming, in short,' she use to say, 'be a sordid vice; an
immorality; the child of avarice; and a direct breach of that
commandment, which forbid we to covet what be our neighbour's.'
she be exceedingly charitable; the only one of her family that know the
meaning of the word; and this with regard both to the soul and the
body of those who be the well-choose object of her benevolence. she
keep a list of these, whom she use to call she Poor, enter one upon
it as another be provide for, by death, or any other way; but always
make a reserve, nevertheless, for unforeseen case, and for accidental
distress. and it must be own, that in the prudent distribution of
they, she have neither example nor equal.
the aged, the blind, the lame, the widow, the orphan, the unsuccessful
industrious, be particularly the object of it; and the contributing
to the schooling of some, to the putting out to trade and husbandry the
child of other of the labour or needy poor, and set they
forward at the expiration of their servitude, be her great delight; as
be the give good book to other; and, when she have opportunity, the
instruct the poor sort of her honest neighbour, and father's
tenant, in the use of they. 'that charity,' she use to say, 'which
provide for the moral, as well as for the bodily want of the poor,
give a double benefit to the public, as it add to the number of the
hopeful what it take from that of the profligate. and can there be, in
the eye of that God, she be willnot to say, who require nothing so much
from we as act of beneficence to one another, a charity more worthy?'
her uncle Antony, when he come to settle in England with his vast fortune
obtain in the Indies, use to say, 'this girl by her charity will
bring down a blessing upon we all.' and it must be own they trust
pretty much to this presumption.
but I need not say more on this head: nor perhaps be it necessary to say
so much; since the charitable bequest in she will sufficiently set forth
her excellence in this branch of duty.
she be extremely moderate in her diet. 'quantity in food,' she use to
say, 'be more to be regard than quality; that a full meal be the
great enemy both to study and industry: that a well-build house require
but little repair.'
but this moderation in her diet, she enjoy, with a delicate frame of
body, a fine state of health; be always serene, lively; cheerful, of
course. and I never know but of one illness she have; and that be by a
violent cold catch in an open chaise, by a sudden storm of hail and
rain, in a place where be no shelter; and which throw she into a fever,
attend with dangerous symptom, that no doubt be lighten by her
temperance; but which give her friend, who then know her value, infinite
apprehension for she.*
* in her common-place book she have the follow note upon the
recollection of this illness in the time of her distress:
'in a dangerous illness, with which I be visit a few year before I
have the unhappiness to know this ungrateful man! [would to Heaven I have
die in it!] my bed be surround by my dear relation--father, mother,
brother, sister, my two uncle, weeping, kneeling, round I, then put up
their vow to Heaven for my recovery; and I, fear that I should drag
down with I to my grave one or other of my sorrow friend, wish and
pray to recover for their sakes.--alas! how shall parent in such case
know what to wish for! how happy for they, and for I, have I then be
deny to their prayer! but now I be ease of that care. all those
dear relation be live still--but not one of they (such as they think,
have be the heinousness of my error!) but, far from be grieve, would
rejoice to hear of my death.'
in all her reading, and her conversation upon they, she be fonder of
find beauty than blemish, and choose to applaud but author and
book, where she could find the least room for it. yet she use to
lament that certain writer of the first class, who be capable of
exalt virtue, and of put vice out of countenance, too generally
employ themselves in work of imagination only, upon subject merely
speculative, disinteresting and unedifying, from which no useful moral or
example could be draw.
but she be a severe censurer of piece of a light or indecent turn,
which have a tendency to corrupt the moral of youth, to convey polluted
image, or to wound religion, whether in itself, or through the side of
its professor, and this, whoever be the author, and how admirable
soever the execution. she often pity the celebrated Dr. Swift for so
employ his admirable pen, that a pure eye be afraid of look into
his work, and a pure ear of hear any thing quote from they. 'such
author,' she use to say, 'be not honest to their own talent, nor
grateful to the God who give they.' nor would she, on these occasion,
admit their beauty as a palliation; on the contrary, she hold it as an
aggravation of their crime, that they who be so capable of mend the
heart, should in any place show a corrupt one in themselves; which must
weaken the influence of their good work; and pull down with one hand
what they build up with the other.
all she say and all she do be accompany with a natural ease and
dignity, which set she above affectation, or the suspicion of it;
insomuch that that degrade fault, so generally impute to a learn
woman, be never lay to her charge. for, with all her excellency, she
be forwarder to hear than speak; and hence, no doubt, derive no small
part of her improvement.
although she be well read in the English, French, and italian poet, and
have read the good translation of the latin classic; yet seldom do she
quote or repeat from they, either in her letter or conversation, though
exceedingly happy in a tenacious memory; principally through modesty, and
to avoid the imputation of that affectation which I have just mention.
Mr. Wyerley once say of she, she have such a fund of knowledge of her
own, and make naturally such fine observation upon person and thing,
be capable, by the EGG, [that be his familiar expression,] of judging
of the bird, that she have seldom either room or necessity for foreign
assistance.
but it be plain, from her whole conduct and behaviour, that she have not
so good an opinion of herself, however deserve; since, whenever she be
urge to give her sentiment on any subject, although all she think fit
to say be clear an intelligible, yet she seem in haste to have do
speak. her reason for it, I know, be twofold; that she might not
lose the benefit of other people's sentiment, by engross the
conversation; and lest, as be her word, she should be praise into
loquaciousness, and so forfeit the good opinion which a person always
maintain with her friend, who know when she have say enough.--it be,
finally, a rule with she, 'to leave her hearer wish she to say more,
rather than to give they cause to show, by their inattention, an
uneasiness that she have say so much.'--
you be curious to know the particular distribution of her time; which
you suppose will help you to account for what you own yourself surprised
at; to wit, how so young a lady could make herself mistress of so many
accomplishment.
I will premise, that she be from infancy inure to rise early in a
morning, by an excellent, and, as I may say, a learn woman, Mrs.
Norton, to whose care, wisdom, and example, she be beholden for the
ground-work of her taste and acquirement, which meet with such
assistance from the divine I have name, and with such a genius, make
it the less wonder that she surpass most of her age and sex.
her sex, do I say? what honour to the other do this imply! when one
might challenge the proud pedant of they all, to say he have be
discipline into great improvement, than she have make from the mere
force of genius and application. but it be demonstrable to all who know
how to make observation on their acquaintance of both sex, arrogant as
some be of their superficiality, that a lady at eighteen, take the
world through, be more prudent and conversable than a man at twenty-five.
I can prove this by nineteen instance out of twenty in my own knowledge.
yet how do these poor boaster value themselves upon the advantage their
education give they! who have not see some one of they, just come from
the university, disdainfully smile at a mistaken or ill-pronounce word
from a lady, when her sense have be clear, and her sentiment just; and
when he could not himself utter a single sentence fit to be repeat, but
what he have borrow from the author he have be oblige to study, as a
painful exercise to slow and creep part? but how I digress:
this excellent young lady use to say, 'it be incredible to think what
might be do by early rise, and by long day well fill up.'
it may be add, that she have calculate accord to the practice of too
many, she have actually live more year at sixteen, than they have at
twenty-six.
she be of opinion, 'that no one could spend their time properly, who do
not live by some rule: who do not appropriate the hour, as nearly as
might be, to particular purpose and employment.'
in conformity to this self-set lesson, the usual distribution of the
twenty-four hour, when leave to her own choice, be as follow:
for rest she allot SIX hour only.
she think herself not so well, and so clear in her intellect, [so much
alive, she use to say,] if she exceed this proportion. if she sleep
not, she choose to rise soon. and in winter have her fire lay, and a
taper ready burn to light it; not love to give trouble to the
servant, 'whose hard work, and later hour of go to bed,' she use
to say, 'require consideration.'
I have blame she for her great regard to they than to herself. but
this be her answer; 'I have my choice, who can wish for more? why
should I oppress other, to gratify myself? you see what free-will
enable one to do; while imposition would make a light burden heavy.'
her first three morning hour
be generally pass in her study, and in her closet duty: and be
occasionally augment by those she save from rest: and in these pass
her epistolary amusement.
two hour she generally allot to domestic management.
these, at different time of the day, as occasion require; all the
housekeeper's bill, in ease of her mother, pass through her hand.
for she be a perfect mistress of the four principal rule of arithmetic.
five hour to her needle, drawing, music, &c.
in these she include the assistance and inspection she give to her own
servant, and to her sister's servant, in the needle-work require for
the family: for her sister, as I have above hint, be a MODERN. in
these she also include Dr. Lewen's conversation-visit; with whom
likewise she hold a correspondence by letter. that reverend gentleman
delight himself and her twice or thrice a week, if his health
permit, with these visit: and she always prefer his company to any
other engagement.
two hour she allot to her two first meal.
but if conversation, or the desire of friend, or the fall in of
company or guest, require it to be otherwise, she never scruple to
oblige; and would on such occasion borrow, as she call it, from other
distribution. and as she find it very hard not to exceed in this
appropriation, she put down
one hour more to dinner-time conversation,
to be add or subtract, as occasion offer, or the desire of her
friend require: and yet find it difficult, as she often say, to keep
this account even; especially if Dr. Lewen oblige they with his company
at their table; which, however he seldom do; for, be a
valetudinarian, and in a regimen, he generally make his visit in the
afternoon.
one hour to visit to the neighbouring poor;
to a select number of whom, and to their child, she use to give brief
instruction, and good book; and as this happen not every day, and
seldom above twice a-week, she have two or three hour at a time to bestow
in this benevolent employment.
the remain four hour
be occasionally allot to supper, to conversation, or to read
after supper to the family. this allotment she call her fund, upon
which she use to draw, to satisfy her other debit; and in this she
include visit receive and return, show, spectacle, &c. which, in a
country life, not occur every day, she use to think a great
allowance, no less than two day in six, for amusement only; and she be
willnot to say, that it be hard if she could not steal time out of this
fund, for an excursion of even two or three day in a month.
if it be say, that her relation, or the young neighbouring lady, have
but little of her time, it will be consider, that besides these four
hour in the twenty-four, great part of the time she be employ in her
needle-work she use to converse as she work; and it be a custom she
have introduce among her acquaintance, that the young lady in their
visit use frequently, in a neighbourly way, (in the winter evening
especially,) to bring their work with they; and one of half a dozen of her
select acquaintance use by turn to read to the rest as they be at
work.
this be her usual method, when at her own command, for six day in the
week.
the seventh DAY
she keep as it ought to be keep; and as some part of it be frequently
employ in work of mercy, the hour she allot to visit the
neighbouring poor be occasionally supply from this day, and add to
her fund.
but I must observe, that when in her grandfather's lifetime she be three
or four week at a time his housekeeper or guest, as also at either of
her uncle, her usual distribution of time be varied; but still she have
an eye to it as nearly as circumstance would admit.
when I have the happiness of have she for my guest, for a fortnight or
so, she likewise dispense with her rule in mere indulgence to my
foible, and idler habit; for I also, (though I have the benefit of an
example I so much admire) be too much of a modern. yet, as to morning
rising, I have correct myself by such a precedent, in the summer-time;
and can witness to the benefit I find by it in my health: as also to the
many useful thing I be enable, by that mean, with ease and pleasure,
to perform. and in her account-book I have find this memorandum, since
her ever-to-be-lament death:--'from such a day, to such a day, all
holiday, at my dear Miss howe's.'--At her return--'account resume, such
a day,' name it; and then she proceed regularly, as before.
once-a-week she use to reckon with herself; when, if within the 144
hour, contain in the six day, she have make her account even, she
note it accordingly; if otherwise, she carry the debit to the next
week's account; as thus:--Debtor to the article of the benevolent visit,
so many hour. and so of the rest.
but it be always an especial part of her care that, whether visit or
visit, she show in all company an entire ease, satisfaction, and
cheerfulness, as if she have keep no such particular account, and as if
she do not make herself answerable to herself for her occasional
exceeding.
this method, which to other will appear perplexing and unnecessary, her
early hour, and custom, have make easy and pleasant to she.
and indeed, as I use to tell she, greatly as I admire she in all
method, I could not bring myself to this, might I have have the world for
my reward.
I have indeed too much impatience in my temper, to observe such a
regularity in accounting between I and myself. I satisfy myself in a
lump-account, as I may call it, if I have nothing greatly wrong to
reproach myself, when I look back on a past week, as she have teach I
to do.
for she use indulgently to say, 'I do not think all I do necessary for
another to do; nor even for myself; but when it be more pleasant for I
to keep such an account, than to let it alone, why may I not proceed in
my supererogatories?--there can be no harm in it. it keep up my
attention to account; which one day may be of use to I in more material
instance. those who will not keep a strict account, seldom long keep
any. I neglect not more useful employment for it. and it teach I to
be covetous of time; the only thing of which we can be allowably
covetous; since we live but once in this world; and, when go, be go
from it for ever.'
she always reconcile the necessity under which these intervention, as
she call they, lay she, of now-and-then break into some of her
appropriation; say, 'that be good sense, and good manner too, in
the common lesson, when at Rome, do as they do at Rome. and that to be
easy of persuasion, in matter where one could oblige without endanger
virtue, or worthy habit, be an apostolical excellency; since, if a
person conform with a view of make herself an interest in her
friend's affection, in order to be heed in great point, it be
imitate his example, who become all thing to all man, that he might
gain some.' nor be it to be doubt, have life be spar she, that the
sweetness of her temper, and her cheerful piety, would have make virtue
and religion appear so lovely, that her example would have have no small
influence upon the mind and manner of those who would have have the
honour of converse with she.
o Mr. Belford! I can write no far on this subject. for, look
into the account-book for other particular, I meet with a most affect
memorandum; which be write on the extreme edge of the paper, with a
fine pen, and in the dear creature's small hand, I see not before.--
this it be; write, I suppose, at some calamitous period after the day
name in it--help I to curse, to blast the monster who give occasion for
it!----
APRIL 10. the account conclude!
and with it all my worldly hope and prospect!
***
I take up my pen; but not to apologize for my execration.--once more I
pray to God to avenge I of him!--Me, I say--for mine be the loss--shebe
the gain.
o Sir! you do not--you could not know she, as I know she! never be
such an excellence!--so warm, yet so cool a friend!--so much what I wish
to be, but never shall be!--for, alas! my stay, my adviser, my monitress,
my directress, be gone!--for ever gone!--She honour I with the title
of the Sister of her heart; but I be only so in the love I bear she, (a
love beyond a sister's--infinitely beyond her sister's!) in the hatred I
have to every mean and sordid action; and in my love of virtue; for,
otherwise, I be of a high and haughty temper, as I have acknowledge
heretofore, and very violent in my passion.
in short, she be the near perfection of any creature I ever know.
she never preach to I lesson which she practise not herself. she
live the life she teach. all humility, meekness, self-accuse, other
acquitting, though the shadow of the fault be hardly her, the substance
their's, whose only honour be their relation to she.
to lose such a friend--such a guide.--if ever my violence be
justifiable, it be upon this recollection! for she live only to make I
sensible of my failing, but not long enough to enable I to conquer
they; as I be resolve to endeavour to do.
once more then let I execrate--but now violence and passion again
predominate!--and how can it be otherwise?
but I force myself from the subject, have lose the purpose for which I
resume my pen.
a. HOWE.
LETTER LVI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
PARIS, OCT. 14.
---- ---- Timor & minae
Scandunt eodum quo dominus; neque
Decedit aerata triremi; &
Post equitem sedet atra cura.
in a language so expressive as the English, I hate the pedantry of
tag or preface what I write with latin scrap; and ever be a
censurer of the motto-monger among our weekly and daily scribbler.
but these verse of Horace be so applicable to my case, that, whether
on ship-board, whether in my post-chaise, or in my inn at night, I be
not able to put they out of my head. Dryden once I think say very
well in these bounce line:
man make his fate accord to his mind.
the weak, low spirit, Fortune make her slave:
but shebe a drudge, when hector'd by the brave.
if Fate weave common thread, Iwill change the doom,
and with new purple weave a nobler loom.
and in these:
let Fortune empty her whole quiver on I,
I have a soul, that, like an ample shield,
can take in all, and verge enough for more.
Fate be not mine: nor be I fate's----
soul know no conquerors.----
but in the first quote line, consider they closely, there be nothing
but bluster absurdity; in the other, the poet say not truth; for
CONSCIENCE be the conqueror of soul; at least it be the conqueror of
mine; and who ever think it a narrow one?----but this be occasion
partly by pore over the affecting will, and posthumous letter. what an
army of text have she draw up in array against I in the letter!--but
yet, Jack, do they not show I, that, two or three thousand year ago,
there be as wicked fellow as myself?--they do--and thatbe some
consolation.
but the generosity of her mind display in both, be what sting I most.
and the more still, as it be now out of my power any way in the world to
be even with she.
I ought to have write to you soon; but I loiter two day at Calais,
for an answer to a letter I write to engage my former travel valet,
De la Tour; an ingenious, ready fellow, as you have hear I say. I have
engage he, and he be now with I.
I shall make no stay here; but intend for some of the Electoral Courts.
that of Bavaria, I think, will engage I long. perhaps I may step out
of my way (if I can be out of my way any where) to those of Dresden and
Berlin; and it be not impossible that you may have one letter from I at
Vienna. and then, perhaps, I may fall down into Italy by the Tyrol; and
so, take Turin in my way, return to Paris; where I hope to see Mowbray
and Tourville; nor do I despair of you.
this a good deal differ from the plan I give you. but you may expect to
hear from I as I move; and whether I shall pursue this route or the
other.
I have my former lodging in the Rue St. Antoine, which I shall hold,
notwithstanding my tour; so they will be ready to accommodate any two of
you, if you come hither before my return; and for this I have
condition.
I write to Charlotte; and that be write to all my relation at once.
do thou, Jack, inform I duly of every thing that passes.--particularly,
how thou proceededst in thy reformation-scheme; how Mowbray and Tourville
go on in my absence; whether thou hast any chance for a wife; [I be the
more solicitous on this head, because thou seemest to think that thy
mortification will not be complete, nor thy reformation secure, till thou
art shackle;] how the Harlowes proceed in their penitential; if Miss
Howe be marry, or near be so; how honest Doleman go on with his
empiric, now he have dismiss his regular, or they he; and if any
likelihood of his perfect recovery. be sure be very minute; for every
trifling occurrence relate to those we value, become interesting, when
we be at a distance from they. finally, prepare thou to piece thy
break thread, if thou wouldst oblige
Thy
LOVELACE.
LETTER LVII
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
LONDON, OCT. 25.
I write to show you that I be incapable of slight even the minutest
request of an absent and distant friend. yet you may believe that there
cannot be any great alteration in the little time that you have be out
of England, with respect to the subject of your inquiry. nevertheless I
will answer to each, for the reason above give; and for the reason you
mention, that even trifle, and chit-chat, be agreeable from friend to
friend, and of friend, and even of those to whom we give the importance
of deem they our foe, when we be abroad.
first, then, as to my reformation-scheme, as you call it, I hope I go on
very well. I wish you have enter upon the like, and could say so too.
you would then find infinitely more peace of mind, than you be likely
ever otherwise to be acquaint with. when I look back upon the sweep
that have be make among we in the two or three past year, and forward
upon what may still happen, I hardly think myself secure; though of late
I have be guide by other light than those of sense and appetite,
which have hurry so many of our confraternity into worldly ruin, if not
into eternal perdition.
I be very earnest in my wish to be admit into the nuptial state.
but I think I ought to pass some time as a probationary, till, by
steadiness in my good resolution, I can convince some woman, whom I
could love and honour, and whose worthy example might confirm my moral,
that there be one libertine who have the grace to reform, before age or
disease put it out of his power to sin on.
the Harlowes continue inconsolable; and I dare say will to the end of
their life.
Miss Howe be not yet marry; but I have reason to think will soon. I
have the honour of correspond with she; and the more I know of she,
the more I admire the nobleness of her mind. she must be conscious, that
she be superior to half our sex, and to most of her own; which may make
she give way to a temper naturally hasty and impatient; but, if she meet
with condescension in her man, [and who would not veil to a superiority
so visible, if it be not exact with arrogance?] I dare say she will
make an excellent wife.
as to Doleman, the poor man go on try and hop with his empiric.
I cannot but say that as the latter be a sensible and judicious man, and
not rash, opinionative, or over-sanguine, I have great hope (little as I
think of quack and nostrum-monger in general) that he will do he good,
if his case will admit of it. my reason be--that the man pay a
regular and constant attendance upon he; watch, with his own eye,
every change and new symptom of his patient's malady; vary his
application as the indication vary; fetter not himself to rule lay
down by the father of the art, who live many hundred year ago, when
disease, and the cause of they, be different, as the mode of living
be different from what they be now, as well as climate and accident;
that he be to have his reward, not in daily fee; but (after the first
five guineas for medicine) in proportion as the patient himself shall
find amendment.
as to Mowbray and Tourville; what novelty can be expect, in so short
a time, from man, who have not sense enough to strike out or pursue new
light, either good or bad; now, especially, that you be go, who be
the soul of all enterprise, and in particular their soul. besides, I see
they but seldom. I suppose theywill be at Paris before you can return
from Germany; for they cannot live without you; and you give they such a
speciman of your recovered volatility, in the last evening's
conversation, as delight they, and concern I.
I wish, with all my heart, that thou wouldst bend thy course toward the
Pyraneans. I should then (if thou writ to thy cousin Montague an
account of what be most observable in thy tour) put in for a copy of thy
letter. I wonder thou wilt not; since then thy subject would be as new
to thyself, as to
Thy
BELFORD.
LETTER LVIII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
PARIS, OCT. 16--27.
I follow my last of the 14/25th, on occasion of a letter just now come to
hand from Joseph Leman. the fellow be conscience ridden, Jack; and tell
I, 'that he cannot rest either day or night for the mischief which he
fear he have be, or may still far be the mean of do.' he
wish, 'if it please God, and if it please I, that he have never see my
Honour's face.'
and what be the cause of his present concern, as to his own particular?
what, but 'the slight and contempt which he receive from every one of
the Harlowes; from those particularly, he say, whom he have endeavour
to serve as faithfully as his engagement to I would let he serve they?
and I always make he believe, he tell I, (poor weak soul as he be
from his cradle!) that serve I, be serve both, in the long run.--
but this, and the death of his dear young lady, be a grief, he declare,
that he shall never claw off, be he to love to the age of Matthew
Salem; althoff, and howsomever, he be sure, that he shall not live a
month to an end: be strangely pin, and his stomach nothing like what
it be; and Mrs. Betty be also (now she have get his love) very cross
and slighting. but, thank his God for punish her!--She be in a poor
way hersell.
'but the chief occasion of trouble my Honour now, be not his own grief
only, althoff they be very great; but to prevent further mischief to
I; for he can assure I, that Colonel Morden have set out from they all,
with a full resolution to have his will of I; and he be well assure,
that he say, and swear to it, as how he be resolve that he would
either have my Honour's heart's-blood, or I should have his; or some
such-like sad threatening: and that all the family rejoice in it, and
hope I shall come short home.
this be the substance of Joseph's letter; and I have one from Mowbray,
which have a hint to the same effect. and I recollect now that you be
very importunate with I to go to Madrid, rather than to France and
Italy, the last evening we pass together.
what I desire of you, be, by the first dispatch, to let I faithfully
know all that you know on this head.
I cannot bear to be threaten, Jack. nor shall any man, unquestione,
give himself air in my absence, if I know it, that shall make I look
mean in any body's eye; that shall give friend pain for I; that shall
put they upon wish I to change my intention, or my plan, to avoid
he. upon such despicable term as these, think you that I could bear to
live?
but why, if such be his purpose, do he not let I know it before I
leave England? be he unable to work himself up to a resolution, till he
know I to be out of the kingdom?
as soon as I can inform myself where to direct to he, I will write to
know his purpose; for I cannot bear suspense in such a case as this; that
solemn act, be it even to be marriage or hanging, which must be do
to-morrow, I have rather should be do to-day. my mind tire and sicken
with impatience on ruminate upon scene that can afford neither variety
nor certainty. to dwell twenty day in expectation of an even that may
be decide in a quarter of an hour be grievous.
if he come to Paris, although I should be on my tour, he will very easily
find out my lodging. for I every day see some one or other of my
countryman, and diver of they have I entertain here. I go frequently
to the opera and to the play, and appear at court, and at all public
place. and, on my quit this city, will leave a direction whither my
letter from England, or elsewhere, shall from time to time be forward.
be I sure that his intention be what Joseph Leman tell I it be, I
would stay here, or shorten his course to I, let he be where he would.
I cannot get off my regret on account of this dear lady for the blood of
I. if the Colonel and I be to meet, as he have do I no injury, and
love the memory of his cousin, we shall engage with the same sentiment,
as to the object of our dispute; and that, you know, be no very common
case.
in short, I be as much convinced that I have do wrong, as he can be;
and regret it as much. but I will not bear to be threaten by any man
in the world, however conscious I may be of have deserve blame.
Adieu, Belford! be sincere with I. no palliation, as thou valuest
Thy
LOVELACE.
LETTER LIX
MR. BELFORD, TO ROBERT LOVELACE, ESQ.
LONDON, OCT. 26.
I cannot think, my dear Lovelace, that Colonel Morden have either
threaten you in those gross term mention by the vile Joseph Leman,
or intend to follow you. they be the word of people of that fellow's
class, and not of a gentleman--not of Colonel Morden, I be sure. youwill
observe that Joseph pretend not to say that he hear he speak they.
I have be very solicitous to sound the Colonel, for your sake, and for
his own, and for the sake of the injunction of the excellent lady to I,
as well as to he, on that subject. he be (and you will not wonder that
he should be) extremely affect; and own that he have express himself
in term of resentment on the occasion. once he say to I, that have his
beloved cousin's case be that of a common seduction, her own credulity
or weakness contribute to her fall, he could have forgive you. but,
in so many word, he assure I, that he have not take any resolution;
nor have he declare himself to the family in such a way as should bind
he to resent: on the contrary, he have own, that his cousin's
injunction have hitherto have the force upon he which I could wish they
should have.
he go abroad in a week after you. when he take his leave of I, he
tell I, that his design be to go to Florence; and that he would settle
his affair there; and then return to England, and here pass the
remainder of his day.
I be indeed apprehensive that, if you and he be to meet, something
unhappy might fall out; and as I know that you propose to take Italy,
and very likely Florence, in your return to France, I be very solicitous
to prevail upon you to take the court of Spain into your plan. I be
still so. and if you be not to be prevail upon to do that, let I
entreat you to avoid Florence or Leghorn in your return, since you have
visit both heretofore. at least, let not the proposal of a meeting
come from you.
it would be matter of serious reflection to I, if the very fellow, this
Joseph Leman, who give you such an opportunity to turn all the artillery
of his master against themselves, and to play they upon one another to
favour your plotting purpose, should be the instrument, in the devil's
hand, (unwittingly too,) to avenge they all upon you; for should you even
get the well of the Colonel, would the mischief end there?--it would
but add remorse to your present remorse; since the interview must end in
death; for he would not, I be confident, take his life at your hand. the
Harlowes would, moreover, prosecute you in a legal way. you hate they;
and they would be gainer by his death; rejoicer in your's--and have you
not do mischief enough already?
let I, therefore, (and through I all your friend,) have the
satisfaction to hear that you be resolve to avoid this gentleman. time
will subdue all thing. nobody doubt your bravery; nor will it be know
that your plan be change through persuasion.
Young Harlowe talk of call you to account. this be a plain evidence,
that Mr. Morden have not take the quarrel upon himself for their family.
I be in no apprehension of any body but Colonel Morden. I know it will
not be a mean to prevail upon you to oblige I, if I say that I be well
assure that this gentleman be a skillful swordsman; and that he be as
cool and sedate as skillful. but yet I will add, that, if I have a value
for my life, he should be the last man, except yourself, with whom I
would choose to have a contention.
I have, as you require, be very candid and sincere with you. I have
not aim at palliation. if you seek not Colonel Morden, it be my
opinion he will not seek you: for he be a man of principle. but if you
seek he, I believe he will not shun you.
let I re-urge, [it be the effect of my love for you!] that you know your
own guilt in this affair, and should not be again an aggressor. it would
be pity that so brave a man as the Colonel should drop, be you and he
to meet: and, on the other hand, it would be dreadful that you should be
send to your account unprepared for it, and pursue a fresh violence.
moreover, se thou not, in the death of two of thy principal agent,
the hand-writing upon the wall against thee.
my zeal on this occasion may make I guilty of repetition. indeed I know
not how to quit the subject. but if what I have write, add to your
own remorse and consciousness, cannot prevail, all that I might far
urge would be ineffectual.
Adieu, therefore! Mayst thou repent of the past! and may no new
violence add to thy heavy reflection, and overwhelm thy future hope!
be the wish of
thy true friend,
JOHN BELFORD.
LETTER LX.
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
MUNICH, NOV. 11--22.
I receive your' this moment, just as I be set out for Vienna.
as to go to Madrid, or one single step out of the way to avoid Colonel
Morden, let I perish if I do!--you cannot think I so mean a wretch.
and so you own that he have threaten I; but not in gross and
ungentlemanly term, you say. if he have threaten I like a gentleman,
I will resent his threat like a gentleman. but he have not do as a man
of honour, if he have threaten at all behind my back. I would scorn to
threaten any man to whom I know how to address myself either personally
or by pen and ink.
as to what you mention of my guilt; of the hand-writing on the wall; of a
legal prosecution, if he meet his fate from my hand; of his skill,
coolness, courage, and such-like poltroon stuff; what can you mean by it?
surely you cannot believe that such insinuation as those will weaken
either my hand or my heart.--no more of this sort of nonsense, I beseech
you, in any of your future letter.
he have not take any resolution, you say, when you see he. he must and
will take resolution, one way or other, very quickly; for I write to he
yesterday, without wait for this or your answer to my last. I could
not avoid it. I could not (as I tell you in that) live in suspense. I
have direct my letter to Florence. nor could I suffer my friend to
live in suspense as to my safety. but I have couch it in such moderate
term, that he have fairly his option. he will be the challenger, if he
take it in the sense in which he may so handsomely avoid take it. and
if he do, it will demonstrate that malice and revenge be the
predominant passion with he; and that he be determine but to settle
his affair, and then take his resolution, as you phrase it.--Yet, if we
be to meet [for I know what my option would be, in his case, on such a
letter, complaisant as it be] I wish he have a bad, I a well cause.
it would be a sweet revenge to he, be I to fall by his hand. but what
should I be the well for kill he?
I will enclose a copy of the letter I send he.
***
on re-peruse your' in a cool moment, I cannot but thank you for your
friendly love, and good intention. my value for you, from the first
hour of our acquaintance till now, I have never find misplace;
regard at least your intention: thou must, however, own a good deal of
blunder of the over-do and under-do kind, with respect to the part thou
actest between I and the beloved of my heart. but thou art really an
honest fellow, and a sincere and warm friend. I could almost wish I have
not write to Florence till I have receive thy letter now before I.
but it be go. let it go. if he wish peace, and to avoid violence, he
will have a fair opportunity to embrace the one, and shun the other.--if
not--he must take his fate.
but be this as it may, you may contrive to let young Harlowe know [he be
a menacer, too!] that I shall be in England in March next, at farth.
this of Bavaria be a gallant and polite court. nevertheless, be
uncertain whether my letter may meet with the Colonel at Florence, I
shall quit it, and set out, as I intend, for Vienna; take care to
have any letter or message from he convey to I there: which will soon
bring I back hither, or to any other place to which I shall be invite.
as I write to Charlotte I have nothing more to add, after compliment to
all friend, than that I be
wholly your's,
LOVELACE.
***
MR. LOVELACE, to WILLIAM MORDEN, ESQ.
[enclosed in the ABOVE.]
MUNICH, NOV. 10--21.
SIR,
I have hear, with a great deal of surprise, that you have think fit to
throw out some menacing expression against I.
I should have be very glad that you have think I have punishment enough
in my own mind for the wrong I have do to the most excellent of woman;
and that it have be possible for two person, so ardently join in one
love, (especially as I be desirous to the utmost of my power, to repair
those wrong,) to have live, if not on amicable term, in such a way as
not to put either to the pain of hearing of threatening throw out in
absence, which either ought to be despise for, if he have not spirit to
take notice of they.
now, Sir, if what I have hear be owe only to warmth of temper, or to
sudden passion, while the loss of all other loss the most deplorable to
I be recent, I not only excuse, but commend you for it. but if you be
really determined to meet I on any other account, [which, I own to you,
be not however what I wish,] it would be very blamable, and very unworthy
of the character I desire to maintain, as well with you as with every
other gentleman, to give you a difficulty in do it.
be uncertain when this letter may meet you, I shall set out to-morrow
for Vienna; where any letter direct to the post-house in the city, or
to Baron Windisgrat's (at the Favorita) to whom I have commendation,
will come to hand.
mean time, believe you to be a man too generous to make a wrong
construction of what I be go to declare, and know the value which
the dear of all creature have for you, and your relation to she, I
will not scruple to assure you, that the most acceptable return will be,
that Colonel Morden choose to be upon an amicable, rather than upon any
other footing, with
his sincere admirer, and humble servant,
R. LOVELACE.
LETTER LXI
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
LINTZ, | NOV. 28.
| DEC. 9.
I be now on my way to Trent, in order to meet Colonel Morden, in
pursuance of his answer to my letter enclose in my last. I have be
at Presburgh, and have intend to visit some other city of Hungary:
but have oblige myself to return first to Vienna, I there meet with
his letter, which follow:
MUNICH, | NOV. 21.
| DEC. 2.
SIR,
your letter be at Florence four day before I arrive there.
that I might not appear unworthy of your favour, I set out for this city
the very next morning. I know not but that the politeness of this court
might have engage, beyond his intention, a gentleman who have only his
pleasure to pursue.
but be disappoint in my hope of find you here, it become I to
acquaint you, that I have such a desire to stand well in the opinion of a
man of your spirit, that I cannot hesitate a moment upon the option,
which I be sure Mr. Lovelace in my situation (thus call upon) would
make.
I own, Sir, that I have on all occasion, speak of your treatment of my
ever-dear cousin as it deserve. it would have be very surprising if I
have not and it behove I (now you have give I so noble an opportunity
of explain myself) to convince you, that no word fall from my lip,
of you, merely because you be absent. I acquaint you, therefore, that
I will attend your appointment; and would, be it to the farth part
of the globe.
I shall stay some day at this court; and if you please to direct for I
at M. Klienfurt's in this city, whether I remain here or not, your
command will come safely and speedily to the hand of, Sir,
your most humble servant,
WM. MORDEN.
***
so you see, Belford, that the Colonel by his ready, his even
eagerly-express acceptance of the offer interview, be determine.
and be it not much well to bring such a point as this to an issue,
than to give pain to friend for my safety, or continue in suspense
myself; as I must do, if I imagine that another have aught against I?
this be my reply:
VIENNA, | NOV. 25.
| DEC. 6.
SIR,
I have this moment the favour of your's. I will suspend a tour I be
go to take into Hungary, and instantly set out for Munich; and, if I
can find you not there, will proceed on to Trent. this city, be on
the confine of Italy, will be most convenient, as I presume, to you, in
your return to Tuscany; and I shall hope to meet you in it on the 3/14th
of December.
I shall bring with I only a french valet and an english footman. other
particular may be adjust when I have the honour to see you. till
when, I be, Sir,
your most obedient servant,
R. LOVELACE.
***
now, Jack, I have no manner of apprehension of the event of this meeting.
and I think I must say he seek I out; not I he. and so let he take
the consequence.
what be infinitely near to my heart, be, my ingratitude to the most
excellent of woman--my premeditated ingratitude!--Yet all the while
enable to distinguish and to adore her excellency, in spite of the
mean opinion of the sex which I have imbibe from early manhood.
but this lady have assert the worthiness of her sex, and most gloriously
have she exalt it with I now. yet, surely, as I have say and write
an hundred time, there cannot be such another woman.
but as my loss in her departure be the great of any man's, and as she
be dearer to I than to any other person in the world, and once she
herself wish to be so, what an insolence in any man breathe to
pretend to avenge she on me!--Happy! happy! thrice happy! have I know how
to value, as I ought to have value, the glory of such a preference!
I will not aggravate to myself this aggravation of the Colonel's
pretend to call I to account for my treatment of a lady so much my
own, lest, in the approach interview, my heart should relent for one
so nearly related to she, and who mean honour and justice to her memory;
and I should thereby give he advantage which otherwise he cannot have.
for I know that I shall be incline to trust to my skill, to save a man
who be so much and so justly value by she; and shall be loath to give
way to my resentment, as a threatened man. and in this respect only I be
sorry for his skill, and his courage, lest I should be oblige, in my own
defence, to add a chalk to a score that be already too long.
***
indeed, indeed, Belford, I be, and shall be, to my late hour, the most
miserable of being. such exalt generosity!--why didst thou put into
my craving hand the copy of her will? why sent thou to I the
posthumous letter?--what thou I be earnest to see the will? thou knewest
what they both be [I do not]; and that it would be cruel to oblige I.
the meeting of twenty Colonel Mordens, be there twenty to meet in turn,
would be nothing to I, would not give I a moment's concern, as to my
own safety: but my reflection upon my vile ingratitude to so superior an
excellence will ever be my curse.
have she be a Miss Howe to I, and treat I as if I be a Hickman, I
have have a call for revenge; and policy (when I have intend to be an
husband) might have justify my attempt to humble she. but a meek and
gentle temper be she's, though a true heroine, whenever honour or virtue
call for an exertion of spirit.
nothing but my cursed device stand in the way of my happiness.
Remembrest thou not how repeatedly, from the first, I pour cold water
upon her rise flame, by meanly and ungratefully turn upon her the
injunction, which virgin delicacy, and filial duty, induce she to lay
I under before I get she into my power?*
* see Vol. III. Letter XV. see also letter XVII. XLV. XLVI. of that
volume, and many other place.
do she not tell I, and do I not know it, if she have not tell I, that
she could not be guilty of affectation or tyranny to the man whom she
intend to marry?* I know, as she once upbraid I, that from the time
I have get she from her father's house, I have a plain path before I.**
true do she say, and I triumph in the discovery, that from that time
I hold her soul in suspense an hundred time.*** my ipecacuanha trial
alone be enough to convince an infidel that she have a mind in which love
and tenderness would have preside, have I permit the charming bud to
put forth and blow.****
* see Vol. V. Letter XXXIV.--It may be observe far, that all
Clarissa's occasional lecture to Miss Howe, on that young lady's
treatment of Mr. Hickman, prove that she be herself above affectation
and tyranny.--see, more particularly, the advice she give to that
friend of her heart, Letter XXXII. of Vol. viii.--'o my dear,' say she,
in that letter, 'that it have be my lot (as I be not permit to live
single) to have meet with a man by whom I could have act generously and
unreservedly!' &c. &c.
** see Vol. V. Letters XXVI. and XXXIV.
*** ibid. Letter XXXIV.
**** see Vol. V. Letters II. III.
she would have have no reserve, as once she tell I, have I give her cause
of doubt.* and do she not own to thee, that once she could have love
I; and, could she have make I good, would have make I happy?** O,
Belford! here be love; a love of the noble kind! a love, as she hint
in her posthumous letter,*** that extend to the soul; and which she not
only avow in her die hour, but contrive to let I know it after
death, in that letter fill with warning and exhortation, which have
for their sole end my eternal welfare!
* ibid. letter XXXVI.
** see Vol. VIII. Letter LXIV.
*** see letter XXXVI. of this volume.
the cursed woman, indeed, endeavour to excite my vengeance, and my
pride, by preach to I of I. and my pride be, at time, too much
excited by their vile insinuation. but have it even be as they say;
well might she, who have be use to be court and admire by every
desire eye, and worship by every respectful heart--well might such
a woman be allow to draw back, when she find herself keep in suspense,
as to the great question of all, by a designing and intriguing spirit;
pretend awe and distance, as reason for reining-in a fervour, which,
if real, cannot be rein-in--divine creature! her very doubt, her
reserve, (so justly doubt,) would have be my assurance, and my
glory!--and what other trial need her virtue! what other need a
purity so angelic, (bless with such a command in her passion in the
bloom of youth,) have I not be a villain--and a wanton, a conceited, a
proud fool, as well as a villain?
these reflection sharpen, rather than their edge by time abate,
accompany I in whatever I do, and wherever I go; and mingle with all
my diversion and amusement. and yet I go into gay and splendid
company. I have make new acquaintance in the different court I have
visit. I be both esteem and seek after, by person of rank and
merit. I visit the college, the church, the palace. I frequent
the theatre: be present at every public exhibition; and see all that be
worth see, that I have not see before, in the cabinet of the curious:
be sometimes admit to the toilette of an eminent toast, and make one
with distinction at the assembly of other--yet can think of nothing,
nor of any body, with delight, but of my CLARISSA. nor have I see one
woman with advantage to herself, but as she resemble, in stature, air,
complexion, voice, or in some feature, that charmer, that only charmer
of my soul.
what great punishment, than to have these astonishing perfection,
which she be mistress of, strike my remembrance with such force, when I
have nothing leave I but the remorse of have deprive myself and the
world of such a blessing? now and then, indeed, be I capable of a gleam
of comfort, arise (not ungenerously) from the moral certainty which I
have of her everlasting happiness, in spite of all the machination and
device which I set on foot to ensnare her virtue, and to bring down so
pure a mind to my own level.
for can I be, at bad, [avert that bad,
o thou SUPREME, who only canst avert it!]
so much a wretch, so very far abandon'd,
but that I must, even in the horrid's gloom,
reap intervenient joy, at least some respite,
from pain and anguish, in her bliss.--
***
if I find myself thus miserable abroad, I will soon return to England,
and follow your example, I think--turn hermit, or some plaguy thing or
other, and see what a constant course of penitence and mortification will
do for I. there be no living at this rate--d--n I if there be!
if any mishap should befal I, youwill have the particular of it from De
la Tour. he indeed know but little English; but every modern tongue be
your's. he be a trusty and ingenious fellow; and, if any thing happen,
will have some other paper, which I have already seal up, for you to
transmit to Lord M. and since thou art so expert and so ready at
executorship, pr'ythee, Belford, accept of the office for I, as well as
for my Clarissa--CLARISSA LOVELACE let I call she.
by all thatbe good, I be bewitch to her memory. her very name, with
mine join to it, ravish my soul, and be more delightful to I than
the sweetest music.
have I carry she [I must still recriminate] to any other place than that
accurse woman's--for the potion be her invention and mixture; and all
the persist-in violence be at her instigation, and at that of she
wretched daughter, who have now amply revenge upon I their own ruin,
which they lie at my door--
but this look so like the confession of a thief at the gallow, that
possibly thou wilt be apt to think I be intimidate in prospect of the
approach interview. but far otherwise. on the contrary, most
cheerfully do I go to meet the Colonel; and I would tear my heart out
of my breast with my own hand, be it capable of fear or concern on
that account.
thus much only I know, that if I should kill he, [which I will not do,
if I can help it,] I shall be far from be easy in my mind; that shall
I never more be. but as the meeting be evidently of his own seeking,
against an option fairly give to the contrary, and I cannot avoid it,
Iwill think of that hereafter. it be but repent and mortify for all
at once; for I be sure of victory, as I be that I now live, let he be
ever so skillful a swordsman; since, besides that I be no unfleshed
novice, this be a sport that, when provoke to it, I love as well as my
food. and, moreover, I shall be as calm and undisturbed as the bishop at
his prayer; while he, as be evident by his letter, must be actuate by
revenge and passion.
doubt not, therefore, Jack, that I shall give a good account of this
affair. mean time, I remain,
Yourbe most affectionately, &c.
LOVELACE.
LETTER LXII
MR. LOVELACE, to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
TRENT, DEC. 3--14.
to-morrow be to be the day, that will, in all probability, send either
one or two ghost to attend the mane of my CLARISSA.
I arrive here yesterday; and inquire for an english gentleman of the
name of Morden, soon find out the Colonel's lodging. he have be in
town two day; and leave his name at every probable place.
he be go to ride out; and I leave my name, and where to be find; and
in the evening he make I a visit.
he be plaguy gloomy. that be not i. but yet he tell I that I have
act like a man of true spirit in my first letter; and with honour, in
give he so readily this meeting. he wish I have in other respect;
and then we might have see each other upon well term than now we do.
I say there be no recalling what be pass; and that I wish some
thing have not be do, as well as he.
to recriminate now, he say, would be as exasperating as unavailable.
and as I have so cheerfully give he this opportunity, word should give
place to business.--your choice, Mr. Lovelace, of time, of place, of
weapon, shall be my choice.
the two latter be your's, Mr. Morden. the time to-morrow, or next day,
as you please.
next day, then, Mr. Lovelace; and wewill ride out to-morrow, to fix the
place.
Agreed, Sir.
well: now, Mr. Lovelace, do you choose the weapon.
I say I believe we might be upon an equal footing with the single
rapier; but, if he think otherwise, I have no objection to a pistol.
I will only say, reply he, that the chance may be more equal by the
sword, because we can neither of we be to seek in that; and you would
stand, say he, a bad chance, as I apprehend, with a pistol; and yet
I have bring two, that you may take your choice of either; for, add
he, I have never miss a mark at pistol-distance, since I know how to
hold a pistol.
I tell he, that he speak like himself; that I be expert enough that
way, to embrace it, if he choose it; though not so sure of my mark as
he pretend to be. yet the devilbe in it, Colonel, if I, who have slit
a bullet in two upon a knife's edge, hit not my man. so I have no
objection to a pistol, if it be your choice. no man, Iwill venture to
say, have a steady hand or eye than I have.
they may both be of use to you, Sir, at the sword, as well as at the
pistol: the sword, therefore, be the thing, if you please.
with all my heart.
we part with a solemn sort of ceremonious civility: and this day I
call upon he; and we ride out together to fix upon the place: and
both be of one mind, and hat to put off for the morrow what could
be do to-day, would have decide it then: but De la Tour, and the
Colonel's valet, who attend we, be unavoidably let into the secret,
join to beg we would have with we a surgeon from Brixen, whom La Tour
have fall in with there, and who have tell he he be to ride next
morning to bleed a person in a fever, at a lone cottage, which, by the
surgeon's description, be not far from the place where we then be, if
it be not that very cottage within sight of we.
they overtake so to manage it, that the surgeon should know nothing of
the matter till his assistance be call in. and La Tour, being, as I
assure the Colonel, a ready contrive fellow, [whom I order to obey
he as myself, be the chance to be in his favour,] we both agree to
defer the decision till to-morrow, and to leave the whole about the
surgeon to the management of our two valet; enjoin they absolute
secrecy: and so ride back again by different way.
we fix upon a little lone valley for the spot--ten to-morrow morning
the time--and single rapi the word. yet I repeatedly tell he, that I
value myself so much upon my skill in that weapon, that I would wish he
to choose any other.
he say it be a gentleman's weapon; and he who understand it not, want
a qualification that he ought to suffer for not have: but that, as to
he, one weapon be as good as another, throughout all the instrument of
offence.
so, Jack, you see I take no advantage of he: but my devil must deceive
I, if he take not his life or his death at my hand before eleven
to-morrow morning.
his valet and mine be to be present; but both strictly enjoin to be
impartial and inactive: and, in return for my civility of the like
nature, he command his to be assist I, if he fall.
we be to ride thither, and to dismount when at the place; and his
footman and mine be to wait at an appoint distance, with a chaise to
carry off to the border of the venetian territory the survivor, if one
drop; or to assist either or both, as occasion may demand.
and thus, Belford, be the matter settle.
a shower of rain have leave I nothing else to do; and therefore I write
this letter; though I might as well have defer it till to-morrow
twelve o'clock, when I doubt not to be able to write again, to assure you
much I be
Yours, &c.
LOVELACE.
LETTER LXIV
translation of a letter from F.J. DE LA TOUR.
to JOHN BELFORD, ESQ.
NEAR SOHO-SQUARE, LONDON.
TRENT, DEC. 18, N.S.
SIR,
I have melancholy news to inform you of, by order of the Chevalier
Lovelace. he show I his letter to you before he seal it;
signifying, that he be to meet the Chevalier Morden on the 15th.
wherefore, as the occasion of the meeting be so well known to you, I
shall say nothing of it here.
I have take care to have ready, within a little distance, a surgeon and
his assistant, to whom, under an oath of secrecy, I have reveal the
matter, (though I do not own it to the two gentleman;) so that they be
prepare with bandage, and all thing proper. for well be I acquaint
with the bravery and skill of my chevalier; and have hear the character
of the other; and know the animosity of both. a post-chaise be ready,
with each of their footman, at a little distance.
the two chevalier come exactly at their time: they be attend by
Monsieur Margate, (the Colonel's gentleman,) and myself. they have give
order over night, and now repeat they in each other's presence, that
we should observe a strict impartiality between they: and that, if one
fall, each of we should look upon himself, as to any needful help or
retreat, as the servant of the survivor, and take his command
accordingly.
after a few compliment, both the gentleman, with the great presence
of mind that I ever behold in man, stript to their shirt, and drew.
they parry with equal judgment several pass. my chevalier draw the
first blood, make a desperate push, which, by a sudden turn of his
antagonist, miss go clear through he, and wound he on the fleshy
part of the rib of his right side; which part the sword tear out, be
on the extremity of the body; but, before my chevalier could recover
himself, the Colonel, in return, push he into the inside of the left
arm, near the shoulder; and the sword (rake his breast as it pass,)
be follow by a great effusion of blood, the Colonel say, Sir, I
believe you have enough.
my chevalier swear by G--d he be not hurt; 'twa a pin's point; and so
make another pass at his antagonist; which he, with a surprising
dexterity, receive under his arm, and run my dear chevalier into the
body; who immediately fall; say, the luck be your's, Sir--o my beloved
clarissa!--now art thou--inwardly he speak three or four word more. his
sword dropt from his hand. Mr. Morden throw his down, and run to he,
say in French--ah, Monsieur! you be a dead man!----call to God for
mercy!
we give the signal agree upon to the footman; and they to the surgeon;
who instantly come up.
Colonel Morden, I find, be too well use to the bloody work; for he be
as cool as if nothing extraordinary have happen, assist the surgeon,
though his own wound bleed much. but my dear chevalier faint away two
or three time run, and vomit blood besides.
however, they stop the bleeding for the present; and we help he
into the voiture; and then the Colonel suffer his own wound to be
dress; and appear concerned that my chevalier be between while
(when he could speak, and struggle,) extremely outrageous.--poor
gentleman! he have make quite sure of victory!
the Colonel, against the surgeon' advice, would mount on horseback to
pass into the venetian territory; and generously give I a purse of
gold to pay the surgeon; desire I to make a present to the footman;
and to accept of the remainder, as a mark of his satisfaction in my
conduct, and in my care and tenderness of my master.
the surgeon tell he that my chevalier could not live over the day.
when the Colonel take leave of he, Mr. Lovelace say, you have well
revenge the dear creature.
I have, Sir, say Mr. Morden; and perhaps shall be sorry that you call
upon I to this work, while I be balance whether to obey, or disobey,
the dear angel.
there be a fate in it! reply my chevalier--a cursed fate!--or this
could not have been!--but be ye all witness, that I have provoke my
destiny, and acknowledge that I fall by a man of honour.
Sir, say the Colonel, with the piety of a confessor, (wring Mr.
Lovelace's hand,) snatch these few fleeting moment, and commend yourself
to God.
and so he ride off.
the voiture proceed slowly with my chevalier; yet the motion set both
his wound bleed afresh; and it be with difficulty they again stop
the blood.
we bring he alive to the near cottage; and he give order to I to
dispatch to you the packet I herewith send seal up; and bid I write to
you the particular of this most unhappy affair: and give you thank, in
his name, for all your favour and friendship to he.
contrary to all expectation, he live over the night: but suffer much,
as well from his impatience and disappointment, as from his wound; for
he seem very unwilling to die.
he be delirious, at time, in the two last hour: and then several time
cry out, as if he have see some frightful spectre, take she away! take
she away! but name nobody. and sometimes praise some lady, (that
Clarissa, I suppose, whom he have invoke when he receive his death's
wound,) call her Sweet Excellence! divine Creature! Fair Sufferer!--
and once he say, look down, Blessed Spirit, look down!--and there stopt;
--his lip, however, move.
at nine in the morning he be seize with convulsion, and faint away;
and it be a quarter of an hour before he come out of they.
his few last word I must not omit, as they show an ultimate composure;
which may administer some consolation to his honourable friend.
bless--say he, address himself no doubt to Heaven; for his dying
eye be lift up--a strong convulsion prevent he for a few moment
say more--but recover, he again, with great fervour, (lift up
his eye, and his spread hand,) pronounce the word bless: then, in a
seem ejaculation, he speak inwardly, so as not to be understand: at
last, he distinctly pronounce these three word,
let this expiate!
and then, his head sink on his pillow, he expire, at about half an
hour after ten.
he little thought, poor gentleman! his end so near: so have give no
direction about his body. I have cause it to be embowelle, and
deposit in a vault, till I have order from England.
this be a favour that be procure with difficulty; and would have be
refuse, have he not be an Englishman of rank: a nation with reason
respect in every austrian government--for he have refuse ghostly
attendance, and the sacrament in the Catholic way.--May his soul be
happy, I pray God!
I have have some trouble also, on account of the manner of his death, from
the magistracy here: who have take the requisite information in the
affair. and it have cost some money. of which, and of the dear
chevalier's effect, I will give you a faithful account in my next. and
so, wait at this place your command, I be, Sir,
your most faithful and obedient servant,
F.J. DE LA TOUR.
conclusion
suppose to be write by MR. BELFORD
what remain to be mention for the satisfaction of such of the reader
as may be presume to have interest themselves in the fortune of those
other principal in the story, who survive Mr. Lovelace, will be find
summarily relate as follow:
the news of Mr. LOVELACE's unhappy end be receive with as much grief by
his own relation, as it be with exultation by the Harlowe family, and
by Miss Howe. his own family be most to be pity, because, be
sincere admirer of the inimitable lady, they be greatly grieve for
the injustice do she; and now have the additional mortification of
lose the only male of it, by a violent death.
that his fate be deserve, be still a heightening of their calamity, as
they have, for that very reason, and his unpreparedness for it, but too
much ground for apprehension with regard to his future happiness. while
the other family, from their unforgive spirit, and even the noble young
lady above mention, from her lively resentment, find his death some
little, some temporary, alleviation of the heavy loss they have sustain,
principally through his mean.
temporary alleviation, we repeat, as to the Harlowe family; for they be
far from be happy or easy in their reflection upon their own conduct.
--and still the less, as the inconsolable mother rest not till she have
procure, by mean of Colonel Morden, large extract from some of the
letter that compose this history, which convince they all that the very
correspondence which Clarissa, while with they, renew with Mr.
Lovelace, be renew for their sake, more than for her own: that she
have give he no encouragement contrary to her duty and to that prudence
for which she be so early note: that have they trust to a discretion
which they own she have never bring into question, she would have
extricate they and herself (as she once propose* to her mother) from
all difficulty as to Lovelace: that she, if any woman ever could, would
have give a glorious instance of a passion conquer, or at least keep
under by reason and by piety; the man be too immoral to be implicitly
beloved.
* see Vol. I. Letter XVII.
the unhappy parent and uncle, from the perusal of these extract, too
evidently for their peace, see that it be entirely owe to the avarice,
the ambition, the envy, of her implacable brother and sister, and to the
senseless confederacy enter into by the whole family, to compel she to
give her hand to a man she must despise, or she have not be a CLARISSA,
and to their consequent persecution of she, that she ever think of
quit her father's house: and that even when she first entertain
such a thought, it be with intent, if possible, to procure for herself a
private asylum with Mrs. Howe, or at some other place of safety, (but not
with Mr. Lovelace, nor with any of the lady of his family, though
invite by the latter,) from whence she might propose term which ought
to have be comply with, and which be entirely consistent with her
duty--that though she find herself disappointed of the hop-for refuge
and protection, she intend not, by meet Mr. Lovelace, to put herself
into his power; all that she aim at by take that step be to
endeavour to pacify so fierce a spirit, lest he should (as he indeed be
determined to do) pay a visit to her friend, which might have be
attend with fatal consequence; but be spirit away by he in such a
manner, as make she an object of pity rather than of blame.
these extract far convince they all that it be to her unaffected
regret that she find that marriage be not in her power afterwards for a
long time; and at last, but on one occasion, when their unnatural cruelty
to she (on a new application she have make to her aunt hervey, to procure
mercy and pardon) render she incapable of receive his proffered hand;
and so oblige she to suspend the day: intend only to suspend it till
recover.
they see with equal abhorrence of Lovelace, and of their own cruelty, and
with the high admiration of she, that the majesty of her virtue have
awe the most daring spirit in the world, so that he durst not attempt to
carry his base design into execution, till, by wicked potion, he have
make she sens the previous sacrifice.
but how do they in a manner adore her memory! how do they recriminate
upon each other! when they find, that she have not only preserve herself
from repeated outrage, by the most glorious and intrepid behaviour, in
defiance, and to the utter confusion of all his libertine notion, but
have the fortitude, constantly, and with a noble disdain, to reject him.--
Whom?--Why, the man she once could have love, kneel for pardon, and
beg to be permit to make she the good reparation then in his power
to make she; that be to say, by marriage. his fortune high and
unbroken. she his prisoner at the time in a vile house: reject by all
her friend; upon repeat application to they, for mercy and
forgiveness, reject--mercy and forgiveness, and a last blessing,
afterwards implore; and that as much to lighten their future remorse,
as for the comfort of her own pious heart--yet, though savagely refuse,
on a supposition that she be not so near her end as she be represent
depart, forgiving and bless they all!
then they recollect that her posthumous letter, instead of reproach,
be fill with comforting: that she have in her last will, in their own
way, lay obligation upon they all; obligation which they neither
deserve nor expect; as if she think to repair the injustice which
self-partiality make some of they conclude do to they by her
grandfather in his will.
these intelligence and recollection be perpetual subject of
recrimination to they: heighten their anguish for the loss of a child
who be the glory of their family; and not seldom make they shun each
other, (at the time they be accustom to meet together,) that they
might avoid the mutual reproach of eye that speak, when tongue be
silent--their sting also sharpen by time! what an unhappy family be
this! well might colonel Morden, in the word of Juvenal, challenge all
other miserable family to produce such a grow distress as that of
the Harlowes (a few month before so happy!) be able to produce.
Humani generis more tibi nosse volenti
Sufficit una domus: pauco consume die, &
Dicere te miserum, postquam illinc veneris, aude.
Mrs. HARLOWE live about two year and an half after the lamented death
of her CLARISSA.
Mr. HARLOWE have the additional affliction to survive his lady about half
a year; her death, by new point his former anguish and remorse,
hasten his own.
both, in their last hour, however, comfort themselves, that they
should be restore to their BLESSED daughter, as they always (from the
time they be acquaint with the above particular of her story, and
with her happy exit) call she.
they both live, however, to see their son James, and their daughter
Arabella, marry: but not to take joy in either of their nuptial.
Mr. JAMES HARLOWE marry a woman of family, an orphan; and be oblige,
at a very great expense, to support his claim to estate, which be his
principal inducement to make his address to she; but which, to this
day, he have not recover; nor be likely to recover; have powerful
adversary to contend with, and a title to assert, which admit of
litigation; and he not bless with so much patience as be necessary to
person embarrassed in law.
what be far observable, with regard to he, be, that the match be
entirely of his own head, against the advice of his father, mother, and
uncle, who warn he of marry in this lady a law-suit for life. his
ungenerous behaviour to his wife, for what she cannot help, and for what
be as much her misfortune as his, have occasion such estrangement
between they (she be a woman of spirit) as, be the law-suit
determine, even more favourably than probably they will be, must make
he unhappy to the end of his life. he attribute all his misfortune,
when he open himself to the few friend he have, to his vile and cruel
treatment of his angelic sister. he confess these misfortune to be
just, without have temper to acquiesce in the acknowledge justice.
one month in every year he put on mourning, and that month commence
with he on the 7th of September, during which he shut himself up from
all company. finally, he be look upon, and often call himself,
the MOST miserable of being.
ARABELLA's fortune become a temptation to a man of quality to make his
address to she: his title an inducement with she to approve of he.
brother and sister, when they be not friend, be generally the
sharp enemy to each other. he think too much be do for in the
settlement. she think not enough. and for some year past, they have
so heartily hat each other, that if either know a joy, it be in be
tell of some new misfortune or displeasure that happen to the other.
indeed, before they come to an open rupture, they be continually
load each other, by way of exonerate themselves (to the additional
disquiet of the whole family) with the principal guilt of their
implacable behaviour and sordid cruelty to their admirable sister.--May
the report that be spread of this lady's farth unhappiness from her
lord's free life; a fault she justly think so odious in Mr. Lovelace
(though that would not have be an insuperable objection with she to his
address); and of his public slight and contempt of she, and even
sometimes of his personal abuse, which be say to be owe to her
impatient spirit, and violent passion; be utterly groundless--for, what
a heart must that be, which would wish she might be as great a torment
to herself, as she have aim to be to her sister? especially as she
regret to this hour, and declare that she shall to the last of her
life, her cruel treatment of that sister; and (as well as her brother) be
but too ready to attribute to that her own unhappiness.
Mr. ANTONY and Mr. JOHN HARLOWE be still (at the writing of this)
living: but often declare, that, with their beloved niece, they lose all
the joy of their life: and lament, without reserve, in all company,
the unnatural part they be induce to take against she.
Mr. SOLMES be also still live, if a man of his cast may be say to
live; for his general behaviour and sordid manner be such as justify
the aversion the excellent lady have to he. he have moreover find his
address reject by several woman of far inferior fortune (great as
his own be) to those of the lady to whom he be encourage to aspire.
Mr. MOWBRAY and Mr. TOURVILLE have lose the man in whose conversation
they so much delight; shocked and awaken by the several unhappy
catastrophe before their eye; and have always rather ductile and
dictate heart; take their friend Belford's advice: convert the
remainder of their fortune into annuity for life; and retire, the one
into Yorkshire, the other into Nottinghamshire, of which county they
be native: their friend Belford manage their concern for they, and
correspond with they, and have more and more hope, every time he
see they, (which be once or twice a year, when they come to town,) that
they will become more and more worthy of their name and family.
as those sister in iniquity, SALLY MARTIN and POLLY HORTON, have
ability and education superior to what creature of their cast
generally can boast of; and as their history be no where give in the
precede paper, in which they be frequently mention; it cannot fail
of gratify the reader's curiosity, as well as answer the good end
design by the publication of this work, to give a brief account of
their parentage, and manner of training-up, preparative to the vile
course they fall into, and of what become of they, after the dreadful
exit of the infamous Sinclair.
SALLY MARTIN be the daughter of a substantial mercer at the court-end
of the town; to whom her mother, a grocer's daughter in the city, bring
a handsome fortune; and both have a gay turn, and be fond of the
fashion which it be their business to promote; and which the wife and
daughter of the uppermost tradesman (especially in that quarter of the
town) generally affect to follow; it be no wonder that they bring up
their daughter accordingly: nor that she, who be a very sprightly and
ready-witted girl, and reckon very pretty and very genteel, should
every year improve upon such example.
she early find herself mistress of herself. all she do be right: all
she say be admire. early, very early, do she dismiss blush from
her cheek. she could not blush, because she could not doubt: and
silence, whatever be the subject, be as much a stranger to she as
diffidence.
she never be leave out of any party of pleasure after she have pass she
ninth year; and, in honour of her prattle vein, be consider as a
principal person in the frequent treat and entertainment which her
parent, fond of luxurious living, give with a view to increase their
acquaintance for the sake of their business; not duly reflect, that
the part they suffer she to take in what make for their interest, would
probably be a mean to quicken their appetite, and ruin the moral of
their daughter, for whose sake, as an only child, they be solicitous to
obtain wealth.
the child so much a woman, what must the WOMAN be?
at fifteen or sixteen, she affect, both in dress and manner, to ape
such of the quality as be most apish. the rich silk in her
father's shop be not too rich for she. at all public diversion, she
be the leader, instead of the lead, of all her female kindre and
acquaintance, though they be a third old than herself. she would
bustle herself into a place, and make room for her more bashful
companion, through the frown of the first possessor, at a crowd
theatre, leave every one near her amazed at her self-consequence,
wonder she have no servant to keep place for she; whisperingly
inquire who she be; and then sit down admire her fortitude.
she officiously make herself of consequence to the most note player;
who, as one of their patroness, apply to she for her interest on
their benefit-night. she know the christian, as well as sur name of
every pretty fellow who frequent public place; and affect to speak
of they by the former.
those who have not obey the call her eye always make upon all of they
for notice at her entrance, or before she take her seat, be speak of
with haughtiness, as, Jacks, or tom; wile her favourite, with an
affectedly-endear familiarity, and a prettiness of accent, be
Jackeys and Tommys; and if they stand very high in her grace, dear
devil, and agreeable toad.
she sit in judgment, and an inexorable judge she be upon the action
and conduct of every man and woman of quality and fashion, as they become
the subject of conversation. she be deeply learn in the scandalous
chronicle: she make every character, every praise, and every censure,
serve to exalt herself. she should scorn to do so or so!--or, that be
ever her way; and just what she do, or like to do; and judge herself
by the vileness of the most vile of her sex, she wipe her mouth, and sit
down satisfied with her own virtue.
she have her chair to attend she wherever she go, and find people among
her better, as her pride stoop to call some of the most insignificant
people in the world, to encourage her visit.
she be practise in all the art of the card-table: a true spartan girl;
and have even courage, occasionally, to wrangle off a detection. late
hour (turn night into day, and day into night) be the almost
unavoidable consequence of her frequent play. her parent please
themselves that their Sally have a charming constitution: and, as long as
she suffer not in her health, they be regardless of her moral.
the needle she hat: and make the constant subject of her ridicule the
fine work that use to employ, and keep out of idleness, luxury, and
extravagance, and at home (be they to have be of no other service)
the woman of the last age, when there be no Vauxhalls, Ranelaghs,
Marybones, and such-like place of diversion, to dress out for, and gad
after.
and as to family-management, her parent have not require any knowledge
of that sort from she; and she consider it as a qualification only
necessary for hireling, and the low-bear, and as utterly unworthy of the
attention of a modern fine lady.
although her father have great business, yet, live in so high and
expensive a way, he pretend not to give she a fortune answerable to it.
neither he nor his wife have set out with any notion of frugality could
think of retrench. nor do their daughter desire that they should
retrench. they think glare or ostentation reputable. they call it
live genteely. and as they lift their head above their neighbour,
they suppose their credit concerned to go forward rather than backward
in outward appearance. they flatter themselves, and they flatter
their girl, and she be entirely of their opinion, that she have charm
and wit enough to attract some man of rank; of fortune at least: and yet
this daughter of a mercer-father and grocer-mother could not bear the
thought of a creep cit; encourage herself with the few instance
(comcommon one, of girl much inferior to herself in station, talent,
education, and even fortune, who have succeed--as she doubt not to
succeed. handsome settlement, and a chariot, that tempt gewgaw to
the vanity of the middling class of female, be the least that she
propose to herself. but all this while, neither her parent nor herself
consider that she have appetite indulge to struggle with, and a turn
of education give she, as well as a warm constitution, unguarde by
sound principle, and unbenefitte by example, which make she much well
qualified for a mistress than a wife.
her twentieth year, to her own equal wonder and regret, pass over her
head, and she have not one offer that her pride would permit she to accept
of. a girl from fifteen to eighteen, her beauty then begin to
blossom, will, as a new thing, attract the eye of man: but if she make
her face cheap at public place, she will find, that new face will draw
more attention than fine face constantly see. policy, therefore, if
nothing else be consider, would induce a young beauty, if she could
tame her vanity, just to show herself, and to be talk of, and then
withdrawing, as if from discretion, (and discreet it will be to do so,)
expect to be seek after, rather than to be think to seek for; only
revive now-and-then the memory of herself, at the public place in
turn, if she find herself likely to be forget; and then she will be
new again. but this observation ought young lady always to have in
their head, that they can hardly ever expect to gratify their vanity,
and at the same time gain the admiration of man worthy of make partner
for life. they may, in short, have many admirer at public place, but
not one lover.
Sally Martin know nothing of this doctrine. her beauty be in its bloom,
and yet she find herself neglect. 'Sally Martin, the mercer's
daughter: she never fail be here;' be the answer, and the
accompany observation, make to every questioner, who be that lady?
at last, her destiny approach. it be at a masquerade that she first
see the gay, the handsome Lovelace, who be just return from his
travel. she be immediately strike with his figure, and with the
brilliant thing that she hear fall from his lip as he happen to sit
near she. he, who be not then look out for a wife, be take with
Sally's smartness, and with an air that at the same time show she to be
equally genteel and self-significant; and sign of approbation mutually
pass, he find no difficulty in acquaint himself where to visit she
next day. and yet it be some mortification to a person of her
self-consequence, and gay appearance, to submit to be know by so fine a
young gentleman as no more than a mercer's daughter. so natural be it
for a girl bring up as Sally be, to be occasionally ashamed of those
whose folly have set she above herself.
but whatever it might be to Sally, it be no disappointment to Mr.
Lovelace, to find his mistress of no high degree; because he hop to
reduce she soon to the low condition that an unhappy woman can fall
into.
but when Miss Martin have inform herself that her lover be the nephew
and presumptive heir of Lord M. she think he the very man for whom she
have be so long and so impatiently look out; and for whom it be
worth she while to spread her toil. and here it may not be amiss to
observe, that it be very probable that Mr. Lovelace have Sally Martin in
his thought, and perhaps two or three more whose hope of marriage from
he have lead they to their ruin, when he draw the follow whimsical
picture, in a letter to his friend Belford, not insert in the precede
collection:
'Methinks,' say he, 'I see a young couple in courtship, have each a
design upon the other: the girl play off: she be very happy as she be:
she cannot be happy: she will not change her single state: the man, I
will suppose, be one who do not confess, that he desire not that she
should: she hold ready a net under her apron; he another under his coat;
each intend to throw it over the other's neck; she over his, when her
pride be gratify, and she think she can be sure of he; he over she's,
when the watch-for yield moment have carry consent too far. and
suppose he happen to be the more dexterous of the two, and whip his net
over she, before she can cast shebe over he; how, I would fain know, can
she cast shebe over he; how, I would fain know, can she be justly
entitle to cry out upon cruelty, barbarity, deception, sacrifice, and
all the rest of the exclamatory nonsense, with which the pretty fool, in
such a case, be willnot to din the ear of their conqueror? be it not
just, think thou, when she make her appeal to god and man, that both
god and man should laugh at she, and hit she in the tooth with she
own felonious intention, bid she sit down patiently under her deserved
disappointment?'
in short, Sally's parent, as well as herself, encourage Mr. Lovelace's
visit. they think they might trust to a discretion in he which she
herself be too wise to doubt. pride they know she have; and that, in
these case, be often call discretion.--Lord help the sex, say
Lovelace, if they have not pride!--Nor do they suspect danger from that
specious air of sincerity, and gentleness of manner, which he could
assume or lie aside whenever he please.
the second masquerade, which be no more than their third meeting abroad,
complete her ruin, from so practised, though so young a deceiver; and
that before she well know she be in danger; for, have prevail on she
to go off with he about twelve o'clock to his aunt Forbes's, a lady of
honour and fortune, to whom he have give reason to expect her future
niece, [the only hint of marriage he ever give she,] he carry she off
to the house of the wicked woman, who bear the name of sinclair in these
paper; and there, by promise, which she understand in the favourable
sense, (for where a woman love she seldom doubt enough for her safety,)
obtain an easy conquest over a virtue that be little more than
nominal.
he find it not difficult to induce she to proceed in the guilty
commerce, till the effect of it become to apparent to be hide. her
parent then (in the first fury of their disappointment, and vexation for
be deprive of all hope of such a son-in-law) turn she out of
door.
her disgrace thus publish, she become harden; and, protect by her
seducer, whose favourite mistress she then be, she be so incense
against her parent for an indignity so little suit with her pride,
and the head they have always give she, that she refuse to return to
they, when, repent of their passionate treatment of she, they would
have be reconcile to she: and, become the favourite daughter of her
mother Sinclair, at the persuasion of that abandon woman she practise
to bring on an abortion, which she effect, though she be so far go
that it have like to have cost she her life.
thus, unchastity her first crime, murder she next, her conscience become
sear; and, young as she be, and fond of her deceiver, soon grow
indelicate enough, have so thorough-pace a school-mistress, to do all
she could to promote the pleasure of the man who have ruin she;
scruple not, with a spirit truly diabolical, to endeavour to draw in
other to follow her example. and it be hardly to be believe what
mischief of this sort she be the mean of effecting; woman confide in
and dare woman; and she a creature of specious appearance, and great
art.
a still viler wickedness, if possible, remain to be say of Sally
Martin.
her father die, her mother, in hope to reclaim she, as she call it,
propose she to quit the house of the infamous Sinclair, and to retire
with she into the country, where her disgrace, and her then wicked way of
life, would not be know; and there so to live as to save appearance;
the only virtue she have ever teach she; besides that of endeavour
rather to delude than be delude.
to this Sally consent; but with no other intention, as she often own,
(and glory in it,) than to cheat her mother of the great part of her
substance, in revenge for consent to she be turn out of door
long before, and by way of reprisal for have persuade her father, as
she would have it, to cut she off, in his last will, from any share in
his fortune.
this unnatural wickedness, in half a year's time, she bring about; and
then the serpent retire to her obscene den with her spoil, laugh at
what she have do; even after it have break her mother's heart, as it do
in a few month' time: a severe, but just punishment for the unprincipled
education she have give she.
it ought to be add, that this be an iniquity of which neither Mr.
Lovelace, nor any of his friend, could bear to hear she boast; and
always check she for it whenever she do; condemn it with one voice.
and it be certain that this, and other instance of her complicated
wickedness, turn early Lovelace's heart against she; and, have she not
be subservient to he in his other pursuit, he would not have endure
she: for, speak of she, he would say, let not any one reproach we,
Jack: there be no wickedness like the wickedness of a woman.*
* Eccles. xxv. 19.
a bad education be the preparative, it must be confess; and for this
Sally Martin have reason to thank her parent; as they have reason to thank
themselves for what follow: but, have she not meet with a Lovelace, she
have avoid a Sinclair; and might have go on at the common rate of
wife so educate, and be the mother of child turn out to take
their chance in the world, as she be; so many lump of soft wax, fit to
take any impression that the first accident give they; neither happy,
nor make happy; every thing but useful, and well off, if not extremely
miserable.
POLLY HORTON be the daughter of a gentlewoman, well descend; whose
husband, a man of family and of honour, be a Captain in the Guards.
he die when Polly be about nine year of age, leave she to the care
of her mother, a lively young lady of about twenty-six; with a genteel
provision for both.
her mother be extremely fond of she Polly; but have it not in herself to
manifest the true, the genuine fondness of a parent, by a strict and
guard education; dress out, and visit, and be visit by the
gay of her own sex, and cast her eye abroad, as one very ready to try
her fortune again in the married state.
this induce those air, and a love to those diversion, which make a
young widow, of so lively a turn, the unfittest tutoress in the world,
even to her own daughter.
Mrs. Horton herself have have an early turn to music, and that sort of
reading which be but an early debauchery for young mind, preparative
to the gross at riper year; to wit, romance and novel, song and
play, and those without distinction, moral or immoral, she indulge she
daughter in the same taste; and at those hour, when they could not take
part in the more active and lively amusement and kill-time, as some
call they, use to employ Miss to read to she, happy enough, in her own
imagination, that while she be divert her own ear, and sometimes, as
the piece be, corrupt her own heart, and her child's too, she be
teach Miss to read, and improve her mind; for it be the boast of
every tea-table half-hour, that Miss Horton, in propriety, accent, and
emphasis, surpass all the young lady her age; and, at other time,
compliment the pleased mother--bless I, Madam, with what a surprising
grace Miss Horton reads!--she enter into the very spirit of her subject
--this she could have from nobody but you! an intended praise; but, as
the subject be, would have be a severe satire in the mouth of an
enemy!--while the fond, the inconsiderate mother, with a delighted air,
would cry, why, I cannot but say, Miss Horton do credit to her
tutoress! and then a Come hither, my good love! and, with a kiss of
approbation, what a pleasure to your dear papa, have he live to see your
improvement, my Charmer! conclude with a sigh of satisfaction, her
eye turn round upon the circle, to take in all the silent applause
of theirs! but little though the fond, the foolish mother, what the
plant would be, which be spring up from these seed! little imagine
she, that her own ruin, as well as her child's, be to be the consequence
of this fine education; and that, in the same ill-fated hour, the honour
of both mother and daughter be to become a sacrifice to the intriguing
invader.
this, the laugh girl, when abandon to her evil destiny, and in
company with her sister Sally, and other, each recount their
setting-out, their progress, and their fall, frequently relate to be
her education and manner of training-up.
this, and to see a succession of humble servant buzz about a mother,
who take too much pride in address of that kind, what a beginning, what
an example, to a constitution of tinder, so prepared to receive the spark
strike, from the steely forehead and flinty heart of such a libertine as
at last it be their fortune to be encounter by!
in short, as Miss grow up under the influence of such a directress, and
of book so light and frothy, with the inflame addition of music,
concert, opera, play, assembly, ball, and the rest of the rabble of
amusement of modern life, it be no wonder that, like early fruit, she
be soon ripen to the hand of the insidious gatherer.
at fifteen, she own she be ready to fancy herself the heroine of every
novel and of every comedy she read, so well do she enter into the spirit
of her subject; she glow to become the object of some hero's flame; and
perfectly long to begin an intrigue, and even to be run away with by
some enterprise lover: yet have neither confinement nor check to
apprehend from her indiscreet mother, which she think absolutely
necessary to constitute a Parthenissa!
nevertheless, with all these fine modern quality, do she complete she
nineteenth year, before she meet with any address of consequence; one half
of her admirer be afraid, because of her gay turn, and but middling
fortune, to make serious application for her favour; while other be
keep at a distance, by the superior air she assume; and a third sort,
not sufficiently penetrate the foible either of mother or daughter,
be keep off by the suppose watchful care of the former.
but when the man of intrepidity and intrigue be find, never be heroine
so soon subdue, never goddess so easily stript of her celestial! for,
at the opera, a diversion at which neither she nor her mother ever miss
to be present, she behold the specious Lovelace--beheld he invest with
all the air of heroic insult, resent a slight affront offer to his
Sally Martin by two gentleman who have know she in her more hopeful
state, one of whom Mr. Lovelace oblige to sneak away with a broken head,
give with the pummel of his sword, the other with a bloody nose; neither
of they well support that readiness of offence, which, it seem, be a
part of their known character to be guilty of.
the gallantry of this action draw every by-stander on the side of the
hero, o the brave man! cry Polly Horton, aloud, to her mother, in a
kind of rapture, how needful the protection of the brave to the fair!
with a softness in her voice, which she have teach herself, to suit she
fancy high condition of life.
a speech so much in his favour, could not but take the notice of a man
who be but too sensible of the advantage which his fine person, and
noble air, give he over the gentler heart, who be always watch
every female eye, and who have his ear continually turn to every
affect voice; for that be one of his indication of a proper subject
to be attempt--affectation of every sort, he use to say, be a certain
sign of a wrong turn head; of a faulty judgment; and upon such a basis
I seldom build in vain.
he instantly resolve to be acquaint with a young creature, who seem
so strongly prejudiced in his favour. never man have a readier invention
for all sort of mischief. he give his Sally her cue. he call she
sister in their hearing; and Sally, whisperingly, give the young lady and
her mother, in her own way, the particular of the affront she have
receive; make herself an angel of light, to cast the bright ray upon
the character of her heroic brother. she particularly praise his know
and approve courage; and mingle with her praise of he such
circumstance relate to his birth, his fortune, and endowment, as leave
he nothing to do but to fall in love with the enamoured polly.
Mr. Lovelace presently see what turn to give his profession. so brave a
man, yet of manner so gentle! hit the young lady's taste: nor could she
suspect the heart that such an aspect cover. this be the man! the
very man! she whisper to her mother. and, when the opera be over, his
servant procure a coach, he undertake, with his specious sister, to set
they down at their own lodging, though situate a quite different way
from his: and there be they prevail upon to alight, and partake of a
slight repast.
Sally press they to return the favour to she at her aunt Forbes's, and
hop it would be before her brother go to his own seat.
they promise she, and name their evening.
a splendid entertainment be provide. the guest come, have in the
interim find all that be say of his name, and family, and fortune to
be true. person of so little strictness in their own moral, take it
not into their head to be very inquisitive after his.
music and dancing have their share in the entertainment. these open
their heart, already half open by love: the aunt Forbes, and the
lover's sister, keep they open by their own example. the hero sing,
vow, promise. their gratitude be move, their delight be
augmented, their hope increase, their confidence be engage, all their
appetite up in arm; the rich wine co-operate, beat quite off their
guard, and not think enough remain for so much as suspicion--Miss,
detach from her mother by Sally, soon fall a sacrifice to the
successful intriguer.
the widow herself, half intoxicate, and raise as she be with artful
mixture, and inflame by love, unexpectedly tender by one of the
libertine, his constant companion, (to whom an opportunity be
contrive to be give to be alone with she, and that closely follow by
importunity, fall into her daughter's error. the consequence of which,
in length of time, become apparent, grief, shame, remorse, seize her
heart, (her own indiscretion not allow she to arraign her daughter's,)
and she survive not her delivery, leave Polly with child likewise;
who, when deliver, be too fond of the gay deluder to renounce his
company, even when she find herself delude, fall into a course of
extravagance and dissoluteness; run through her fortune in a very little
time, and, as an high preferment, at last, with Sally, be admit a
quarter partner with the detestable Sinclair.
all that be necessary to add to the history of these unhappy woman, will
be comprise in a very little compass.
after the death of the profligate Sinclair, they keep on the infamous
trade with too much success; till an accident happen in the house--a
gentleman of family kill in it in a fray, contend with another for
a new-vamp face. Sally be accuse of hold the gentleman's arm,
while his more-favour adversary run he through the heart, and then
make off. and she be try for her life narrowly escape.
this accident oblige they to break up house-keeping; and not have be
frugal enough of their ill-get gain, (lavish upon one what they
get by another,) they be compel, for subsistence sake, to enter
themselves as under-manager at such another house as their own have be.
in which service, soon after, Sally die of a fever and surfeit get by a
debauch; and the other, about a month after, by a violent cold,
occasion through carelessness in a salivation.
happy scene open for the remain character; for it might be
descend too low to mention the untimely end of Dorcas, and of
William, Mr. Lovelace's wicked servant; and the pining and consumptive
one's of Betty Barnes and Joseph Leman, unmarrie both, and in less than
a year after the happy death of their excellent young lady.
the good Mrs. NORTON pass the small remainder of her life, as happily
as she wish, in her beloved foster-daughter's dairy-house, as it use
to be call: as she wish, we repeat; for she have too strong
aspiration after another life, to be greatly attach to this.
she lay out the great part of her time in do good by her advice,
and by the prudent management of the fund commit to her direction.
have live an exemplary life from her youth upwards; and see her son
happily settle in the world; she depart with ease and calmness,
without pang or agony, like a tired traveller, fall into a sweet
slumber: her last word express her hope of be restore to the
child of her bosom; and to her own excellent father and mother, to whose
care and pain she owe that good education to which she be indebted for
all her other blessing.
the poor's fund, which be commit to her care, she resign a week
before her death, into the hand of Mrs. Hickman, accord the direction
of the will, and all the account and disbursement with it; which she
have keep with such an exactness, that the lady declare, that she will
follow her method, and only wish to discharge the trust as well.
Miss HOWE be not to be persuade to quit her mourning for her dear
friend, until six month be fully expire: and then she make Mr.
HICKMAN one of the happy man in the world. a woman of her fine sense
and understanding, marry to a man of virtue and good-nature, (who have
no past capital error to reflect upon, and to abate his joy, and whose
behaviour to Mrs. Hickman be as affectionate as it be respectful to Miss
Howe,) could not do otherwise. they be already bless with two fine
child; a daughter, to whom, by joint consent, they have give the name
of her beloved friend; an a son, who bear that of his father.
she have allot to Mr. Hickman, who take delight in do good, (and
that as much for its own sake, as to oblige she,) his part of the
management of the poor's fund; to be accountable for it, as she
pleasantly say, to she. she have appropriate every Thursday morning for
her part of that management; and take so much delight in the task, that
she declare it to be one of the most agreeable of her amusement. and
the more agreeable, as she teach every one whom she benefit, to bless
the memory of her depart friend; to whom she attribute the merit of
all her own charity, as well as the honour of those which she dispense
in pursuance of her will.
she have declare, that this fund shall never fail while she live. she
have even engage her mother to contribute annually to it. and Mr.
Hickman have appropriate twenty pound a year to the same. in
consideration of which she allow he to recommend four object yearly to
partake of it.--allow, be her style; for she assume the whole
prerogative of dispense this charity; the only prerogative she do or
have occasion to assume. in every other case, there be but one will
between they; and that be generally his or she's, as either speak first,
upon any subject, be it what it will. MRS. HICKMAN, she sometimes as
pleasantly as generously tell he, must not quite forget that she be
once MISS HOWE, because if he have not love she as such, and with all her
foible, she have never be MRS. HICKMAN. nevertheless she seriously, on
all occasion, and that to other as well as to himself, confess that
she owe he unreturnable obligation for his patience with she in she
day, and for his generous behaviour to she in HIS.
and still more the highly do she esteem and love he, as she reflect
upon his past kindness to her beloved friend; and on that dear friend's
good opinion of he. nor be it less grateful to she, that the worthy
man join most sincerely with she in all those respectful and
affectionate recollection, which make the memory of the depart
precious to survivor.
Mr. BELFORD be not so destitute of humanity and affection, as to be
unconcerned at the unhappy fate of his most intimate friend. but when
he reflect upon the untimely end of several of his companion, but just
mention in the precede history*--On the shocking despondency and
death of his poor friend Belton--on the signal justice which overtake the
wicked Tomlinson--on the dreadful exit of the infamous Sinclair--on the
deep remorse of his more value friend--and, on the other hand, on the
example set he by the most excellent of her sex--and on her blessed
preparation, and happy departure--and when he consider, as he often do
with awe and terror, that his wicked habit be so rooted in his
deprave heart, that all these warning, and this lovely example, seem
to be but necessary to enable he to subdue they, and to reform; and that
such awakening-call be hardly ever afford to man of his cast, or (if
they be) but seldom attend the full vigour of constitution:--when he
reflect upon all these thing, he adore the Mercy, which through these
call have snatch he as a brand out of the fire: and think himself
oblige to make it his endeavour to find out, and to reform, any of
those who may have be endanger by his mean; as well as to repair, to
the utmost of his power, any damage or mischief which he may have
occasion to other.
* see letter XLI. and LVII. of this volume.
with regard to the trust with which he be honour by the inimitable
lady, he have the pleasure of acquit himself of it in a very few
month, to every body's satisfaction; even to that of the unhappy family;
who send he their thank on the occasion. nor be he, at deliver up
his account, content without resign the legacy bequeath to he,
to the us of the will. so that the poor's fund, as it be call, be
become a very considerable sum: and will be a lasting bank for relief of
object who well deserve relief.
there be but one earthly blessing which remain for Mr. Belford to wish
for, in order, morally speak, to secure to he all his other
blessing; and that be, the great of all worldly one, a virtuous and
prudent wife. so free a liver as he have be, he do not think that he
could be worthy of such a one, till, upon an impartial examination of
himself, he find the pleasure he have in his new resolution so great,
and his abhorrence of his former course so sincere, that he be the less
apprehensive of a deviation.
upon this presumption, have also keep in his mind some encouraging
hint from Mr. Lovelace; and have be so happy as to have it in his
power to oblige Lord M. and that whole noble family, by some service
grateful to they (the request for which from his unhappy friend be
bring over, among other paper, with the dead body, by De la Tour); he
beseech that nobleman's leave to make his address to Miss CHARLOTTE
MONTAGUE, the eld of his Lordship's two niece: and make at the same
time such proposal of settlement as be not object to, his Lordship
be pleased to use his powerful interest in his favour. and his worthy
niece have no engagement, she have the goodness to honour Mr. Belford
with her hand; and thereby make he as completely happy as a man can be,
who have enormity to reflect upon, which be out of his power to atone
for, by reason of the death of some of the injured party, and the
irreclaimableness of other.
'Happy be the man who, in the time of health and strength, see and
reform the error of his ways!--But how much more happy be he, who have no
capital and wilful error to repent of!--how unmixed and sincere must the
joy of such a one come to he!'
Lord M. add bountifully in his life-time, as do also the two lady
his sister, to the fortune of their worthy niece. and as Mr. Belford
have be bless with a son by she, his Lordship at his death [which
happen just three year after the untimely one of his unhappy nephew]
be pleased to devise to that son, and to his descendent for ever (and
in case of his death unmarried, to any other child of his niece) his
Hertfordshire estate, (design for Mr. Lovelace,) which he make up to
the value of a moiety of his real estate; bequeath also a moiety
of his personal to the same lady.
Miss PATTY MONTAGUE, a fine young lady [to whom her noble uncle, at his
death, devise the other moiety of his real and personal estate,
include his seat in Berkshire] live at present with her excellent
sister, Mrs. Belford; to whom she remove upon Lord M.'s death: but, in
all probability, will soon be the lady of a worthy baronet, of ancient
family, fine quality, and ample fortune, just return from his
travel, with a character superior to the very good one he set out with:
a case that very seldom happen, although the end of travel be
improvement.
Colonel MORDEN, who, with so many virtue and accomplishment, cannot be
unhappy, in several letter tot eh executor, with whom he correspond
from Florence, [have, since his unhappy affair with Mr. Lovelace
change his purpose of come so soon to reside in England as he have
intend,] declare, that although he think himself oblige either to
accept of what he take to be a challenge, as such; or tamely to
acknowledge, that he give up all resentment of his cousin's wrong; and
in a manner to beg pardon for have speak freely of Mr. Lovelace behind
his back; and although at the time he own he be not sorry to be call
upon, as he be, to take either the one course or the other; yet now,
coolly reflect upon his beloved cousin's reasoning against duelling;
and upon the price it have too probably cost the unhappy man; he wish he
have more fully consider those word in his cousin's posthumous letter--
'if God will allow he time for repentance, why should you deny it he?'*
* several worthy person have wish, that the heinous practice of
duelling have be more forcibly discourage, by way of note, at the
conclusion of a work design to recommend the high and most important
doctrine of christianity. it be humbly presume, that these person
have not sufficiently attend to what be already do on that subject in
Vol. II. Letter XII. and in this volume, Letter XVI. XLIII. XLIV. and
XLV.
to conclude--the worthy widow Lovick continue to live with Mr. Belford;
and, by her prudent behaviour, piety, and usefulness, have endear
herself to her lady, and to the whole family.
POSTSCRIPT
refer to in the PREFACE
in which several objection that have be make, as well to the
catastrophe, as to different part of the precede history,
be briefly consider.
the foregoing work have be publish at three different period of
time, the author, in the course of its publication, be favour with
many anonymous letter, in which the writer differently express their
wish with regard to the apprehended catastrophe.
Most of those direct to he by the gentler sex, turn in favour of
what they call a fortunate ending. some of the fair writer,
enamour, as they declare, with the character of the heroine, be
warmly solicitous to have she make happy; and other, likewise of their
mind, insist that poetical justice require that it should be so. and
when, say one ingenious lady, whose undoubted motive be good-nature and
humanity, it must be conclude that it be in an author's power to make
his piece end as he please, why should he not give pleasure rather than
pain to the reader whom he have interest in favour of his principal
character?
other, and some gentleman, declare against tragedy in general, and in
favour of comedy, almost in the word of Lovelace, who be support in
his taste by all the woman at Mrs. Sinclair's and by Sinclair herself.
'I have too much feeling, say he.* there be enough in the world to make
our heart sad, without carry grief into our diversion, and make
the distress of other our own.'
* see Vol. IV. Letter XL.
and how be this happy ending to be bring about? why, by this very
easy and trite expedient; to wit, by reform Lovelace, and marry he
to Clarissa--not, however, abate her one of her trial, nor any of her
suffering, [for the sake of the sport her distress would give to the
tender-hearted reader, as she go along,] the last outrage except:
that, indeed, partly in compliment to Lovelace himself, and partly for
her delicacy-sake, they be willing to spare she.
but whatever be the fate of his work, the author be resolve to take a
different method. he always think that sudden conversion, such,
especially, as be leave to the candour of the reader to suppose and make
out, have neither art, nor nature, nor even probability, in they; and that
they be moreover of a very bad example. to have a Lovelace, for a
series of year, glory in his wickedness, and think that he have nothing
to do, but as an act of grace and favour to hold out his hand to receive
that of the good of woman, whenever he please, and to have it think
that marriage would be a sufficient amend for all his enormity to
other as well as to she--he could not bear that. nor be reformation, as
he have show in another piece, to be secure by a fine face; by a passion
that have sense for its object; nor by the goodness of a wife's heart, nor
even example, if the heart of the husband be not graciously touch by
the divine finger.
it will be see, by this time, that the author have a great end in view.
he have live to see the scepticism and infidelity openly avow, and even
endeavour to be propagate from the press; the great doctrine of
the Gospel bring into question; those of self-denial and mortification
blot out of the catalogue of christian virtue; and a taste even to
wantonness for out-door pleasure and luxury, to the general exclusion of
domestic as well as public virtue, industriously promote among all rank
and degree of people.
in this general depravity, when even the pulpit have lose great part of
its weight, and the clergy be consider as a body of interested man,
the author think he should be able to answer it to his own heart, be
the success what it would, if he throw in his mite towards introduce a
reformation so much want: and he imagine, that if in an age give up
to diversion and entertainment, if he could steal in, as may be say, and
investigate the great doctrine of Christianity under the fashionable
guise of an amusement; he should be most likely to serve his purpose,
remember that of the poet:--
a verse may find he who a sermon fly,
and turn delight into a sacrifice.
he be resolve, therefore, to attempt something that never yet have be
do. he consider that the tragic poet have as seldom make their
hero true object of pity, as the comic_strip theirs laudable one of
imitation: and still more rarely have make they in their death look
forward to a future hope. and thus, when they die, they seem totally to
perish. death, in such instance, must appear terrible. it must be
consider as the great evil. but why be death set in such shocking
light, when it be the universal lot?
he have, indeed, think fit to paint the death of the wicked, as terrible
as he could paint it. but he have endeavour to draw that of the good in
such an amiable manner, that the very Balaams of the world should not
forbear to wish that their latter end might be like that of the heroine.
and after all, what be the poetical justice so much contend for by
some, as the generality of writer have manage it, but another sort of
dispensation than that with which God, by revelation, teach we, he have
think fit to exercise mankind; whom place here only in a state of
probation, he hath so intermingle good and evil, as to necessitate we to
look forward for a more equal dispensation of both?
the Author of the history (or rather Dramatic Narrative) of Clarissa, be
therefore well justify by the christian system, in defer to
extricate suffer virtue to the time in which it will meet with the
completion of its reward.
but not absolutely to shelter the conduct observe in it under the
sanction of Religion, [an authority, perhaps, not of the great weight
with some of our modern critic,] it must be observe, that the Author be
justify in its catastrophe by the great master of reason, and good
judge of composition, that ever live. the learned reader know we must
mean ARISTOTLE; whose sentiment in this matter we shall beg leave to
deliver in the word of a very amiable writer of our own country:
'the english writer of Tragedy,' say Mr. Addison,* 'be possess with
a notion, that when they represent a virtuous or innocent person in
distress, they ought not to leave he till they have deliver he out of
his trouble, or make he triumph over his enemy.
* Spectator, Vol. I. No. XL.
'this error they have be lead into by a ridiculous doctrine in modern
criticism, that they be oblige to an equal distribution of reward and
punishment, and an impartial execution of poetical justice.
'who be the first that establish this rule, I know not; but I be sure
it have no foundation in NATURE, in reason, or in the practice of the
antient.
'we find that good and evil happen alike unto all MEN on this side the
grave: and as the principal design of tragedy be to raise commiseration
and terror in the mind of the audience, we shall defeat this great end,
if we always make virtue and innocence happy and successful.
'whatever cross and disappoint a good man suffer in the body of the
tragedy, they will make but small impression on our mind, when we know,
that, in the last act, he be to arrive at the end of his wish and
desire.
'when we see he engage in the depth of his affliction, we be apt to
comfort ourselves, because we be sure he will find his way out of they,
and that his grief, however great soever it may be at present, will soon
terminate in gladness.
'for this reason, the antient writer of tragedy treat man in their
play, as they be deal with in the world, by make virtue sometimes
happy and sometimes miserable, as they find it in the fable which they
make choice of, or as it might affect their audience in the most
agreeable manner.
'Aristotle consider the tragedy that be write in either of those
kind; and observe, that those which end unhappily have always please
the people, and carry away the prize, in the public dispute of the
state, from those that end happily.
'Terror and commiseration leave a pleasing anguish in the mind, and fix
the audience in such a serious composure of thought, as be much more
lasting and delightful, than any little transient start of joy and
satisfaction.
'accordingly, we find, that more of our english tragedy have succeed,
in which the favourite of the audience sink under their calamity, than
those in which they recover themselves out of they.
'the good play of this kind be the Orphan, Venice Preserved, Alexander
the Great, Theodosius, all for Love, Oedipus, Oroonoko, Othello, &c.
'King Lear be an admirable tragedy of the same kind, as Shakespeare write
it: but as it be reform accord to the chimerical notion of POETICAL
justice, in my humble opinion it have lose half its beauty.
'at the same time I must allow, that there be very noble tragedy which
have be frame upon the other plan, and have end happily; as indeed
most of the good tragedy which have be write since the starting of
the above-mention criticism, have take this turn: the Mourning Bride,
Tamerlane,* Ulysses, Phaedra and Hippolitus, with most of Mr. Dryden's. I
must also allow, that many of Shakespeare's, and several of the
celebrate tragedy of antiquity, be cast in the same form. I do not,
therefore, dispute against this way of write tragedy; but against the
criticism that would establish this as the only method; and by that mean
would very much cramp the English tragedy, and perhaps give a wrong bent
to the genius of our writer.'
* yet, in Tamerlane, two of the most amiable character, Moneses and
Arpasia, suffer death.
this subject be far consider in a letter to the Spectator.*
* see Spect. Vol. VII. no. 548.
'I find your opinion,' say the author of it, 'concern the
late-invent term call poetical justice, be controvert by some
eminent critic. I have draw up some additional argument to strengthen
the opinion which you have there deliver; have endeavour to go to
the bottom of that matter. . . .
'the most perfect man have vice enough to draw down punishment upon his
head, and to justify Providence in regard to any misery that may befall
he. for this reason I cannot but think that the instruction and moral
be much fine, where a man who be virtuous in the main of his character
fall into distress, and sink under the blow of fortune, at the end of
a tragedy, than when he be represent as happy and triumphant. such an
example correct the insolence of human nature, soften the mind of the
beholder with sentiment of pity and compassion, comfort he under his
own private affliction, and teach he not to judge of man's virtue by
their success.* I cannot think of one real hero in all antiquity so
far raise above human infirmity, that he might not be very naturally
represent in a tragedy as plunge in misfortune and calamity. the
poet may still find out some prevail passion or indiscretion in his
character, and show it in such a manner as will sufficiently acquit
providence of any injustice in his suffering: for, as Horace observe,
the good man be faulty, though not in so great a degree as those whom
we generally call vicious man.**
* a caution that our blessed Saviour himself give in the case of the
eighteen person kill by the fall of the tower of Siloam, Luke xiii. 4.
** Vitiis nemo sine nascitur: optimus ille,
Qui minimis urgentur.----
'if such a strict poetical justice (proceed the letter-writer,) as some
gentleman insist upon, be to be observe in this art, there be no
manner of reason why it should not be so little observe in Homer, that
his Achilles be place in the great point of glory and success, though
his character be morally vicious, and only poetically good, if I may use
the phrase of our modern critic. the AEnead be fill with innocent
unhappy person. Nisus and Euryalus, Lausus and Pallas, come all to
unfortunate end. the poet take notice in particular, that in the
sacking of Troy, Ripheus fall, who be the most just character among the
Trojans:
'----Cadit & Ripheus, justissimus unus
Qui fuit in Teucris, & servantissimus aequi.
Diis aliter visum est.--
'the god think fit.--So blameless Ripheus fall,
who lov'd fair Justice, and observ'd it well.'
'and that Pantheus could neither be preserve by his transcendent piety,
nor by the holy fillet of Apollo, whose priest he be:
'--nec te tua plurima, Pantheu,
Labentum pieta, nec Apollinis infula texit. AEn. II.
'nor could thy piety thee, Pantheus, save,
nor ev'n thy priesthood, from an early grave.'
'I might here mention the practice of antient tragic poet, both Greek
and Latin; but as this particular be touch upon in the paper
above-mention, I shall pass it over in silence. I could produce
passage out of Aristotle in favour of my opinion; and if in one place he
say, that an absolutely virtuous man should not be represent as
unhappy, this do not justify any one who should think fit to bring in
an absolutely virtuous man upon the stage. those who be acquaint with
that author's way of writing, know very well, that to take the whole
extent of his subject into his division of it, he often make use of
such case as be imaginary, and not reducible to practice. . . .
'I shall conclude,' say this gentleman, 'with observe, that though the
Spectator above-mention be so far against the rule of poetical justice,
as to affirm, that good man may meet with an unhappy catastrophe in
tragedy, it do not say, that ill man may go off unpunished. the reason
for this distinction be very plain; namely, because the good of man [as
be say above,] have fault enough to justify Providence for any
misfortune and affliction which may befall they; but there be many man
so criminal, that they can have no claim or pretence to happiness. the
good of man may deserve punishment; but the bad of man cannot deserve
happiness.'
Mr. Addison, as we have see above, tell we, that Aristotle, in
consider the tragedy that be write in either of the kind,
observe, that those which end unhappily have always please the people,
and carry away the prize, in the public dispute of the stage, from
those that end happily. and we shall take leave to add, that this
preference be give at a time when the entertainment of the stage be
commit to the care of the magistrate; when the prize contend for
be give by the state; when, of consequence, the emulation among
writer be ardent; and when learning be at the high pitch of glory
in that renowned commonwealth.
it cannot be suppose, that the Athenians, in this their high age of
taste and politeness, be less humane, less tender-hearted, than we of
the present. but they be not afraid of be move, nor ashamed of
show themselves to be so, at the distress they see well paint and
represent. in short, they be of the opinion, with the wise of man,
that it be well to go to the house of mourning, than to the house of
mirth; and have fortitude enough to trust themselves with their own
generous grief, because they find their heart mend by it.
thus also Horace, and the polite Romans in the augustan age, wish to
be affect:
Ac ne forte put I, quae facere ipse recusem,
Cum recte tractant alii, laudere maligne;
Ille per extentum funem mihi posse videtur
Ire poeta, meum qui pectus inaniter angit,
Irritat, mulcet; falsis terroribus implet,
Ut magus; & modo I Thebis, modo point Athenis.
thus englishe by Mr. Pope:
yet, lest thou think I rally more than teach,
or praise malignly art I cannot reach;
let I, for once, presume t'instruct the time
to know the poet from the man of rhyme.
'tis he who give my breast a thousand pain:
can make I feel each passion that he feign;
enrage--compose--with more than magic art,
with pity and with terror tear my heart;
and snatch I o'er the earth, or through the air,
to Thebes, to Athens, when he will, and where.
our fair reader be also desire to attend to what a celebrated critic*
of a neighbouring nation say on the nature and design of tragedy, from
the rule lay down by the same great antient.
* Rapin, on Aristotle's Poetics.
'Tragedy,' say he, make man modest, by represent the great master
of the earth humble; and it make he tender and merciful, by show
he the strange accident of life, and the unforeseen disgrace, to which
the most important person be subject.
'but because man be naturally timorous and compassionate, he may fall
into other extreme. too much fear may shake his constancy of mind, and
too much of tragedy to regulate these two weakness. it prepare and
arm he against disgrace, by show they so frequent in the most
considerable person; and he will cease to fear extraordinary accident,
when he see they happen to the high part of mankind. and still more
efficacious, we may add, the example will be, when he see they happen
to the good.
'but as the end of tragedy be to teach man not to fear too weakly common
misfortune, it propose also to teach they to spare their compassion for
object that deserve it. for there be an injustice in be move at the
affliction of those who deserve to be miserable. we may see, without
pity, Clytemnestra slain by her son Orestes in AEschylus, because she have
murder Agamemnon her husband; yet we cannot see Hippolytus die by the
plot of his step-mother Phaedra, in euripide, without compassion, because
he die not, but for be chaste and virtuous.
these be the great authority so favourable to the story that end
unhappily. and we beg leave to reinforce this inference from they, that
if the temporary suffering of the virtuous and the good can be account
for and justify on Pagan principle, many more and infinitely strong
reason will occur to a christian reader in behalf of what be call
unhappy catastrophe, from the consideration of the doctrine of future
reward; which be every where strongly enforce in the history of
Clarissa.
of this, (to give but one instance,) an ingenious modern, distinguish
by his rank, but much more for his excellent defence of some of the most
important doctrine of Christianity, appear convince in the conclusion
of a pathetic Monody, lately publish; in which, after he have deplore,
as a man without hope, (express ourselves in the scripture phrase,)
the loss of an excellent wife; he thus console himself:
yet, o my soul! thy rise murmur stay,
nor dare th' all-wise Disposer to arraign,
or against his supreme decree
with impious grief complain.
that all thy full-blow joy at once should fade,
be his most righteous will: and be that will obey'd.
would thy fond love his grace to her controul,
and in these low abode of sin and pain
her pure, exalted soul,
unjustly, for thy partial good detain?
no--rather strive thy grov'le mind to raise
up to that unclouded blaze,
that heav'nly radiance of eternal light,
in which enthron'd she now with pity see,
how frail, how insecure, how slight,
be every mortal bliss.
but of infinitely great weight than all that have be above produce
on this subject, be the word of the Psalmist:
'as for I, say he,* my foot be almost go, my step have well nigh
slipt: for I be envious at the foolish, when I see the prosperity of the
wicked. for their strength be firm: they be not in trouble as other
man; neither be they plague like other man--their eye stand out with
fatness: they have more than their heart could wish--verily I have
cleanse mine heart in vain, and wash my hand in innocence; for all
the day long have I be plague, and chasten every morning. when I
think to know this, it be too painful for I. until I go into the
sanctuary of God; then understand I their end--thou shalt guide I with
thy counsel, and afterwards receive I to glory.'
* psalm lxxiii.
this be the Psalmist's comfort and dependence. and shall man, presume
to alter the common course of nature, and, so far as he be able, to elude
the tenure by which frail mortality indispensably hold, imagine that he
can make a well dispensation; and by call it poetical justice,
indirectly reflect on the Divine?
the more pain have be take to obviate the objection arise from the
notion of poetical justice, as the doctrine build upon it have obtain
general credit among we; and as it must be confess to have the
appearance of humanity and good nature for its support. and yet the
writer of the history of Clarissa be humbly of opinion, that he might
have be excuse refer to they for the vindication of his
catastrophe, even by those who be advocate for the contrary opinion;
since the notion of poetical justice, found on the modern rule, have
hardly ever be more strictly observe in work of this nature than in
the present performance.
for, be not Mr. Lovelace, who could persevere in his villanous view,
against the strong and most frequent conviction and remorse that
ever be send to awaken and reclaim a wicked man--be not this great,
this wilful transgressor condignly punish; and his punishment bring
on through the intelligence of the very Joseph Leman whom he have
corrupt;* and by mean of the very woman whom he have debauched**--i
not Mr. Belton, who have an uncle's hastened death to answer for***--are
not the infamous Sinclair and her wretched partner--and even the wicked
servant, who, with their eye open, contribute their part to the
carrying on of the vile scheme of their respective principal--be they
not all likewise exemplarily punish?
* see Letter LVIII. of this volume.
** ibid. Letter LXI.
*** see Vol. VIII. Letter XVI.
on the other hand, be not Miss HOWE, for her noble friendship to the
exalt lady in her calamity--be not Mr. HICKMAN, for his
unexceptionable moral, and integrity of life--be not the repentant and
not ungenerous BELFORD--be not the worthy NORTON--make signally happy?
and who that be in earnest in their profession of Christianity, but
will rather envy than regret the triumphant death of CLARISSA; whose
piety, from her early childhood; whose diffusive charity; whose steady
virtue; whose christian humility, whose forgiving spirit; whose meekness,
and resignation, HEAVEN only could reward?*
* and here it may not be amiss to remind the reader, that so early in the
work as Vol. II. Letter XXXVIII. the dispensation of Providence be
justify by herself. and thus she end her reflections--'I shall not
live always--may my closing scene be happy!'--She have her wish. it be
happy.
we shall now, accord to the expectation give in the Preface to this
edition, proceed to take brief notice of such other objection as have
come to our knowledge: for, as be there say, 'this work be address
to the public as a history of life and manner, those part of it which
be propose to carry with they the force of example, ought to be as
unobjectionable as be consistent with the design of the whole, and with
human nature.'
several person have censure the heroine as too cold in her love, too
haughty, and even sometimes provoke. but we may presume to say, that
this objection have arise from want of attention to the story, to the
character of Clarissa, and to her particular situation.
it be not intend that she should be in love, but in like only, if
that expression may be admit. it be mean to be every where
inculcate in the story for example sake, that she never would have
marry Mr. Lovelace, because of his immorality, have she be leave to
herself; and that of her ruin be principally owe to the persecution
of her friend.
what be too generally call love, ought (perhaps as generally) to be
call by another name. cupidity, or a paphian stimulus, as some woman,
even of condition, have act, be not word too harsh to be substitute
on the occasion, however grating they may be to delicate ear. but take
the word love in the gentle and most honourable sense, it would have
be think by some highly improbable, that Clarissa should have be
able to show such a command of her passion, as make so distinguish
a part of her character, have she be as violently in love, as certain
warm and fierce spirit would have have she to be. a few observation be
throw in by way of note in the present edition, at proper place to
obviate this objection, or rather to bespeak the attention of hasty
reader to what lie obviously before they. for thus the heroine
anticipate this very objection, expostulate with Miss Howe on her
contemptuous treatment of Mr. Hickman; which (far from be guilty of
the same fault herself) she do, on all occasion, and declare she would
do so, whenever Miss Howe forget herself, although she have not a day to
live:
'o my dear,' say she, 'that it have be my lot (as I be not permit
to live single) to have meet with a man, by whom I could have act
generously and unreservedly!
'Mr. Lovelace, it be now plain, in order to have a pretence against I,
tax my behaviour to he with stiffness and distance. you, at one time,
think I guilty of some degree of prudery. difficult situation should
be allow for: which often make seeming occasion for censure
unavoidable. I deserve not blame from he, who make mine difficult.
and you, my dear, have I any other man to deal with than Mr. Lovelace, or
have he but half the merit which Mr. Hickman have, would have find, that
my doctrine on this subject, should have govern my whole practice.'
see this whole letter, No. XXXII. Vol. VIII. see also Mr. Lovelace's
Letter, Vol. VIII. no. LIX. and Vol. IX. No. XLII. where, just before his
death, he entirely acquit her conduct on this head.
it have be think, by some worthy and ingenious person, that if
Lovelace have be draw an infidel or scoffer, his character, accord
to the taste of the present bad than sceptical age, would have be
more natural. it be, however, too well know, that there be very many
person, of his cast, whose action discredit their belief. and be not
the very devil, in Scripture, say to believe and tremble?
but the reader must have observe, that, great, and, it be hop, good
use, have be make throughout the work, by draw Lovelace an infidel,
only in practice; and this as well in the argument of his friend
Belford, as in his own frequent remorse, when touch with temporary
compunction, and in his last scene; which could not have be make, have
either of they be paint as sentimental unbeliever. not to say that
Clarissa, whose great objection to Mr. Wyerley be, that he be a
scoffer, must have be inexcusable have she know Lovelace to be so, and
have give the least attention to his address. on the contrary, thus
she comfort herself, when she think she must be his--'this one
consolation, however, remain; he be not an infidel, an unbeliever. have
he be an infidel, there would have be no room at all for hope of he;
but (pride himself as he do in his fertile invention) he would have
be utterly abandon, irreclaimable, and a savage.'* and it must be
observe, that scoffer be too witty, in their own opinion, (in other
word, value themselves too much upon their profligacy,) to aim at
conceal it.
* see Vol. IV. Letter XXXIX. and Vol. V. Letter VIII.
besides, have Lovelace add ribbald jest upon religion, to his other
liberty, the freedom which would then have pass between he and his
friend, must have be of a nature truly infernal.
and this father hint be mean to be give, by way of inference, that the
man who allow himself in those liberty either of speech or action,
which Lovelace think shameful, be so far a bad man than Lovelace.
for this reason he be every where make to treat jest on sacred thing
and subject, even down to the mythology of the Pagans, among Pagans, as
undoubted mark of the ill-breeding of the jester; obscene image and
talk, as liberty too shameful for even rake to allow themselves in;
and injustice to creditor, and in matter of Meum and Tuum, as what it
be beneath he to be guilty of.
some have object to the meekness, to the tameness, as they will have it
to be, of Mr. Hickman's character. and yet Lovelace own, that he rise
upon he with great spirit in the interview between they; once, when he
think a reflection be but imply on Miss Howe;* and another time,
when he imagine himself treat contemptuously.** Miss Howe, it must be
own, (though not to the credit of her own character,) treat he
ludicrously on several occasion. but so she do her mother. and
perhaps a lady of her lively turn would have treat as whimsically any
man but a Lovelace. Mr. Belford speak of he with honour and
respect.*** so do Colonel Morden.**** and so do Clarissa on every
occasion. and all that Miss Howe herself say of he, tend more to his
reputation than discredit,***** as Clarissa indeed tell she.******
* see Vol. VII. Letter XXVIII.
** ibid.
*** ibid. Letter XLVIII.
**** see Letter XLVI. of this volume.
***** see Vol. II. Letter II. and Vol. III. Letter XL.
****** see Vol. II. letter XI.
and as to Lovelace's treatment of he, the reader must have observe,
that it be his way to treat every man with contempt, partly by way of
self-exaltation, and partly to gratify the natural gaiety of his
disposition. he say himself to Belford,* 'Thou know I love he not,
Jack; and whom we love not, we cannot allow a merit to; perhaps not the
merit they should be grant.' 'modest and diffident man,' write
Belford, to Lovelace, in praise of Mr. Hickman, 'wear not soon off those
little preciseness, which the confident, if ever they have they,
presently get over.'**
* see Vol. VII. Letter XXVIII.
** ibid. Letter XLVIII.
but, as Miss Howe treat her mother as freely as she do she lover; so
do Mr. Lovelace take still great liberty with Mr. Belford than he
do with Mr. Hickman, with respect to his person, air, and address, as
Mr. Belford himself hint to Mr. Hickman.* and yet be he not so readily
believe to the discredit of Mr. Belford, by the lady in general, as he
be when he disparage Mr. Hickman. whence can this particularity arise?
* see letter XXXVI. of this volume.
Mr. Belford have be a rake: but be in a way of reformation.
Mr. Hickman have always be a good man.
and Lovelace confidently say, that the woman love a man whose regard for
they be found in the knowledge of they.*
* see Vol. V. Letter XVIII.
nevertheless, it must be own, that it be not purpose to draw Mr.
Hickman, as the man of whom the lady in general be likely to be very
fond. have it be so, goodness of heart, and gentleness of manner,
great assiduity, and inviolable and modest love, would not of themselves
have be suppose sufficient recommendation. he would not have be
allow the least share of preciseness or formality, although those
defect might have be impute to his reverence for the object of his
passion; but in his character it be design to show, that the same man
could not be every thing; and to intimate to lady, that in choose
companion for life, they should rather prefer the honest heart of a
Hickman, which would be all their own, than to risk the chance of
sharing, perhaps with score, (and some of those probably the most
profligate of the sex,) the volatile mischievous one of a Lovelace: in
short, that they should choose, if they wish for durable happiness, for
rectitude of mind, and not for speciousness of person or address; nor
make a jest of a good man in favour of a bad one, who would make a jest
of they and of their whole sex.
two letter, however, by way of accommodation, be insert in this
edition, which perhaps will give Mr. Hickman's character some heighten
with such lady as love spirit in a man; and have rather suffer by it,
than not meet with it.--
woman, bear to be controul'd,
stoop to the forward and the bold,
say Waller--and Lovelace too!
some have wish that the story have be tell in the usual narrative way
of tell story design to amuse and divert, and not in letter
write by the respective person whose history be give in they. the
author think he ought not to prescribe to the taste of other; but
imagine himself at liberty to follow his own. he perhaps mistrust his
talent for the narrative kind of writing. he have the good fortune to
succeed in the epistolary way once before. a story in which so many
person be concern either principally or collaterally, and of
character and disposition so various, carry on with tolerable
connection and perspicuity, in a series of letter from different
person, without the aid of digression and episode foreign to the
principal end and design, he think have novelty to be plead for it;
and that, in the present age, he suppose would not be a slight
recommendation.
besides what have be say above, and in the Preface, on this head, the
follow opinion of an ingenious and candid foreigner, on this manner of
writing, may not be improperly insert here.
'the method which the author have pursue in the history of Clarissa, be
the same as in the Life of Pamela: both be relate in familiar letter
by the party themselves, at the very time in which the event happen:
and this method have give the author great advantage, which he could not
have draw from any other specie of narration. the minute particular
of event, the sentiment and conversation of the party, be, upon this
plan, exhibit with all the warmth and spirit that the passion suppose
to be predominant at the very time could produce, and with all the
distinguishing characteristic which memory can supply in a history of
recent transaction.
'romance in general, and Marivaux's amongst other, be wholly
improbable; because they suppose the history to be write after the
series of event be close by the catastrophe: a circumstance which
imply a strength of memory beyond all example and probability in the
person concern, enable they, at the distance of several year, to
relate all the particular of a transient conversation: or rather, it
imply a yet more improbable confidence and familiarity between all
these person and the author.
'there be, however, one difficulty attend the epistolary method; for
it be necessary that all the character should have an uncommon taste for
this kind of conversation, and that they should suffer no event, not even
a remarkable conversation to pass, without immediately commit it to
write. but for the preservation of the letter once write, the
author have provide with great judgment, so as to render this
circumstance highly probable.'*
* this quotation be translate from a critique on the history of
CLARISSA, write in French, and publish at Amsterdam. the whole
Critique, render into English, be insert in the Gentleman's Magazine
of June and August, 1749. the author have do great honour in it to the
history of Clarissa; and as there be remark publish with it, which
answer several objection make to different passage in the story by that
candid foreigner, the reader be refer to the aforesaid Magazine for
both.
it be presume that what this gentleman say of the difficulty
attend a story thus give in the epistolary manner of writing, will
not be find to reach the history before we. it be very well account
for in it, how the two principal female character come to take so great
a delight in writing. their subject be not merely subject of
amusement; but greatly interesting to both: yet many lady there be who
now laudably correspond, when at distance from each other, on occasion
that far less affect their mutual welfare and friendship, than those
treat of by these lady. the two principal gentleman have motif of
gaiety and vain-glory for their inducement. it will generally be find,
that person who have talent for familiar writing, as these
correspondent be presume to have, will not forbear amuse themselves
with their pen on less arduous occasion than what offer to these.
these FOUR, (whose story have a connection with each other,) out of the
great number of character who be introduce in this history, be only
eminent in the epistolary way: the rest appear but as occasional writer,
and as draw in rather by necessity than choice, from the different
relation in which they stand with the four principal person.
the length of the piece have be object to by some, who perhaps look
upon it as a mere novel or romance; and yet of these there be not
want work of equal length.
they be of opinion, that the story move too slowly, particularly in
the first and second volume, which be chiefly take up with the
altercation between Clarissa and the several person of her family.
but be it not true, that those altercation be the foundation of the
whole, and therefore a necessary part of the work? the letter and
conversation, where the story make the slow progress, be presume
to be characteristic. they give occasion, likewise, to suggest many
interesting personality, in which a good deal of the instruction
essential to a work of this nature be convey. and it will, moreover,
be remember, that the author, at his first set out, apprize the
reader, that the story (interesting as it be generally allow to be) be
to be principally look upon as the vehicle to the instruction.
to all which we may add, that there be frequently a necessity to be very
circumstantial and minute, in order to preserve and maintain that air of
probability, which be necessary to be maintain in a story design to
represent real life; and which be render extremely busy and active by
the plot and contrivance form and carry on by one of the principal
character.
some there be, and lady too! who have suppose that the excellency
of the heroine be carry to an improbable, and even to an
impracticable, height in this history. but the education of Clarissa,
from early childhood, ought to be consider as one of her very great
advantage; as, indeed, the foundation of all her excellency: and, it
be to be hop, for the sake of the doctrine design to be inculcate by
it, that it will.
she have a pious, a well-read, a not meanly-descend woman for her nurse,
who with her milk, as Mrs. Harlowe say,* give she that nurture which no
other nurse could give she. she be very early happy in the
conversation-visit of she learn and worthy Dr. Lewen, and in her
correspondencie, not with he only, but with other divine mention in
her last will. her mother be, upon the whole, a good woman, who do
credit to her birth and fortune; and both delight in she for those
improvement and attainment which give she, and they in she, a
distinction that cause it to be say, that when she be out of the
family it be consider but as a common family.** she be, moreover, a
country lady; and, as we have see in Miss Howe's character of she,***
take great delight in rural and household employment; though qualify
to adorn the bright circle.
* see Vol. IV. Letter XXVIII.
** see her mother's praise of she to Mrs. Norton, Vol. I. Letter XXXIX.
*** see Letter LV. of this volume.
it must be confess that we be not to look for Clarissa's name among
the constant frequenter of Ranelagh and Vauxhall, nor among those who
may be call daughter of the card-table. if we do, the character of
our heroine may then, indeed, only be justly think not improbable, but
unattainable. but we have neither room in this place, nor inclination,
to pursue a subject so invidious. we quit it, therefore, after we have
repeat that we know there be some, and we hope there be many, in the
british dominion, (or they be hardly any where in the european world,)
who, as far as occasion have call upon they to exert the like humble and
modest, yet steady and useful, virtue, have reach the perfection of a
Clarissa.
have thus briefly take notice of the most material objection that
have be make to different part of this history, it be hop we may be
allow to add, that have we think ourselves at liberty to give copy
of some of the many letter that have be write on the other side of
the question, that be to say, in approbation of the catastrophe, and of
the general conduct and execution of the work, by some of the most
eminent judge of composition in every branch of literature; most of what
have be write in this Postscript might have be spar.
but as the principal objection with many have lain against the length of
the piece, we shall add to what we have say above on that subject, in
the word of one of those eminent writer: 'that if, in the history
before we, it shall be find that the spirit be duly diffuse throughout;
that the character be various and natural; well distinguished and
uniformly support and maintain; if there be a variety of incident
sufficient to excite attention, and those so conduct as to keep the
reader always awake! the length then must add proportionably to the
pleasure that every person of taste receive from a well-draw picture
of nature. but where the contrary of all these quality shock the
understanding, the extravagant performance will be judge tedious, though
no long than a fairy-tale.'
finis
